[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 117-59]

MINDING THE GAP: HOW OPERATIONAL

ENERGY CAN HELP US ADDRESS LOGISTICS CHALLENGES

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

DECEMBER 2, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-444                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JACKIE SPEIER, California            JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JASON CROW, Colorado                 AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan, Vice       JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
Chair                            MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington

Wendell Frank White, Jr., Professional Staff Member
Ian Bennitt, Professional Staff Member
Naajidah Khan, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     3

WITNESSES

Banta, LtGen Edward D., USMC, Deputy Commandant, Installations
and Logistics, U.S. Marine Corps...............................     9
Barrett, Lt Gen Sam C., USAF, Joint Staff Director for Logistics,
J-4, The Pentagon..............................................     5
Berry, Lt Gen Warren D., USAF, Deputy Chief of Staff for
Logistics, Engineering and Force Protection, A-4, U.S. Air
Force..........................................................    10
Gamble, LTG Duane A., USA, Deputy Chief of Staff, G-4, U.S. Army.     6
Williamson, VADM Rick L., USN, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations
for Fleet Readiness and Logistics, N-4, Office of the Chief of
Naval Operations...............................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Banta, LtGen Edward D........................................    72
Barrett, Lt Gen Sam C........................................    40
Berry, Lt Gen Warren D.......................................    79
Gamble, LTG Duane A..........................................    50
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    37
Williamson, VADM Rick L......................................    57

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Scott....................................................    89

MINDING THE GAP: HOW OPERATIONAL ENERGY CAN HELP US ADDRESS LOGISTICS
CHALLENGES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Thursday, December 2, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:03 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Garamendi
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. I call this meeting, this hearing to order,
the Readiness Subcommittee of the House Armed Services
Committee.
First, some administrative and technical notes.
Members are reminded that they must be visible on the
screen within the software platform for the purposes of
identity verification. Members must continue to use the
software platform's video function while attending the hearing,
unless they experience connectivity issues or other technical
problems that render the member unable to fully participate on
camera.
If you experience technical difficulties, please contact
the committee staff for assistance. If I experience technical
difficulties during this hearing, Mr. Crow has agreed to take
over the gavel until I can reconnect.
Who wrote that sentence?
So, when you are recognized, video will be broadcast via
the television and internet feeds. You will be recognized as
normal for questions, but if you want to speak at any other
time you must seek recognition verbally. Please do so politely.
Please mute your microphone when you are not speaking, and
remember to unmute prior to speaking. Please be aware that
there will be a slight lag between when you start speaking and
when the camera shot switches to you.
Please remember to keep the software platform's video
function on for the entirety of the time you are attending this
hearing. If you have to leave for a short period of time,
don't, this is an important hearing. However, if you do, please
leave your video function on. If you are leaving to join a
different proceeding you can only do one at a time. Be advised
that you have designated--that I have designated a committee
staff member to mute unrecognized members' microphones. If they
are acting out, if their dog is climbing or barking, if the
cat, other problems are occurring in your home, we will mute
you.
Please use the platform's chat feature to communicate with
staff regarding technical or logistical support issues.
Finally, you will see a 5-minute countdown, countdown clock
on the software platform. And I have the mute button here. If
you go beyond 5 minutes, I will certainly remind you.
With that, we are here to--Oh, now the real part. Don't run
on my sentences.
Thank you for joining us today, gentlemen. We are here
today to discuss the challenges of sustaining the joint force
against a near-peer competitor. The problem of how to get our
forces what they need to meet the wartime demand is not new.
History provides countless examples of how the Department of
Defense was able to ramp up supply to meet surging wartime
demand, but it also shows what happens when those demands fail
to be met.
These lessons from the past will help us address how we
approach some of our current challenges: namely, how will we
ensure that the joint force has the energy, the energy
resources required to accomplish their current and future
mission. Supplying forces with their energy requirements
requires both fuel and the capacity to move it across vast
distances. This has always been a challenging prospect because
it is--because it is resource-intensive. It requires both fuel
and the transportation needed to move it. But it becomes even
more challenging during the instances of near-peer conflict.
Both the European and Pacific theaters in World War II
offer countless examples of how logistics and supply lines
impact operations. One is to remember General Patton who, when
on the offense and short of fuel, said, give me 400,000 gallons
of gasoline and I will put you inside Germany in 2 days. But,
because he could not be resupplied, the United States lost the
initiative and the war dragged on.
German U-boats prioritized sinking oil tankers because they
understood it was easier to sink a tanker than a warship, with
a similar deleterious result on the war effort.
Likewise, commanders in the Pacific were continually
concerned about keeping their best warships fueled and ready to
engage the enemy. We could talk about Guadalcanal and the
removal of the aircraft carriers in that regard.
As it has been in the past conflicts and the future fight,
a near-peer adversary will certainly try to constrain our
ability to provide fuel to the forces. And the Department of
Defense uses a lot of fuel. It is, in fact, the largest single
consumer of petroleum products in the world.
In fiscal year 2017, the Department of Defense consumed
over 85 million barrels of fuel to power ships, aircraft,
combat vehicles, and contingency bases at a cost of nearly $8.2
billion. Such expansive requirements invite risk, both to the
service members on the front line who need the fuel, and those
who are charged with providing it.
Because of this risk and the certainty that an adversary
will seek to constrain supply, we must look to the other side
of the equation: demand. Reducing the energy demands of our
Armed Forces must be as much a part of our strategy for meeting
contested logistics challenges as ensuring that we have fuel
and the transport for the supply side of the equation. We must
learn the lessons of history and couple them with modern
innovation to reduce the demand of our weapon systems.
While peacetime demand reduction is often dismissed as
unnecessary environmentally motivated greening of the military,
but a reduction of demand is mission critical in a contested
fight, because decreasing demand increases joint forces
lethality.
If we become more fuel [efficient], then we can increase
range and maneuverability, and decrease cost which can then be
invested elsewhere to increase overall readiness.
Today we have the technologies, including electrification,
hydrogen fuel cell technologies, and fuel efficiency measures
that were unimaginable in the conflicts of the past. But to
integrate the right technologies into our strategy, we must
overcome the Pentagon's stovepiping that may make this
difficult, if not impossible.
The military departments must take a holistic approach:
research, acquisition, requirement development, and war plan
creation. Today's witnesses are our military's logistics
leaders, as well as the Department's operational energy
personnel. They must be engaged and included in this
discussion. This collaboration, while often missing in the
past, is necessary to lower demand so that the Department of
Defense is lethal in a contested environment.
While today's witnesses do not have all the answers, they
have many. They are uniquely positioned to understand both the
operational warfighting requirements, the wargaming results,
and the challenge to supplying the force in a contested
environment.
I remind the members of the subcommittee that, as this is
an open forum, there may be many times in our discussion when
we can only talk in generalities. We will, however, have
follow-up meetings, and we will go into detail on these issues.
So, we will look for those opportunities. And I invite all the
members to participate in them. You will not be able to do so
remotely, so plan ahead. We will give you at least 24 hours
notice.
With that, Mr. Lamborn, please.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 37.]

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
The future fight will present logistics challenges not
experienced in the recent past. Adversaries like Russia and
China are seeking to deny access in all domains, and to ensure
that our supply lines are contested. It is under this all-
domain threat that we must be able to rapidly assemble and
deploy forces worldwide and, importantly, to support those
forces over large distances for lengthy periods of time. That
is a tall order.
Simply put, we must be planning and solving for the
operational energy challenges presented by the future fight.
This will require a strategy that considers both supply and
demand. A balanced approach will better position our forces for
the future. So, we have asked the Department here today to tell
us what is being done to assure energy needs and better plan
for scenarios where supply lines are disrupted. We must get
this right.
When the ability to provide and deliver energy is placed at
risk, so, too, is the Department's ability to deploy and
sustain forces around the globe. I know that the Department and
the services take this challenge seriously, and have been
working hard to find solutions. I look forward to hearing about
new systems and concepts, and what investments are being
planned and made for innovation tailored to an enhanced ability
to operate in contested environments. And, importantly, how we
are assuring that those new concepts are being considered and
integrated at program levels.
I am a strong supporter of innovative solutions like
Project Pele. Safe and reliable mobile or microreactors present
a promising solution to providing abundant energy to our
warfighters in remote and austere environments. It is
imperative we move quickly to develop new capabilities able to
maintain our lines of communication and supply.
I know that much of this conversation can get classified
quickly, but I am also interested in what we are learning from
the planning and execution of war games. It is my hope that
these efforts are improving Department decision making in
concept and capability development, and in program investments.
And while supply challenges can dominate near-term focus, I
am also interested in demand side efforts and opportunities.
Efforts to increase the range and capability of the legacy
tactical ground vehicle fleet, transform the operational energy
performance of manned and unmanned systems, among many others,
are vital to long-term solutions.
So, again, I appreciate the witnesses being here today. And
I look forward to their comments.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
A couple of introductions before we introduce our witnesses
today. In the back of the room are two people that are integral
in my work. Rebecca Wolf, who will leave my office in the next
week, has been my Military Fellow from the U.S. Navy. She will
have a ship to command, or at least be number two in the
command of a ship in the very near future. We thank the Navy
for sending her my way.
Also, my new hire, my military legislative person, fresh
out of the Marine Corps, former major, now staff, Elle Ekman.
Elle, in the back of the room.
And next to me is Mr. White, my new member of our
professional staff.
So, with those introductions, we will now move on. And to
them, a big thank you,.
So, let me do our introductions here.
We have from the Joint Staff, Lieutenant General Sam
Barrett, Joint Staff Director for Logistics, J-4.
Lieutenant General Duane Gamble, United States Army, Deputy
Chief of Staff, G-4.
Vice Admiral Rick Williamson, United States Navy, Deputy
Chief of Naval Operations for Fleet Readiness and Logistics, N-
4.
Lieutenant General Edward ``Ted'' Banta, United States
Marine Corps, Deputy Commandant, Installations and Logistics.
And Lieutenant General Warren D. Berry, United States Air
Force, Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics, Engineering and
Force Protection, A-4.
So, let's start, General Barrett, if you would.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN SAM C. BARRETT, USAF, JOINT STAFF DIRECTOR
FOR LOGISTICS, J-4, THE PENTAGON

General Barrett. Good morning.
Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn, distinguished
members of this committee, thanks for the opportunity to appear
today to discuss how operational energy can help address
logistics challenges. I am honored to be here with my service
four counterparts who will provide context from their service
perspectives.
First and foremost, I want to take a minute to express my
pride in the men and women of the U.S. Armed Forces,
particularly those in the joint logistics enterprise. Whether
conducting the largest airlift evacuation in history, supplying
and sustaining operations around the world, our logistics
professionals are simply the best. But as good as they are,
they remain and will remain dependent on the right operational
energy architecture to train, move, and sustain military forces
across the globe.
Operational energy is an important enabler for our
warfighting power, and one that requires complex integration.
In today's contested environment and in future fights, ensuring
the availability of operational energy by reducing consumption,
increasing resiliency, and leveraging alternative sources is
crucial to our Nation's success.
As the joint force prepares for the full range of military
operations, we are continually reviewing operational plans to
ensure energy considerations are properly integrated. Through
exercises and war games the Joint Staff evaluates risk to force
and risk to mission.
For example, the Joint Force Energy Wargames series and our
J-4-sponsored Advancing Globally Integrated Logistics [Effort]
war game, which is known as AGILE, bring together warfighters
from the services, combatant commands, and our allies and
partners to explore the potential seams between organizations.
These games also evaluate the strengths, weaknesses, and
consequences of alternative approaches to operational energy.
Without question, our future success depends on robust and
accurate assessments of logistics capabilities. These
assessments then inform logistics investments.
For example, this past year the Department's Logistics
Functional Capability Board outlined requirements to deliver
petroleum to the joint force over the shore.
Similarly, our Joint Logistics Board established a
department-wide working group focused on improving the
management, visibility, and delivery of bulk fuel in contested
environments. These boards, and others like them, provide
operational energy guidance for the fight today, while driving
reduction in energy requirements for the future.
Advances in modern material science, computing, and
engineering offer new opportunities to mitigate risk and reduce
energy demand. The ability to operate for extended periods,
over long distances, with great speed and payload directly
increase our flexibility, our capability, and it reduces the
adversary's opportunity to disrupt operations.
Alternative energy sources like electricity, low carbon
fuels, nuclear power, provide opportunities to reduce petroleum
footprints while increasing military capability. Reducing
demand for energy is a critical component of our military's
ability to sustain distributed operations against our potential
adversaries.
As a nation, we have faced operational energy challenges
before, especially in World War II. Most recently, our
adversaries watched us build iron mountains of supplies to
achieve our Nation's goals. In response, adversaries have
developed capabilities to counter our global logistics
advantage. As our competitors vie for increased influence, they
will actively exploit seams in our logistics and our
operational energy networks.
We know that modernizing the joint force operational energy
construct and capabilities will play a critical role in
overcoming those shared challenges.
Finally, we will continue to prioritize our most vital
asset: our people. Our logistics professionals are the linchpin
to America's ability to pursue global objectives. Developing
and training these logistics professionals is absolutely
essential.
Thanks again for the opportunity to speak today. I look
forward to the statements of my peers and friends. And I will
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Barrett can be found in
the Appendix on page 40.]
Mr. Garamendi. General Barrett, thank you very much. You
set the stage.
General Gamble, please.

STATEMENT OF LTG DUANE A. GAMBLE, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF,
G-4, U.S. ARMY

General Gamble. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of
Secretary Wormuth, General McConville, and the soldiers,
families, and civilians of the United States Army, thanks for
the opportunity today to discuss operational energy's
contributions to both logistics capabilities and to Army
readiness.
We in the Army define operational energy as the energy-
associated systems, information, and processes required to
train, move, and sustain forces and systems in support of
military operations. Energy is the key enabler that drives
operational capabilities, and the primary objective of our
operational energy plan is to improve warfighter capacity,
capability, and to win the Nation's wars.
The contested operating environments described by both you,
Mr. Chairman, and you, Ranking Member Lamborn, these are the
environments in which we expect to fight, and in which the U.S.
could be engaged, and that is all the more necessary to make
operational energy capabilities important and decisive to our
success.
Potential adversaries continue to improve their ability to
contest the lines of communication, deny us access, and target
our forces. One way our Army is seeking to mitigate the risks
within these contested environments is to reduce the demand for
supplies and services, including fuel, which will extend range,
operational endurance, maintain battlefield momentum, and
increase freedom of action, all the while minimizing soldier
exposure to enemy action.
We are also looking at ways to field new and emerging
operational energy capabilities that will give us an edge on
the battlefield. To accomplish these goals, we are developing
the Army's first Operational Energy Strategy; it is currently
on track to be signed in spring of 2022.
The Army Operational Energy Strategy identifies challenges
in the future operating environment; it presents these
challenges and is focused on two desired goals.
The first goal is to increase warfighter capability by
increasing operational endurance, duration, and reach. To
accomplish this, we believe we must enable maneuver units to
operate autonomously from their lines of communication by
decreasing sustainment requirements at the point of need. This
has an added benefit of decreasing logistics signatures and
footprints of soldiers, equipment, and infrastructure.
The second goal of our Operational Energy Strategy is to
increase energy security and increase energy resilience so that
we can accomplish our mission despite disruptions from the
enemy, from the weather, and the terrain. This will be
accomplished through capability development of systems at scale
that can be utilized, multiple sources of energy, including
alternative energies, and have the capability to store, manage,
and control required energy, and to distribute that energy to
soldiers, systems, ground and aerial platforms, as well as to
mission commandos tied to microgrids.
In addition to our Operational Energy Strategy, our Army is
finalizing our Army Climate Strategy, which will provide a
roadmap for the Army to mitigate and adapt to climate change. I
personally participated in incorporating logistics and energy
resilience into that climate strategy. So, I know firsthand how
well logistics capabilities are embedded in our efforts to
combat climate change.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that the Army
absolutely recognizes the tie between operational energy and
our logistics capabilities required in a contested environment.
It is part of our responsibility to provide foundational
logistics capabilities to the joint force. The Army is working
diligently to make sure our strategies produce tangible,
actionable improvements in the operational energy, and to yield
decisive capabilities in contested environments worldwide.
Thank you once more for the opportunity to present this
testimony and for your continued support of the soldiers,
civilians, and families of the United States Army.
[The prepared statement of General Gamble can be found in
the Appendix on page 50.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you very much, General.
We now turn to Admiral Williamson.

STATEMENT OF VADM RICK L. WILLIAMSON, USN, DEPUTY CHIEF OF
NAVAL OPERATIONS FOR FLEET READINESS AND LOGISTICS, N-4, OFFICE
OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS

Admiral Williamson. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member
Lamborn, and distinguished members of the House Armed Services
Committee on Readiness, thank you for the opportunity to
provide the subcommittee a Navy perspective on how Navy's
operational energy efforts are addressing logistic challenges.
The naval logistics enterprise reached its peak in World
War II, and sustained that stance through the Cold War. In
subsequent decades, our logistics posture changed to peacetime
efficiency. The logistics enterprise has performed well over
the years sustaining our warfighters.
For the first time in over three decades, both the 2018
National Defense and the Tri-Service Maritime Strategies
clearly and firmly orient the national security environment
toward strategic competition. This environment comprises long-
term global competition across multiple domains; spans the
global industrial base and operational battle space; and
requires technological, operational, and strategic solutions
within a significant unpredictably--unpredictable and
uncertainty. However, these achievements took place in the
context of a permissive maritime environment against non-peer
adversaries.
Cost-efficient hub-and-spoke model works well. Just-in-time
delivery is sufficient for a fleet that is not widely dispersed
or dynamically maneuvering under persistent multi-domain
attack. Hub-and-spoke is effective in peacetime operations, but
once we shift to Phase 2 operations, it is not sustainable.
In 2019, the Secretary of the Navy [SECNAV] set operational
energy priorities for the Department to address gaps in
alignment of energy supply and demand in strategic competition.
Those include extending operational reach of current and future
weapon systems through more effective use of energy, reducing
energy consumption and external energy logistics requirements
to forward-deployed strike groups, and increasing the effective
use, conversion, storage, and distribution of operational
energy.
The CNO [Chief of Naval Operations] followed SECNAV's
operational energy goals with Navy-specific objectives that
target energy and acquisition, optimizing energy use, energy
supply chain, and supply and demand management. The Navy is
answering those goals and objectives. We are increasing
operational energy modeling capabilities to appropriately
assess energy supportability and acquisition, incorporating
efficiency measures in ships and aircraft, increased investment
in batteries and electrification of warfighting systems, and
integrating energy command and control tools into the Navy's
log LOG IT [logistics information technology] systems.
The Navy is actively shifting the logistics paradigm from a
pull to a push system, moving away from the just-in-time
logistics of hub-and-spoke design to a concept with distributed
nodes. The Navy uses the five vector model of maritime
sustainment: refuel, revive, rearm, repair, and resupply.
Aligning to these vectors, our national--our naval
logistics enterprise will develop new, divest of legacy, and
improve existing capabilities to include those that deliver
operational energy to the warfighter.
We will continue to apply analytic rigor to our logistics
problems, including condition-based maintenance, supply chain,
and industrial base, to enable expeditionary operations per
distributed maritime operations and expeditionary advanced base
operations. We will continue to work to provide the operational
energy and logistics capabilities our naval forces need.
I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Williamson can be found
in the Appendix on page 57.]
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral, thank you very much.
We now turn to General Banta, United States Marine Corps.

STATEMENT OF LTGEN EDWARD D. BANTA, USMC, DEPUTY COMMANDANT,
INSTALLATIONS AND LOGISTICS, U.S. MARINE CORPS

General Banta. Good morning.
Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to discuss how the Marine Corps' approach to
operational energy can help address logistics challenges,
especially in contested environments.
To meet the Commandant's vision for Force Design 2030, the
Marine Corps has spent the last 2 years making significant
changes to how it is organized, trained, equipped, and postured
to meet the demands of the future operating environment. The
joint force requires a capability that operates persistently
and with maximum organic mobility and dispersion to compete and
deter in the contact and blunt layers.
As a result, the Marine Corps has taken steps to modernize,
including deliberate efforts to invest, divest, and reset.
Logistics is the Marine Corps' current pacing function in this
effort. As we pivot from two decades of extensive land
operations to a focus on executing expeditionary advanced base
operations, the Marine Corps is developing its approach to
sustaining stand-in forces in a contested and dynamic
environment.
Advancements in operational energy technologies present an
opportunity for the Marine Corps to increase lethality, extend
operational reach, and self-sustain units, while simultaneously
providing positive contributions towards climate imperatives.
Our approach to operational energy includes reducing
demand, investing in more fuel-efficient systems, and exploring
alternative energy sources. We have partnered with academia,
the Navy, and our joint force counterparts to examine our
operational energy architecture in the expeditionary
environment. The results have informed the Marine Corps' focus
on developing and adopting viable solutions to address our
logistics challenges.
The Marine Corps 2030 Strategic Logistics Plan outlines our
approach to meeting future logistics challenges across four
lines of effort: enabling global logistics awareness,
diversifying distribution, improving sustainment, and
operationalizing installations to support sustained operations.
Within these lines of effort, the Marine Corps requires
critical capabilities to ensure our forces can operate in this
environment. We support the Navy's effort to develop light
combatant surface vessels and ancillary logistics connectors,
such as the light amphibious warship, or LAW, to support
littoral sustainment and maneuver.
Leasing commercial vessels can also provide flexibility and
redundancy, and allows us to experiment with our sustainment
concepts in the near term. A modernized prepositioning network
with the right mix of afloat and ashore capabilities, as well
as uncrewed logistics systems will reduce risk in future
sustainment missions.
The challenges we face in the future operating environment
will blur the distinction between operations at home and
overseas. Many of the same threats faced by our installations
at home will also be faced by our advanced naval bases, all of
which are critical to the Marine Corps' support for naval and
joint operations. Resiliency efforts require hardened critical
and energy infrastructure to support the force before, during,
and after deployment. Increasing our installations' capability
and capacity underpins our forward presence.
The Marine Corps is committed to a future force unleashed
from the tether of fossil fuels on the battlefield. The service
actively continues to invest in developing expeditionary and
alternative operational energy sources and systems to achieve
energy resilience and enable the persistence and mobility that
a naval expeditionary force demands. Increased lethality,
range, and endurance of Marine Corps formations remain
warfighting imperatives that drive our force modernization
efforts.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today,
and for your oversight, input, and support as we develop the
capabilities to sustain our stand-in forces. I look forward to
working with you to further our warfighting capability and the
readiness of our power projection platforms.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Banta can be found in
the Appendix on page 72.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, General.
We now turn to the United States Air Force, General Berry.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN WARREN D. BERRY, USAF, DEPUTY CHIEF OF
STAFF FOR LOGISTICS, ENGINEERING AND FORCE PROTECTION, A-4,
U.S. AIR FORCE

General Berry. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you as
well for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
operational energy and its nexus to logistics opportunities and
challenges in a contested environment.
Air power is critical to the success of modern military
operations in the joint force, and our basing and logistics
enterprise is the foundation that generates Air Force combat
power, from air superiority to long-range strike.
Our pacing adversaries have watched our operations over the
last few decades, and have developed ways to attempt to blunt
or take away America's air power advantage. In the event of
conflict, we expect our air bases and logistics supply chains
will be subject to determined multi-domain attack. Our
adversaries' kinetic air and missile capabilities drive us to
be prepared to rapidly disperse and maneuver our air forces,
commonly referred to as agile combat employment, or ACE.
In the face of kinetic threats, ACE allows us to generate
combat power from potentially vulnerable forward bases. Of
course, we also know that such maneuver greatly complicates the
logistical challenges, particularly in the realm of operational
energy. And while we are still experimenting with concepts that
allow us to deliver and sustain persistent logistics and
persistent mission generation while under attack, we also know
that this is inherently a solvable problem.
Operational energy remains a key ingredient to achieving
that persistent mission generation. Operational energy is a
critical enabler to our global mission, as aviation fuel and
energy to power aircraft comprised over 82 percent of the $4.6
billion Air Force energy bill in 2020.
While the Air Force relies on the joint force and the
Defense Logistics Agency to sustain our energy and fuel supply
lines, we are constantly seeking solutions to improve
operational energy efficiency, especially given these
logistical challenges. We are committed to improving fuel
efficiency and reducing costs through leveraging alternative
energy sources when it provides a competitive advantage, and
where practical.
We focused our efforts to reduce operational energy demand
in three broad areas: reducing the footprint required for
mission generation forward; reducing aviation and ground fuels
demand; and reducing installation energy demands from our bases
forward and at home.
In that vein, I'd like to highlight just two of the many
promising initiatives the Air Force is pursuing. The first is
actually an example of a bottom-up innovation from an
outstanding senior noncommissioned officer in the Air Force.
It's called the VIPER [Versatile Integrating Partner Equipment
Refueling] kit.
And the VIPER kit takes existing petroleum, oil, and
lubricant, or POL, components from an R-11 refueling truck and
configures them into a small custom sled that eliminates the
need for those R-11 refueling trucks during hot refuel
operations in a forward deployed environment. It has an
immediate impact on our energy footprint, it decreases our
deployment processing times by 96 percent and distribution
costs by 90 percent, and obviously is much easier to take into
combat.
Second, the Air Force Civil Engineering Center is
developing a new system for expeditionary-based power called
the Base Powerload and Installation Management System. And it
allows for the seamless integration of alternative and
renewable energy sources from any type of energy source.
This type of innovative work is ongoing throughout the
force, and in concert with the joint working groups that ensure
standard interfaces and help avoid duplicative effort.
Ultimately, our focus must be squarely on preparing to fight
through determined multi-domain attacks against our basing and
logistics forces, while generating decisive airpower effects on
the adversary now and in the future. Operational energy is
critical to doing so.
We have some of the answers today. And through our
continued experimentation, tough training, and an innovative
culture of empowered airmen, we will further enhance our
capabilities to achieve and retain relative advantage in the
future.
Thanks again to the members of the subcommittee for your
support of the Air Force and my DOD [U.S. Department of
Defense] partners here with me today. And I look forward to our
discussion on this very important topic.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Berry can be found in
the Appendix on page 79.]
Mr. Garamendi. Gentlemen, thank you very much for your
testimony. I would bring to the attention of the committee the
written testimony which will, without objection, be made part
of the record of this hearing.
And I want to thank you and your staffs for an
exceptionally good written testimony that covers many of these
issues, and focused clearly on the issue at hand, operational
energy and how we might reduce those, the need for it.
The witnesses received a copy of this a few moments ago. I
hand this to the members that are here.
For those of you that are out there in virtual land, I am
going to hold this up. This is an 1869 chart of Napoleon's
march to Moscow from eastern Germany, or what was then--what is
now Lithuania. And if you look at it, you will notice that he
started off with an enormous number of troops and supplies. And
the brown line here is what he wound up with in Moscow. And the
black line is what he wound up in his return.
He didn't use petroleum products as energy, but he used
horses. And horses need to be fed. And the Russians figured out
that if there was nothing for the horses to eat they might get
hungry. And eventually Napoleon wound up using the horses as
food, not supply.
Also, this chart demonstrates another issue which is not
the subject of this committee, but will be at some point, and
that is the health of the troops. Most of the troops died as a
result of typhus that was spread throughout the force by lice.
And along the way, this is a demonstration of one of the
world's great generals and what he failed to deal with.
And, yes, I would like to put that in the record also, and
for the edification of all of us that we need to pay attention.
[The chart referred to was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Garamendi. Even the world's great generals missed a
couple of things along the way. He thought he could supply his
troops on the way to Moscow. The Russians had a different idea.
They burned the fields, burned the houses, and the troops were
hungry.
So, I bring this to our attention to drive home the point
that this is exceedingly important that we pay attention, in
this case to the energy. The other logistical issues will be,
have been, and will continue to be subject matter of this
committee in future hearings.
So, I could ask a lot of questions. I really want to turn
very quickly to my colleagues on the committee, both Democrats
and Republicans; we'll have the gavel order in a few moments.
But my fundamental question to the five of you is, you
understand this issue. Your written testimony as well as your
oral testimony today speaks to your clear understanding and the
priority that, in this case, operational energy presents to
you, to your operations and, frankly, to the tasks that you're
responsible for.
My question is different. What do you need from us to be
successful in reducing your energy requirements, and in
achieving a distribution of an appropriate availability of that
energy where it is needed?
So, the question is really back to us, or the issue is back
to us. We need to know by the end of this hearing and by the
work that will be following on it, and that will involve
classified briefings, what do we need to do?
We may or may not be able to do anything in this year's
NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act]. And the rumors are
that there might actually be a conclusion to it. That was a
happy thought, and let's hold that for a while. But in the next
NDAA I want this committee to address this issue squarely. And
in order for us to do that we need you to tell us what you
need.
We will, of course, review it and we will make sure that it
is, at least in our view, sensible and appropriate.
So, I am going to let my question go there unanswered. But
during the course of the hearing if the opportunity presents
itself in the questions put forth by my colleagues, please come
back and challenge us along the way.
Mr. Lamborn, I turn to you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And thank you for having this
hearing. Thank you again to you gentlemen for being here today.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I am a supporter of
innovative solutions to the operational energy challenge, like
Project Pele. Mobile microreactors have the potential to be
employed in austere and remote areas. Who has any thoughts on
this capability?
Could microreactors be part of the solution?
General Gamble. Ranking Member Lamborn, Duane Gamble, U.S.
Army. I will jump on that.
The Army clearly sees a utility for that type of
technology. We have received briefings from the Strategic
Capabilities Office. Our Army Corps of Engineers and the Army
G-4, my teams, have spoken with the Strategic Capabilities
Office who is currently developing that, that technology.
It is my understanding the technology is not quite mature
yet, but we expect it, of course, to become mature in the
future. And we even had a Army Requirements Oversight Council
meeting on it this last year. So, it has also received the
attention of our Army senior leaders.
Really that is all I have to report on it at this point.
But there is clearly opportunity there once the technology
comes to fruition.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Does the Navy or anyone else have a
comment on microreactors?
General Banta. Ranking Member Lamborn, General Banta,
Marine Corps.
So, while not intimately familiar with the concept of
microreactors, the Marine Corps clearly appreciates the value
and potential future benefits of alternative energy sources.
Through our Marine Corps Warfighting Lab we have been involved
in looking at hydrogen fuel as a potential future source. And I
would think that combining that with both microgrids as well as
potentially microreactors would provide great benefit to us in
the future, particularly operating in an expeditionary
environment.
So, we will remain engaged with, through our Joint Staff
partners, as well as services and Congress on those efforts.
Thank you.
General Berry. Congressman Lamborn, I would just say, as
you may have read in the press, the Air Force announced a
microreactor project, a pilot project, that we are going to put
into Alaska. We expect that to be in the fiscal year 2027 realm
that we would do it as a power purchasing agreement where we
would basically buy that power. But it's a way to get us some
redundancy and resiliency in the power demand at that
installation. We look forward to what that pilot project might
tell us.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir. Echo a lot of what my fellow
members spoke to. Anything that allows us the freedom of
maneuver we are obviously very interested in. Enable to divorce
the operational fleet from the logistics tether gives us
maneuverability. Maneuverability equals survivability.
As you know, we have very big reactors. But we have to look
at the problem of sustaining the fleet as a whole. And so that
is going to be done both ashore and afloat. And so if there is
potential there, obviously it provides a tremendous operational
advantage for us.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
General Barrett. And, finally, I would just say I don't
think we can afford to not explore it within the realm of
demand reduction. And it has been well stated by my colleagues
the ongoing efforts. But there is certainly a place for this to
take a look at both our resiliency, energy independence, and
certainly in an expeditionary location it would be helpful.
Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, very good. Thank you all.
And my next question I would like to ask you about is the
electrification of vehicles. Now, I know for the Navy vessels
or for the Air Force for airborne planes, you know, we are
probably a ways off.
But for the Army, the electrification of ground vehicles is
something that is a present day option. And I know in your
written statement, General Gamble, you did talk about the
progress being made and the advantages of electric vehicles. I
know that there are also disadvantages. You have to have a
reliable electric source. And in theater that may or may not be
available.
And also there are some people who say that you are just
transferring the energy problem from your neighborhood gas
station to a remote electric plant out in the desert, but it is
the same demand in either case when you look at the big
picture.
But you did have some interesting things that you said in
your written testimony. And so, could you elaborate in this
open setting, of course, nothing classified, but what
advantages and disadvantages you see for more use of electric
vehicles on the ground?
General Gamble. Representative Lamborn, thanks for your
question.
Indeed, I believe, the Army believes we are at an
inflection point on the electrification of the tactical wheeled
vehicle fleet as well as the combat vehicle fleet. And while,
and because--it is because of the commercial industry and the
technologies that have emerged, as well as to the Department of
Defense and some work done there as well.
But really it is about the inflection point really stems
from our commercial industry and available technology.
We believe the technology is scalable as well to our, at
least our tactical wheeled vehicle fleet.
We see the challenges you described, you know, full
electrification for our complex weapon systems at the forward
edge of the battlefield is a goal that we don't believe
currently our technology will support that.
Having said that, in fiscal year 2022 we will continue to
prototype one of our Bradley Fighting Vehicles to be full--
fully electric. For our JLTV, Joint Light Tactical Vehicles,
and our, you know, Humvee fleet, our High Mobility Multipurpose
Wheeled Vehicles, in fiscal year 2022 we will test hybrid
electric Humvees and JLTVs as well.
So, while we are doing testing and prototyping of hybrid
electric, full electric remains our stretch goal. Our strategy,
and I believe I touched on it in my written testimony, is
really kind of a three-part strategy: it is hybrid electric,
anti-idle, hybrid electric, and full electric. And it meets
what we think the goal on full electric is in the 2030-2035
timeframe for complex weapon systems because we believe then
the technology will be matured.
We do think, though, in the short term, anti-idle
technology, we are incorporating that in some of our vehicles
today and working, working to do that. We believe that reduces
thermal signature, it increases operational range and
endurance, it reduces, you know, fuel consumption as well. So,
this demand reduction that both you and the chairman talked
about, it's dead in our sights.
So, I hope I answered your question, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much.
Does anyone have anything to add, or does that pretty much
cover where we are at right now.
General Berry. Sir, I would just say from an Air Force
perspective, right, a large part of our support equipment that
we use to generate air power: diesel. And so we, we echo what
General Gamble said, right.
There is a great capability as we look at leveraging what
commercial industry is doing with electrification to use
perhaps photovoltaic cells to provide lighting on the airfields
as we do aircraft operations or munitions loading operations;
to electrify loaders, right, that put munitions on aircraft, so
that we do have some resiliency and redundancy and we aren't
just beholden to the POL farm that is there, but we have other
means and other sources of generating combat capability without
relying on diesel.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you all so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
The gavel order that we presently have would be Mr. Kahele,
followed by Mr. Wilson. And I think on the remote side of this,
Ms. Slotkin has joined us and perhaps--ah, here we go.
So, heads up, team, here we are: Kahele, Wilson,
Strickland, Bergman. You are on this twice, Wilson. What is
going on here? And Slotkin.
Mr. Kahele, you are up.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Admiral Williamson, my comments and questions this
morning are related to the Red Hill Bulk Storage Facility and
the Navy's entire pipeline infrastructure and fuel operations
on the island of Oahu in my home State of Hawaii.
Many of my colleagues, Mr. Chairman, right now might not
know about Red Hill. So, I am going to take just a few minutes
to share some background on this facility.
The Red Hill Fuel Storage Facility contains 20 steel tanks
encased by up to 4 feet of concrete, and surrounded by basalt
bedrock. Construction on the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage
Facility began in secret a year before the attack on Pearl
Harbor and was constructed underground to provide maximum
protection of the fuel supply. The facility remained classified
until 1995.
This is the largest single Department of Defense fuel
storage facility in the Pacific theater, and it has the
capability to accommodate 250 million gallons of fuel, and
currently contains approximately 110 million gallons of fuel.
There is no question that Red Hill is a strategic and
operationally important asset for the U.S. military in Indo-
Pacific.
However, it is equally or more important for this committee
to know that the Red Hill Facility, located approximately 100
feet above one of the island's main groundwater aquifers, is
safe. The aquifers are sources of potable water and are
vulnerable to contamination from an unscheduled discharge of
fuel from the facility.
Dating back to 1947, there have been dozens of fuel leaks.
The worst leak in recent years was in January of 2014 when the
U.S. Navy discovered a fuel leak of approximately 27,000
gallons of fuel.
I am bringing up Red Hill today because the Navy is
currently experiencing a crisis of astronomical proportions in
Hawaii. The Navy's water system is contaminated with petroleum.
Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam's water systems are entirely
shut down. Almost 100,000 people are without water. Our
military families, people are getting sick, animals are getting
sick, and our military families need answers, and the island of
Oahu needs answers.
Earlier this week I personally visited, Mr. Chairman, some
of the impacted Navy personnel and their families. One mother I
met, Amanda, invited me into her home to test the water from
her kitchen, water that she and her family had been consuming
for a week after the most recent leak on November 20th, as a
result of operator error.
At her invitation, I collected water samples from her
kitchen--this water right here. Amanda had her daughter at home
in Zoom classes because her school was closed due to the
contamination. Her family had been drinking the water for days.
Her dog got sick, was vomiting. Her daughter went to the ER
[emergency room]. Her son experienced an unusual sore on his
mouth.
Today, Amanda just texted me--and this was about 6 o'clock
in the morning Hawaii time, Mr. Chairman--that she went to the
Tripler Emergency Room last night because of a headache and
irritation in her mouth and throat. And her doctor diagnosed
her with chemical burns in her mouth. She is worried,
rightfully so, about her health and the health of her family.
Another military mother, Kelly, emailed me at 9 o'clock
last night. She is 6 months pregnant. She had been drinking the
water for a week, and she is, rightfully so, in a panicked
state.
As you can see here, there is a sheen on this drinking
water. This is taken out of somebody's kitchen, Navy family
housing at Pearl Harbor. And I can tell you myself that if you
smell this water you would know that there is something wrong
with this water. There is a petroleum product in this water.
Right now the Navy is relying on community donations and
using water tankers to distribute clean water to residents. You
can smell some type of petroleum chemical in the water. The
Department of Health and the University of Hawaii has confirmed
the petroleum in the water. And there have been concerns on the
community for years on the possibility of leaks from Red Hill
into the drinking water supply.
This is a mother walking up to a water distribution site
with a 5-gallon jug so that she can take a shower last night.
And yet the Navy seems totally unprepared for this
situation that has now impacted the military's own service
members and families. And what is happening on the ground in
Hawaii right now is absolutely unacceptable.
And I understand the operational importance of Red Hill
Facility to our military today and our military's readiness in
the future. However, there have been three reported fuel leaks
on Oahu in the last 20 months, and we need answers.
So, I have two questions for you.
Although the Navy has said there are no indications that
the tanks are leaking, many Hawaii residents are calling for
the immediate drainage of all the Red Hill fuel tanks. As I
stated in my opening remarks, there are over a dozen tanks that
contain more than 110 million gallons of fuel.
So, first question: Is it possible to make Red Hill safe
for our water supply and our community? If yes, how? What are
the steps that need to be taken immediately? And how quickly
can they be taken? We know the status quo is not working.
My second question is, logistically, how would draining the
facility work if we called for the shutdown of the Red Hill
Bulk Fuel Storage Facility? How long would it take? Where would
you store the fuel? And what draining the Red Hill fuel tanks
would mean for the United States military?
And I know I have run out of time, so I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Kahele, you have whatever time is
necessary. Well, we think we know where this question is going
to go.
Admiral Williamson.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir.
First, sir, I want to say that this has, obviously, my
leadership's full attention. And we are taking it very
seriously.
The health and safety of our sailors, their families, the
surrounding community is of the utmost importance. You know, we
share your concerns. We are committed to find the facts, get
the root causes, and make the appropriate corrections to
anything that we discover.
You have our commitment to be completely transparent with
the local government, the local people, our sailors, our
families, and with this committee.
As far as your questions go, sir, I would love to take that
for the record and come back to you with an answer.
Mr. Kahele. It is a question that the people of Hawaii are
asking for of this congressional delegation. And we don't know
how that would be possible to drain 110 million gallons of
fuel. Where would you put it? How would you do it? How long
would it take? But these are questions that the people of
Hawaii are asking. And it is questions that we need to provide
to the Governor, and State legislators, and elected officials,
and the community in Hawaii.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kahele. My understanding is that we should be, based on
a conversation that the delegation had with the Secretary of
the Navy, who is on his way or will be on his way to Hawaii to
be boots on the ground and taking charge of this situation
directly, that we will be receiving one of the water samples
that was sent to a mainland distribution or a mainland testing
facility by this afternoon.
If those tests come back with some type of petroleum
substance chemical in the water, affirming what the University
of Hawaii and the State Department of Health released yesterday
in that their preliminary samples have some type of petroleum
in the water--and I can guarantee you, Vice Admiral Williamson,
if you smell this water that I allowed the chairman to smell
before this hearing started, you would know that something is
wrong with this water--but if the Navy's test comes back this
afternoon with a petroleum product in the water, what is the
Navy going to do?
Admiral Williamson. [Speaking off-mic.]
Mr. Kahele. Well, I hope the Navy is taking the next 5 to 6
hours to prepare for that if those tests come back. And I can't
emphasize it enough. You know, this is a crisis that we have
not seen in Hawaii. You know, Hawaii has a strong military
community. But this is something that is affecting the lives of
our service members, their families, the public, the community.
Red Hill provides about 25 percent, or the Halawa Shaft and
the aquifer underneath the Red Hill fuel tanks, Halawa,
Wahiawa, and Red Hill provide about 25 percent of the entire
groundwater aquifer source for the island of Oahu, which has
about a million residents. It is--we cannot have this water
source contaminated by petroleum fuel from the Red Hill tanks.
And it is something that we really, really need to take
seriously.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Kahele, thank you for bringing this to
the attention of the committee. This issue is this committee's
issue. It is one of the infrastructure pieces that we are
responsible for. And we will be following up.
Admiral Williamson, if you would respond by early afternoon
to the questions that Mr. Kahele has put forth, there appears
to be a serious ongoing public health issue. And the
probability is that the U.S. military, Navy, Red Hill Facility
is responsible.
So, if you will have your people get back to this committee
and we will disseminate the information to all the committee
members. And certainly, Mr. Kahele, you will be the first to
hear whatever information there is available.
The issue also--and that is your follow-up question which
is directly to the point of this hearing--we are talking about
operational energy issues. These storage facilities are
specifically for operational energy, both on the base or bases
in the Pacific, as well as the equipment that would be using
the petroleum products.
So, your second question is, goes to the heart of our
concerns specifically today. And that is, how can we reduce the
need for operational energy, and thereby reduce the potential
problems such as you brought to this committee, as well as the
operational problems that would occur?
So, we will continue on that. I think the point of this
hearing will bring more clarity to your second point. And as we
go through the second round of questions you may want to come
back, if you have not had--not been satisfied.
Modification in the order here. Mr. Wilson, I understand
you are going to stand aside and Mr. Scott is going to take the
next question.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank Mr. Wilson. I have a 12:00 o'clock as well that is also
important.
Gentlemen, General [Berry], you mentioned diesel. And
diesel is not refined to the same standard in every sense. And
my question for you is, virtually every operation that we have
requires diesel, whether it be for a generator or whether it be
for an engine. How are you taking into account the different
standards of refining diesel throughout the various areas of
operation?
General Berry. Thanks, Congressman.
One of the things that we do as we scan the horizon of the
locations that we would be most likely using for contingency
operations, we send teams out to do site surveys. And they look
at everything from operational locations in terms of, you know,
ramp space, in terms of facilities. But we also look at fuel.
And we will go out and test pavements for the strength of
the pavement to handle the aircraft that we will bring in, and
we also look at fuel and we test fuel.
So, everywhere we go we are looking at what those standards
are and do they match what we require to run our equipment. And
if they don't, then we will go back and get an engineering
analysis to see if there is a way that we can still use the
diesel that is there. And if not, then we make plans and
contingencies to do something different. But we do take that
into consideration in our operational planning.
Mr. Scott. So, to be clear, the newer tier of diesel
engines in the United States simply can't function on the
diesel that is refined in certain parts of Africa and other
parts of the world. And I just want to make sure that as we
push forward that we, that we take that into account. I know we
are concerned about emissions and other things, and we should
be. We can and should do a better job of taking care of the
environment. But, ultimately, when we are in a fight, we have
to win that fight.
And I am concerned, I can tell you, and I am--you know,
this is happening with farmers right now. I mean, the majority
of the shutdowns on the tractors are coming from DEF [diesel
exhaust fluid] fluid problems, and sensor problems, and other
things. And I just, I want to make sure we're being very, very
careful in your operations that, that we don't end up with
engines that aren't able to function in areas where the fuel is
readily available.
So, one last question, General Barrett.
In your testimony you state that the days of hand waving,
is your terminology, logistics risks and limitations in war
gaming exercises are over and our future success in contested
environment depends on robust logistics capabilities.
What are the most important insights and lessons learned
from the energy--the Joint Force Energy War Games, and what
concerns you the most?
General Barrett. First of all, Congressman Scott, thanks
for that question. Very much appreciated and a good question.
Let me start by saying that I do believe we've had a very
strong focus on fuel distribution in the war games that we've
executed over the last year, I think a significant increase in
visibility to look at that. And you're right; there are no easy
solutions. That's one thing that we've taken away.
But let me just summarize three hard-hitting strategic
observations that we've pulled from the war games and exercises
that we've seen. First and foremost, we have to get better with
decisively being able to see ourselves globally. I will tell
you that any operational energy problem that we face today,
tomorrow, or in the future, is a global problem. It's a global
ecosystem that we have to look at. So we have to be able to see
ourselves going forward.
One of the action items that we're taking out of recent war
games and exercises to advance that proposition is we have
tasked the development of an end-to-end energy operating
picture. Common operating picture was called a COP. We're going
to take a first look at that in December, and we're encouraged.
It's something that we're going to have to do across many, many
things, fuel and munitions, but that is strategic observation
and lesson-learned number one and one action point to get after
it.
Number two, from our war games and exercises, it is
apparent that we have a persistent shortage of intratheater
distribution assets. So if we look at the Pacific theater, and
I would dare say it's not limited to the Pacific but that is a
significant focus, we are getting after that problem set. I can
talk more about how we're doing it, given more time later on.
But I will tell you that we define that problem set in terms of
the last tactical thousand miles because the theater is so big,
but we have got to look at solution sets for intratheater
distribution going forward.
One tangible example that we're getting after is you are
likely familiar with the Vice Chairman's emphasis on the Joint
Requirements and Oversight Committee, and we have worked very
hard within that to charter a look at multiple capable
distribution platforms. So we can take all of the services and
what they bring to the fight and look across that and find
joint solutions so that we can close that gap.
And then finally, I would tell you that it is obvious from
our war games that the importance of allies and partners and
industry, it jumps off the page at us on what we need to do
forward. So we've conducted numerous engagements with our
allies and partners. They possess unique capabilities to help
us diversify our energy needs in the Pacific theater and other
places around the globe.
Thank you for the question.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, General. Gentlemen, thank you all.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Scott. You've raised an
important issue here; we're going to follow up on the diesel
issue that you raised and the quality of the fuel, and we'll
want to write that into some of our report here and get
feedback.
Thank you for the question.
A little bit of housekeeping here. Mr. Kahele presented
photography and also some information. I'm not sure that we can
take your water and put it into the record, but all of the rest
of it will be put into the record without unanimous consent.
We'll do that. Very good.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Garamendi. We now have Mr. Bergman. You're up.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. We always do a comm [communication]
check. Can you hear me?
Mr. Garamendi. Yes, we can.
Mr. Bergman. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member. Thank you to the panel.
Number one, I was very excited to hear you just explain how
the war-gaming and the joint environment is to establish where
the vulnerabilities are with our, whether it's electric,
whether it's diesel, whether it's hydrogen. No matter what the
capability that we're going to bring to the fight, it's going
to enable you to win in the fight.
And it was good to hear of all the joint exercises that
you're doing. I would suggest to you it would be helpful for
us, as members of especially of this committee, to understand
more of that. So if there's a way to do, for lack of a better
term, whether it's a simple tabletop exercise, you know, with
flat screens and, you know, in an operation center, however you
want to do it, that would be helpful for this committee to
understand some of the things that you're going through because
I'm going to make an assumption that all of you sitting at the
table are warfighters. That's why you wear the uniform. And
there's only one outcome in a warfight, and that's to win. And
you win by, number one, never quitting; but, number two, by
preparing in advance. So in the Sun Tzu fashion, if you do it
right, you don't have to fight because the adversary decides
that you will destroy them in the fight. So I applaud all of
you for that.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution to what we're
talking about. And the ability to innovate is going to come
from industry, not from the United States military, not from
the Department of Defense. Will you have a hand in it? Yes, by
evaluating and making suggestions for requirements that allow
contracts to be let that allow new capabilities to be
introduced into the system at a rate so that we are ahead.
I really don't have any questions, other than--and I'm
going to close with one comment, because time is valuable with
any time you can yield back, is that I would suggest to you
that as warfighters and all of you are commanders coming up
through your O-5 ranks and O-6 and above, but I would suggest
to you the biggest climate issue that you could be working on
within your services is your command climate.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Bergman, we thank you for your comments
and for your experience. And this committee will lean on all of
the members as we drive the policy or assist in achieving the
goal here of reducing the energy consumption and the resiliency
of the military in that regard. So thank you, and you made a
very good statement but I want to get deeper into your own
personal knowledge. So we'll come at you.
Mr. Wilson, you're next. I don't know where my Democratic
colleagues are, but we'll run through the Republicans here.
Mr. Wilson. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And in
the tradition of Congressman Lamborn being so visionary, I
appreciate that he raised the issue of the microreactors. And
I'm very grateful to represent the Savannah River Site
laboratory in South Carolina and the microreactors, small
modular reactors [SMRs]. What a potential we have. And,
particularly, Admiral, with the potential of, say, on a base
which is an island, i.e., Parris Island or Guam, and I think
how helpful it would be to have small modular reactors. And
then, Admiral, too, with the experience of nuclear submarines,
nuclear aircraft carriers, gosh, we should be on the cusp of
truly achieving what Congressman Lamborn has described. And
however that can be facilitated, I know I would be interested
and I look forward to working with you on that.
And then, General Gamble, the Army has been pursuing the
Advanced Combat Engine, ACE, since 2015 at a substantial cost
to taxpayers while trying to fund over 30 critical
modernization priorities. Meanwhile, there are fully developed
combat vehicle proven engines from industry that offer similar
fuel efficiency at a potentially lower cost. Do you believe
that the ACE substantially exceeds the performance capabilities
of existing engines, particularly with respect to fuel
efficiency and reliability? Can you describe what metrics the
Army is using to make this comparison and the status of the ACE
in achieving them? And finally, can you commit to publicly
releasing performance data and status, as industry competitors
would, so that we can ensure that taxpayer dollars are being
spent on the most capable, efficient, and reliable solution?
General Gamble. Congressman, thanks very much for your
question. I regret to inform you I'm unprepared to answer. If I
may take it for the record, I assure you we'll have a thorough
answer, including your last point, sir. Over.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. And I look forward to
receiving your response.
General Gamble. Yes, sir.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Wilson. The next question for General Barrett. As a
part of the joint task force, the operational energy
requirements of the land component will directly affect the
size of air and maritime logistics requirements, which, in
turn, need security forces and further increase operational
energy demands. Can you share on how the Joint Staff analyzed
its future operational energy needs and how this analysis
drives recommendations for force array across combatant
commands?
General Barrett. Congressman, thanks for the question. And,
yes, I can share some thoughts on that. First, I would say--I'd
like to make the point that we don't fight as services, we
fight as a joint force. And so all of us here are committed to
understanding what are the joint requirements to win our
Nation's wars and to contribute to integrated deterrence going
forward.
With that specific question on operational energy, what I'd
like to pose to you is that we certainly rely on our combatant
commanders, in particular their theater posture plans, as we
look to the future with exercises of the joint force and what
the energy requirement is. We rely on them and their posture
plans to forecast for the future.
And then a very important organization that I know you know
well is the Defense Logistics Agency. And so the Defense
Logistics Agency has an important responsibility to take those
theater posture plans and develop global petroleum distribution
plans that help us define what those requirements would be, not
only today but as we look to the future. That next plan we're
anticipating out in the spring of 2022, which will help us look
forward to the next year.
But I would go further in to tell you that, as we look to
changing operational constructs in the future, you're familiar
with the joint warfighting construct and where we perhaps go
with that, it's important for us to continue to use exercises
and analysis so that we can stay ahead of what DLA develops as
a global demand because, where the warfighter changes their
scheme of maneuver, logistics must follow. And so we are
committed to continue to look at service support constructs and
where that meets joint requirements.
Thank you for the question.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. I want to thank each of
you for your service, as a very grateful Army dad, three sons
serving in the Army; and Navy dad, one in the Navy; and also
grateful son-in-law of a Marine who served with distinction in
World War II; and my dad served with the Army Air Corps, Flying
Tigers, in India and China. So thank you all for your service.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. What about the Space
Force? What member of your family is in Space Force?
Mr. Wilson. Well, hey, hey, hey, I was with the Commander
General Raymond last week at the Clemson victory over UCONN
[University of Connecticut], so, hey, but that's my association
with Space Force. But I want to give credit, actually, to
Congressman Mike Rogers for his persistence and President
Trump's vision to have a Space Force. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good segue. Moving on here, Mrs.
McClain, you're up.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I want to
applaud all of you on the monumental task of the refugee
airlift out of Afghanistan. The logistical challenge that you
all faced and actually conquered was nothing short of
miraculous, so thank you for your efforts on that.
I want to discuss the Army's plans to transition both the
tactical and the non-tactical wheeled vehicles, the wheeled
vehicle fleet to hybrid of all-electric vehicles. While I
completely agree with the Department's conclusion that the
logistics of providing fuel to our vehicles in areas of
operation is daunting, clearly, I'm concerned that the
technology to provide the power, whether it be battery or
recharging capabilities, may be too far in the future to
consider a major transition in our vehicle fleet on the short
term.
Lieutenant General Gamble, what is the Army's approach and
really timeline for that transition?
General Gamble. Congresswoman, thanks for your question. I
do agree with your assertion that maybe some of the
technologies are out of reach in the near term and our
electrification strategy reflects that. The tactical and combat
vehicle electrification initial capabilities document was
developed; it was a pathway to aim for full electrification,
first into our light and medium tactical vehicles by 2035 and
the heavy tactical wheeled vehicle fleet after 2036. And some
of that, that's full electrification. The timelines that are in
our strategy or in our initial capabilities document reflect
what you said, that full electrification at the forward edge of
the battlefield may not be technologically achievable, given
the requirements for combat operations, at this point.
But left of that, as I stated, tried to articulate earlier,
left of that, infusion of start-stop technology, anti-idle
technology, which is mature, and hybridization which we think
is near maturity, both in combat vehicles and our light
tactical wheeled vehicles, we think that is achievable between
now and 2030.
And then, ma'am, you hit on something that we also, I
think, well, I know the Army sees it the same way. The
electrification of our non-tactical vehicles in our garrisons
and our installations provides us opportunities to look at ways
we can inform the force and to innovate, quite frankly, as
highlighted by other members of this distinguished committee,
the innovation that comes from our national industrial base,
not our organic industrial base but our broader national
industrial base which includes our commercial partners.
So using non-tactical wheeled vehicles and understanding
the use of them, understanding the technology, building trust
in our soldiers, our civilians, and our leaders in our non-
tactical wheeled vehicle fleet and the infrastructure that goes
along with that non-tactical wheeled vehicle fleet in garrisons
will help us transition and fully understand not only the
technology but the challenges associated with incorporating it
into our combat vehicles.
And so, in a nutshell, we do have a three-phased approach
that reflects your assertion, that some of the technology is
slightly out of reach at this point in time. So we're starting
with anti-idle, moving to hybrid electric, with an aim to full
electric----
Mrs. McClain. I appreciate that. I have one more question,
and just in the interest of time; I don't mean to cut you off.
But how does the Army plan on providing the electricity to
vehicles in the combat zones? I think that's what I'm trying to
grasp. I mean, we're going into a combat zone, and we're trying
to provide electricity. How do you see that happening?
General Gamble. So, ma'am, you've described a daunting
challenge. We don't--I don't mean to be glib, so please forgive
me. But we don't envision mobile charging stations like, you
know, our Army installations have. But hybrid electric is
within our reach. Other fuel technologies, as highlighted by
the other distinguished members of the committee; hydrogen fuel
cells may provide us an opportunity to electrify vehicles on
the move. But the first, we're thinking big and starting small.
We do think, though, that our first purpose-built all-
electric vehicle we'll prototype in fiscal year 2022, an
electric light reconnaissance vehicle. So while it's very
small, there is room, we believe, in current technology for
very small full electrification today, and we are working
through those challenges as you described.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, sir. We have to start somewhere,
right?
General Gamble. Yes, ma'am. Think big, start small.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mrs. McClain. A good series of
questions, and good answers, directed at the Army. I'm going to
take to each one of you, the services, to answer the same
question. Start small. What's your next step, and what is your
vision beyond that next step?
Let's start with, I'm going to start with the Navy and the
Marine Corps. And I specifically want to bring to light your
Navy contested logistics war room as a way of answering the
issue that Mrs. McClain brought forward. So I'll leave it to
the admiral and the general to fight out who goes first. It
looks like the admiral.
Admiral Williamson. Thank you, sir, for the opportunity to
talk about my war room. Basically, this effort started about
2\1/2\ years ago and, as I mentioned, our five-vector model,
looking at refuel, rearm, revive, and resupply our fleet.
We talk a lot about operational energy. The one thing I
think we have learned is it's all commodity. We have to
understand what the fleet needs to be lethal.
The intent of our war room is to do data analysis to be
able to see, as General Barrett talked, ourselves is incredibly
valuable to us, particularly in this space. We put a lot of
effort into digital transformation, looking at modernizing our
LOG IT systems. Being able to start small, is it capable of
seeing what a ship or squadron is actually consuming at the
tactical end?
In our world, in my world, the idea of endurance is not a
new one. We understand fuel, we understand food. You have to
have those two things. But we are finding through our learning
that that's also very applicable to weapon systems. It's very
applicable to every commodity that a ship consumes.
We look at that, not through just the continuum of inter/
intra last tactical mile, but we work very closely with DASN
[Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for] Sustainment. In
this learning, as we are gaining this information, we are
feeding it back to our industrial base to ensure that they
understand what endurance means to us. Are the parts that we
are procuring lasting as long as they should be? Are there
single points of failure within our supply chain? Another part
of the analysis that we partner with DASN Sustainment.
And then the other part that comes out of LOG [logistics]
war room through this analysis is marrying the supply chain
with the distribution network and understanding that all the
way from CONUS [continental United States] to the last tactical
mile, to the sailor, the Marine, out there on an island or in
the high north or wherever those individuals are, and being
able to do the analysis to inform our acquisition process, the
platforms in which we purchase. Can we come up with innovative
solutions on how to solve those issues.
We work very closely with the other services. We work very
closely with the Joint Staff. We solidify that through our war-
gaming process. The CNO and the SECNAV, obviously, they
understand the significance of logistics. It is now part of our
narrative in our NAV [Navigation] Plan signed up by the CNO and
his guidance to me, so much so that he has directed us to run a
series of three war games. We have completed our first, which
baselined us. Our next one, based on our learning, is to take
the fuel, the commodities, all the things necessary to make our
fleet lethal, and play that game, validate our assumptions, and
then go into the acquisition process as we start generating
those assets.
And then the other part of it that General Barrett
mentioned is also the allies and partners and having robust
conversations with them and what are their supply chain
capabilities and what is their logistics system and how do we
fit into theirs and how they fit into ours.
And I'd offer General Banta his comments.
General Banta. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for the
opportunity to comment and Admiral Williamson for those leading
comments.
So the Marine Corps, first off, has been very fortunate to
benefit and work hand in glove with the Navy through their war
room. We have liaison officers on the Navy staff in our Marine
Corps Warfighting Lab, as well as our folks down in our
Expeditionary Energy Office, are closely tied in with those
efforts.
So I agree with everything that has been said thus far,
particularly if we're talking about electrification of future
vehicle fleets, especially in a tactical environment. That
would be very much of a long-term goal. I think hybrid electric
is much more of a near-term goal and, before that, it's how do
we reduce the demand on fuel through being more efficient with
our existing platforms. And we've made some successes there
with software upgrades to our MTVR fleet, our medium tactical
vehicle fleet, that yield 10-15 percent efficiency in current
fuel sources. And as we think about future vehicles, we will
clearly be very interested in being able to look at hybrid
electric technology as it becomes more available.
I think this also underscores the importance of improving
our distribution, which we talk about in our Marine Corps 2030
strategic logistics plan and strategy. Critical to that as we
think in terms of sustaining our stand-in forces in a
distributed environment are the ability to get fuel where it
needs to be. So as we work with the Navy and with the joint
force on littoral connectors, particularly the light amphibious
warship which I mentioned earlier, and the opportunity,
potentially, through leased or contract vessels that we would
be able to experiment on improving the distribution of fuel
into our endpoint of use, obviously with the goal of reducing
consumption in the long term but, in the near term, we will
still probably have a degree of reliance there.
And we're happy to talk with the committee members more on
an in-depth level of our efforts with respect to demand
reduction, should there be an interest to do so. So thank you
for the opportunity to comment, Mr. Chairman.
General Berry. Mr. Chairman, I would just echo. I think our
strategy is along the lines of what the Army is, right, think
big and start small. I mentioned some of those already. You
know, we do exercises and war games that help inform
operational concepts that will work. That leads to some
capability gap analysis and identification. We then do
experimentation and do some pilots, perhaps launch some R&D
[research and development] programs. So that's where we get
into some of the expeditionary energy solutions that we're
testing out now, like photovoltaic cells and battery and
hybrid, much like what General Gamble said.
We also do operational energy enhancements on, you know,
weapon systems, microvanes on C-17s that are looking very
promising in terms of allowing those aircraft to fly much more
fuel efficiently and having a great return on investment for
what we would have to do to put the modification on the
aircraft versus the fuel savings that we would get once that
modification is in place.
But what I might offer to you, Mr. Chairman, is the
question you posed at the very beginning: Where do we need
Congress' help? I think all of us are in the realm of doing the
war-gaming, the exercising, experimentation. The challenge, I
think, that we will have moving forward is, once we find things
that work, how do we scale it? That's the challenge. How do you
scale it? And that has long been what I would, you know, what
we, in the Air Force, sometimes call the valley of death where
the R&D project launches, you have success, you think it's a
viable way forward, but then scaling it becomes very
challenging.
Certainly, in the Air Force, you know, our Nation asks us
to do more than the resources that the Air Force has to do it,
and so it's a very keen competition with all the things that we
need to bring to bear from an Air Force to support the joint
fight to get these things in the program. The onus is on us as
the logisticians, the professional logisticians, to make that
case in our service to get it into our budget. But when they
are in the budget, I think Congress' help here is to help us
keep those in the budget so that we can scale some of these
ideas at a rapid pace.
Mr. Garamendi. General Gamble, do you want to add--you
started the conversation. It's moved on. Do you want to add
about your own war-gaming and how that's fitting into this?
General Gamble. Yes, sir. So I mentioned earlier our
operational energy strategy that's under development. It's--I
think it's important for me to state that it's under
development by Army Futures Command. That's where all our
experimentation, war-gaming that informs our modernization
program occurs. So it is inextricably linked. The modernization
efforts, the tactical wheeled vehicle electrification strategy,
it's all fully nested with the Army modernization programs.
And so the Project Convergence 21, I was just there this
last month at White Sands Missile Range where operational
energy was front and center in their Army modernization
efforts. On display were microgrids, leader-follower technology
on some of our cargo vehicles that, while it doesn't reduce
energy consumption, it reduces the overall number of vehicles
required to deliver the same goods. So while it's not platform-
centric, it's formation-centric with more distribution with
less vehicles, which, overall, is a reduction of demand.
So that's the only thing I'd like to close at least this
last question with is that in the Army we're inextricably
linked. Our modernization programs, the visions associated with
that, all the experimentation that feeds that, operational
energy is inherently a part of that.
Mr. Garamendi. I'm going to come back after our--Mr.
Kahele, you're next, if you'd like to follow up questions.
Mr. Kahele. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to go
back to Red Hill. And, Vice Admiral Williamson, I know that you
don't have all the answers concerning Red Hill and the SECNAV
and Admiral Nott and others in Hawaii, and commander of PAC
[Pacific] Fleet, is directly addressing this situation.
But maybe you can talk to the bulk fuel storage in the
Pacific. You know, we talked about the subterranean tanks at
Red Hill, and right now there's about 110 million gallons
there. It has the capability if all 20 tanks were filled at
12.5 million gallons each, you could have about 250 million
gallons of fuel in Hawaii. We know that there's smaller but
bulk fuel storage facilities in the Pacific, but what does
the--has the Navy looked at or the Pentagon looked at how much
fuel we would need in the Pacific to execute the Pacific
Deterrence Initiative or to posture our forces in the Pacific,
because that's something that I think the people of Hawaii
don't understand or would like answers to, and maybe that's
something that is in your wheelhouse to address.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir. As I mentioned----
Mr. Garamendi. If I might just interrupt a moment, please
take this in a general point, and we'll come back in a
classified hearing. We're getting into some serious stuff here.
Admiral, if you'll, in a general way, answer the question.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir. And thank you. Sir, in very
general terms, obviously, the Navy is responsible for the joint
force fuel requirements to the high water mark. The analysis
that I spoke about earlier through our games and our learning,
understanding the impacts of operational energy, having the
data and being able to see ourselves allows us to do better
nodal analysis. And from a theater posture perspective, we're
best to position those stores.
Sir, I'll absolutely come back with you. We get classified
very quickly talking about this, but I'd be more than happy to
get on your calendar and come back and give you a much more
detailed answer than that.
Mr. Kahele. When we're referring to the subject of energy
on this committee, you know, there are other military bases
throughout the Nation that have bulk fuel storage, whether
they're above ground or subterranean, that have had leaks and
issues. The Pacific Northwest is one example, and we have
addressed that issue in that particular case.
You know, has the Navy looked at or will the Navy look at,
if you needed a certain amount of fuel in the Pacific in
Hawaii, you know what we have now in terms of the underground
tanks. How could we do something differently that would
preserve the fuel that we need for our national defense and
readiness but also protect the environment, protect the
community, and the aquifer that right now doesn't seem to be
happening.
Admiral Williamson. Yes, sir. Obviously, like I said
before, the safety of the community, the people, is paramount
to us. Without getting into the classified level, sir, I would
love to be able to come back to you and talk and discuss that
with you. We do look at that on a very regular basis, and I'd
be more than happy to come back and provide you with that
detail.
Mr. Kahele. Two things that the delegation conveyed to the
SECNAV is that, you know, there is considerable resources spent
at Red Hill, but, often, it's because the delegation is
bringing those resources through the budget. We would really
like to see in the next budget the Navy, the Pentagon,
prioritize Red Hill, whether it's secondary containment, moving
the facility, addressing the issue in its budget when it
submits it to the Congress, that shows how serious the Navy is
in taking this issue seriously.
And just on a final note, you talk about how the Navy is
serious about addressing this. In just recent community
meetings over the last few days when families and military
families have spoken about their concerns, about what they've
had to endure and deal with in terms of their health and
sickness, responses by senior Navy leaders in Hawaii have
really brushed off their concerns and said that they're
continuing to drink the water and that they don't feel that
there may be an issue, they're still continuing to use or
shower with the water. And that just doesn't convey a sense of
seriousness in the situation. And I would highly suggest that
our senior Navy leaders in Hawaii and military representatives
show that empathy and compassion to the people of Hawaii and
the military residents in Hawaii when these concerns are being
brought to them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Kahele. A couple of things. I
know you're going to be leaving in a moment, and we're going to
be terminating the committee in just a few moments also. A
couple of things. There are technologies available that are
able to cleanse water, and it may very well be that there's
evidence of an ongoing contamination, either small consistent
or episodic but contamination. It may very well be in the next
budget, or the next NDAA we may want to put in place for the
water systems themselves a technique to cleanse the water. They
do exist.
The other piece of this is, as we've gone through this
hearing, I keep coming back to the recent work of Congress,
two-thirds of which is done. The remaining--well, half is done.
The remaining issues are the NDAA, pertinent to what we're
talking about here today, and the Build Back Better
legislation, together with the infrastructure legislation.
Those two pieces of legislation have a very, very significant
amount of money to deal with water systems and contaminated.
On the NDAA side of it, there is language in the current
version, at least the House version, of the NDAA dealing with
the clean-up of past contamination, and that's an ongoing
issue. And so we'll circle back not only in the conference
committee on those issues. The passage of the infrastructure
bill does have money for communities to put in advanced water
systems. And so all of these things may come together.
Also, a couple of thoughts from the chairman here is that
the military is moving out on these issues of reducing
dependency on petroleum products. None of you, although in your
written testimony did, but none of our oral testimony spoke to
what you're actually doing: electrification of aircraft, small
albeit; but, nonetheless, it's happening.
Also in your written testimony, you spoke to--all of you
spoke to using your research to improve the efficiency of the
systems that currently consume petroleum products. And I want
to compliment you on that. It has been noticed.
Also, in the current--in the House version of the NDAA and
in setting up in past versions of the NDAA is moving to the
non-tactical vehicle fleet. Running around on all of your bases
are a whole bunch of internal combustion engine vehicles. It is
the intent, at least this chairman of this committee, if I can
persuade others to go along, is that the second largest fleet
of electric vehicles will be the U.S. military fleet of the
non-tactical vehicles that are operating on all of your bases.
You will be second behind the Post Office.
The other piece of this is that you don't need to invent
this. It's happening.
Also, in the infrastructure bill is a vast amount of money
for the electrification grid. I draw your attention to that. I
see all of you nodding; you're familiar with it. There will be
new techniques, new technologies, and new ways of providing a
grid that can sustain a charging system. All of that is
happening, and the adaption of that by the military, perhaps in
lead or in following, either way, it will be part of your
future life.
So our goal here today was to find ways and to illuminate
the need to reduce the consumption of petroleum-based energy
for the purposes of climate change, for the purposes of cost,
and to, where and when possible, to have a more effective
military, whether that's the ability to conduct operations or
to be able to reduce your cost factors so that you can spend
money on other things that are high priority. So we're going to
drive that issue. There will be a series of questions that we
will deliver to all of you in the days ahead, more specificity
following up on this.
Also, and this goes to General Barrett, you've got a very,
very important task here. We don't have Space Force here yet,
but we'll figure out. We do know that rockets consume a vast
amount of energy and develop a very significant addition to the
climate issue. Leaving that aside for a moment, General
Barrett, it is, I would hope, and we've already talked about
this, you know it is your responsibility to make sure all of us
are working together, that the stovepipe doesn't exist and that
you work across all of the joint force. And so we'll be coming
back to you on that. We want to go into this in a classified
setting to answer many of the questions that Mr. Kahele has
raised and others have raised, and we will do so.
We did not cover today, and I want to compliment myself for
not bringing up the logistics issue. I have been warned and
double-warned that I could get off on a tangent. Control
yourself, Chairman. I do want to come back to the logistics. We
will do a specific hearing in the coming year, early in the
coming year, on logistics so that we can inform ourselves on
what is needed in the next NDAA. So be prepared for that. I
know that all of you are working on that issue, and it involves
techniques, technology, and new equipment along the way. And
we'll want to get into that in depth so that we fully inform
the next NDAA that you have what you need to address not only
in the question of how you're going to reduce your consumption
of fuel but also how you will deliver that reduced amount of
fuel.
With that, Mr. Lamborn, anything to add?
Gentlemen, thank you, thank your staff. And by the way,
comment, the alliteration that went into the Navy's document
was noted. The five Rs and the five Cs. Thank you very, very
much.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

December 2, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

December 2, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

December 2, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. What are the Army's power generation requirements to
support the modernization efforts of the Army Futures Command?
General Gamble. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. What is the Army's current fielding plans for Advanced
Medium Mobile Power Sources (AMMPS) and how does the Army plan to
fulfill future contract needs?
General Gamble. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. How does the Army plan to insert new technology into the
existing architecture to enable advanced control features that will
provide secure protocols and communications, enable telematic
capability and provide easy integration of renewables and energy
storage that is compatible with the current fleet of AMMPS generators?
General Gamble. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. What is the U.S. Army's plan to leverage Mobile Electric
Hybrid Power Sources (MEHPS) with the U.S. Marine Corps?
General Gamble. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]

[all]
