- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-18] NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN EUROPE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-18]

NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN EUROPE

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 15, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-430                WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 DON BACON, Nebraska
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       JIM BANKS, Indiana
JASON CROW, Colorado                 LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Chair                            C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                PAT FALLON, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
Vacancy

Paul Arcangeli, Staff Director
Barron YoungSmith, Counsel
Forrest McConnell, Counsel
Natalie de Benedetti, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     3
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Cooper, Laura K., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Department of Defense............     4
Wolters, Gen Tod D., USAF, Commander, U.S. European Command......     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Cooper, Laura K..............................................    49
Wolters, Gen Tod D...........................................    74

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Gaetz....................................................    99
Mr. Garamendi................................................    99
Mr. Langevin.................................................    99
Mr. Wittman..................................................    99

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Brown....................................................   108
Dr. Jackson..................................................   107
Mrs. McClain.................................................   106
Mr. Moore....................................................   108
Mr. Morelle..................................................   109
Mr. Moulton..................................................   105
Mr. Scott....................................................   103

NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN EUROPE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 15, 2021.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:01 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. Today the full Committee is hearing--the
hearing is on national security challenges and U.S. military
activities in Europe. We have Ms. Laura Cooper, who is the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, and
Eurasia. And we have General Tod Wolters, who is the Commander,
U.S. European Command.
As this is again a hybrid hearing, I will begin by reading
the rules for said hybrid hearing.
Members who are joining remotely must be visible on screen
for the purposes of identity verification, establishing and
maintaining a quorum, participating in the proceeding, and
voting. These members must continue to use the software
platform video function while in attendance, unless they
experience connectivity issues or other technical problems that
render them unable to participate on camera.
If a member experiences technical difficulties, they should
contact the committee staff for assistance. Video of members'
participation will be broadcast in the room and via the
television internet feeds. Members participating remotely must
seek recognition verbally, and they are asked to mute their
microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platforms' video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding.
If members depart for a short while for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding--I've never understood that part
by the way, but I just, I keep reading it--they should leave
the video function on. If members will be absent for a
significant period or depart to join a different proceeding,
they should exit the software platform entirely and then rejoin
it if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
communicate with staff regarding technical or logistical
support issues only.
Finally, I have designated a committee staff member to, if
necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to cancel any
inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the proceeding.
With that, as I said, we are here to hear about the
European Command and the issues in that area. And as with all
parts of the world, there are of course many.
I think top of the line for all members at the moment is
what's going on in Ukraine, in Russian activities in that
region in general. How we are working with Ukraine and our
allies in the region to deal with the threat that Russia poses.
What the best steps forward are and how we can best help the
European command meet that threat.
We also continue to be very concerned about our
relationship with Turkey. Incredibly important relationship.
They are a key ally in many respects, but still problematic in
a number of other respects, most notably with the S-400
purchase and the sanctions that have been levied on them as a
result. So, curious to hear how that relationship is going
forward.
We've also bounced around a little bit in the last couple
of years in terms of how to exactly posture our forces in
Europe. I think we are now in a good place. Would be anxious to
hear from both of you about how you see that going forward. Are
there changes that are necessary, what support could we offer
if those changes are required.
In particular, there's the one issue of, as our
relationships with Poland, Romania, Ukraine, other Eastern
European countries go forward, how does that shift our focus
from where our troops have traditionally been stationed. I know
one big question has always been should they--should we have
permanently stationed troops or rotational troops. And there's
disagreement in the Pentagon about how best to handle that.
Would be curious on your take.
But the overarching issue that I want to leave you with is
an issue that affects the entire DOD [Department of Defense] in
all of the theaters that we're engaged in, and that is the
changing nature of warfare. And I think the European Command
is, you know, best suited to look at this because of Russian
activities.
What Russia did in Crimea a number of years ago, what they
continue to do in the Eastern Ukraine, the information
operations that they're engaged in across the frontier, is sort
of--sort of cutting edge on where we're headed.
And what this committee is really focused on is how can we
make sure that we are purchasing the equipment and being in a
position to deal with the world of warfare as it exists now.
And what that means basically is the incredible importance of
command and control information and technology. Whoever
possesses the best information is in the best position to be
successful.
And there are a lot of technologies that are key to this.
Certainly, artificial intelligence, because you also have to
process whatever information is coming in. The better you're
able to process that, the better you are.
You also have to be able to protect your command and
control and information systems. There are a number of
different ways to do that. We are not ideally suited right now
to protect those systems.
[Off the record comment.]
It's like being heckled at a comedy club.
I'll grant you that wasn't my strongest point, but I'm
working on it here, just taking it off the top of my head. So,
the point is that transition, to my mind, is the single most
important thing that we can do in terms of deterring our
adversaries. Certainly Russia, but China as well, transnational
terrorist groups.
And we are beginning to make that transition. We've seen
with the bottom-up review, the blank slate review, whatever you
want to call it. What the Marine Corps is doing as it's trying
to reposition itself, the Air Force as well.
I think we're headed in the right direction, but we have to
make intelligent purchases and put in place the right
acquisition strategy to do that, to get where we need to be, to
have the best information systems, to be able to protect them.
And then ideally, be able to make vulnerable the information
systems of our adversaries.
And there's a lot we can learn from what the Russians have
been up to, including their overall information campaign, or
disinformation campaign, their effort to tear down
representative government in the West in general through a
series of very low-cost options that are advancing their
agenda. We need to really get in that game.
So I'm very curious as you watch and see what Russia has
been doing in those instances that I mentioned, also in the
fight that's been going on in Armenia and Azerbaijan, a lot of
this played out as well.
What does that mean for what we ought to be buying, for
what we ought to be providing you to make sure that you meet
your requirements. So, very curious to hear about that.
With that, I will turn it over to Ranking Member Rogers for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER. COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
European Command and our NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization] allies are facing an increasingly belligerent
Russia and a growing Chinese influence in their operations.
Russia continues to modernize, investing in hypersonic,
strategic capabilities, and information warfare. Russia's also
rebuilding its Arctic presence to control emerging areas of
resource exploitation and commerce.
And they're turning to new tactics to achieve their goals,
employing aggression below the level of armed conflict. These
new capabilities and tactics are designed to deter the United
States and their allies from defending democracies on Russia's
periphery. From the Black Sea to the Baltics, President Putin
abhors the notion of former Soviet territories charting their
own course as free and democratic nations.
I believe that the committee should continue its strong
support for European Deterrence Initiative, the Ukraine
Security Assistance Initiative, and other programs to build our
capacity in Europe and empower our partners.
Where we can, it also makes sense to equip our allies and
partners with lethal weapon systems and domain awareness
capabilities. Investments in critical facilities, prepositioned
munition stockpiles, and rotational forces keep our deterrent
capabilities credible.
Every capability we build in a partner nation strengthens
our ability to chart a course away from Russian intimidation.
We should be more concerned about raising baseline of--raising
the baseline of our partners' capabilities in Eastern Europe
than about Vladimir Putin's ego. The flat truth is that he and
his cronies won't be happy until they reclaim a portion of the
Soviet Union's territorial glory.
No amount of hand-wringing here in Washington will appease
them. We owe our allies and partners nothing less than our full
and forceful support. That being said, we should also be candid
with our allies as we are with our enemies. Projects like the
Nord Stream 2 pipeline and NATO members' purchases of Russian
military hardware amount to a huge economic, political, and
propaganda victory for Putin.
Our allies shouldn't be in the business of strengthening
our adversaries. We should use a whole-of-government approach
to address these issues before they become diplomatic pressure
points.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about how we
can use diplomatic and military efforts to counter China's
global ambitions in Europe. European nations are coming around
to the threat of Chinese malign investment, hacking, and
influence operations in their own backyard.
We can use this opportunity to blunt China's advance,
promote secure supply chains, and counter Chinese propaganda.
European Command covers many of our most robust and
longstanding international alliances. It is also responsible to
assist in the defense of Israel, our steadfast ally.
To overcome the modern threat posed by Russia and China and
to ensure the protection of Israel, we need to provide the
resources necessary to strengthen these alliances.
Unfortunately, the budget proposed by President Biden will not
do that. It cuts defense spending below the rate of inflation.
If enacted, it will mean combatant commanders like General
Wolters will not have the resources and capabilities they need
to do their jobs. I look forward to working with the majority
to pass a defense budget that supports modernization and
ensures credible deterrence.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Cooper.

STATEMENT OF LAURA K. COOPER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR RUSSIA, UKRAINE, AND EURASIA, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Cooper. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on policy matters related to the U.S.
European Command, or EUCOM, area of responsibility in my
capacity overseeing the Office of International Security
Affairs today.
It truly is a privilege to appear before you, and I would
like to express my appreciation for the continued support from
Congress, and this committee in particular, in shaping and
resourcing the Department's efforts in this region. It is also
absolutely an honor to appear beside General Wolters, an
outstanding partner.
Today, I will highlight the most important foundation of
all--of all Department of Defense efforts in this theater: our
alliances. Then, I will describe our strategic approach to
Europe, the importance of NATO, and capability issues of note,
followed by a brief discussion of regional threats and
challenges.
But first, I would like to briefly address two immediate
issues of concern: escalating Russian aggression in Eastern
Ukraine, and the President's decision to impose measures that
will hold Russia accountable for its pattern of malign
behavior.
The United States is increasingly concerned about Russia's
military buildup of forces along Ukraine's border and in
occupied Crimea. Russia now has more troops on the border with
Ukraine than at any time since 2014. The United States remains
unwavering in its support for Ukraine's sovereignty,
territorial integrity, and Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
As such, we will continue to support Ukraine's long-term
defense capacity and provide security assistance to enable
Ukraine to more effectively defend itself against Russian
aggression. We have also made clear in our engagement with
Moscow that Russia needs to refrain from further escalatory
actions.
Additionally, this morning the United States informed the
Russian Government of its intent to hold Russia accountable for
a pattern of malign behavior that includes efforts to influence
the outcome of the 2020 Presidential election; the Russian
Foreign Intelligence Service, or SVR's, compromise of
SolarWinds software; and the Main Intelligence Directorate, or
GRU, efforts to encourage attacks on U.S. and coalition
personnel in Afghanistan.
The President is taking hard and fast action with
appropriately tailored responses to provide a clear signal of
our resolve without escalation. And I would welcome further
discussion on these matters with this committee today.
Russia's aggression in Eastern Europe--in Eastern Ukraine
and its pattern of destabilizing behavior are examples of the
increasingly challenging international security situation.
To compete in this new landscape, the Department of Defense
is heeding the call of the International Security--Interim
National Security Strategic Guidance and engaging our trans-
Atlantic friends with renewed vigor, reclaiming our place in
international institutions and revitalizing America's unmatched
network of allies and partners.
As President Biden and Secretary Austin have stated on
numerous occasions, the U.S. commitment to NATO remains
ironclad, and the trans-Atlantic alliance remains the
foundation on which our collective security and our shared
prosperity are built.
To ensure NATO's deterrence and defense posture is fit to
purpose to meet the security challenges of the alliance, the
Department will continue to work with allies to reinvigorate
and modernize the alliance, share responsibilities and
investments equitably, increase allied speed of decision-
making, and improve military mobility across Europe to improve
collective readiness.
We are encouraged that we are now in our seventh year of
steady NATO defense spending increases by our allies. We expect
this trend to continue, and we continue to encourage strongly
our NATO allies to increase their defense budgets.
NATO's commitment to deterring nuclear attack remains a
backstop of trans-Atlantic security. As Secretary Austin has
stated, ``Nuclear weapons should remain in NATO countries for
as long as nuclear weapons remain a threat.''
Deterrence also requires combat-credible, forward-deployed
conventional forces to bolster the alliance's deterrence and
defense posture to prevent Russian aggression. To this end, the
Secretary of Defense is conducting a comprehensive Department-
wide global posture review to best align U.S. overseas force
presence with Presidential national security priorities.
In this increasingly competitive environment, our security
remains grounded in a whole, free, and at-peace Europe built
upon a credible and strong NATO alliance.
The Department is also working to improve the resilience of
another frontline state in the face of Russian aggression,
Georgia. The United States remains committed to assisting
Georgia build its resilience and military capabilities in the
face of Russia's malign efforts to undermine its sovereignty
and disrupt its Euro-Atlantic integration.
Poland and the Baltics remain central to deterring Russia.
The Department is bolstering NATO's eastern flank allies
through security cooperation and capacity-building initiatives
targeted at improving defense and security infrastructure to
strengthen national resilience.
In Poland, the Department has increased its rotational
presence to include the newly established Fifth Corps forward
command post and a planned Aegis Ashore facility.
In the Baltics, rotational forces supporting Atlantic
Resolve continue to be a departmental priority.
We continue to review our force posture to compete, to
deter, and defend against Russian aggression and assertiveness
in the Black Sea region and welcome the support of our NATO
allies through their contributions not just to enhance forward
presence in the Baltic Sea region, but also tailor forward
presence in the Black Sea region, as well as their respective
air policing missions.
In the Balkans, the Department continues to strengthen our
history of investment in the region, which includes now some of
NATO's newest member states. The U.S. presence in NATO's Kosovo
Force helps maintain a safe and secure environment in the
Balkans.
In Southern Europe, our presence provides a counterbalance
to growing Chinese and Russian influence, whose efforts also in
Africa and the Mediterranean have implications for our
strategic access and freedom of movement.
While Turkey remains an important ally buttressing NATO's
southern flank, the United States has been clear in opposing
Turkey's procurement of the Russian S-400 anti-aircraft weapon
system. Turkey's procurement of the S-400 prompted its removal
from the F-35 program, and we continue to press Turkey to
remove the S-400 from its arsenal.
Israel is a major strategic partner for the United States.
On January 15, the United States announced that U.S. Central
Command [CENTCOM] will assume responsibility for military-to-
military cooperation with Israel.
This will open up additional opportunities for cooperation
with our USCENTCOM partners while maintaining strong
cooperation between Israel and our European allies and
partners. We will continue to work with EUCOM and CENTCOM to
ensure a thorough and deliberate transfer of authority.
In conclusion, our objective is to ensure our broad and
deep network of alliances and partnerships endures. The United
States must continue to take an active role in the region by
maintaining a ready and capable force, investing in NATO, and
promoting a network of like-minded allies and partners.
This work is only possible with consistent congressional
backing and stable funding. Your support for our allies and
partners in Europe and for Israel is indispensable.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I
appreciate your continued support to the soldiers, sailors,
airmen, Marines, coastguardsmen, guardians, and civilians in
the Department of Defense who work every day in service of the
American people. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cooper can be found in the
Appendix on page 49.]
The Chairman. Thank you. General Wolters.

STATEMENT OF GEN TOD D. WOLTERS, USAF, COMMANDER, U.S. EUROPEAN
COMMAND

General Wolters. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, and
distinguished members of the committee, on behalf of the men,
women, and families who serve our Nation in the Euro-Atlantic,
we extend our heartfelt thanks for your steadfast support.
It remains a privilege to serve alongside these dedicated
patriots and our like-minded allies and partners. It's also
great to be seated with Deputy Assistant Secretary Laura
Cooper, a dedicated professional with strong ties to our valued
European partners. She's been pivotal to generating peace in
the Euro-Atlantic area.
As we enter into the second year of the pandemic, we work
closely alongside our allies and partners to ensure this health
crisis does not transform into a security crisis. We'd also
like to pass our condolences to those impacted by COVID-19. The
battle against the virus continues, and we must remain
vigilant.
We're fully aligned with Secretary Austin's priorities to
defend the Nation, take care of our people, and succeed through
teamwork. Via NATO, we work closely with our allies and
partners to address the evolving challenges posed by our
adversaries to secure peace and protect our interests abroad.
NATO remains the strategic center of gravity and the
foundation of deterrence and assurance in Europe. Everything we
do is about generating peace. We compete to win. We deter, and
if deterrence fails, we're prepared to respond to aggression
with the full weight of the trans-Atlantic alliance. The United
States relationship with European allies and partners remains a
key strategic advantage, and we must defend it.
We live in an increasingly complex and contested world.
Political uncertainty, energy competition, and diffusion of
destructive technology are stressing the established, rules-
based international order. Threats and challengers seek to take
advantage of these conditions through aggressive actions using
all instruments of national power. And they're backed by
increasingly capable military forces.
Adversaries amplify these malign activities and foster
instability with disinformation. Success in 21st century
warfare demands we embrace competition and all of its
associated activities below the level of armed conflict. This
is actually as critical as preparations for crisis or conflict
themselves.
We're in an era of strategic competition, and winning in
this era is all about ensuring that strategic competition does
not morph into a global conflict. One notable example of
operations, activities, and investments contributing to
competition and deterrence is our robust EUCOM exercise
program.
This summer, when we execute our Defender series exercises,
composed of USEUCOM'S Defender-Europe and NATO's Steadfast
Defender, 30,000 U.S. service members, allies, and partners
from all warfare domains will demonstrate their ability to lift
and shift massive forces over large swaths of territory, at
speed and at scale, from the eastern periphery of the European
continent. And once on station, they'll sharpen their
responsiveness, resiliency, and lethality.
Our current security posture is strong, yet challenged, as
evidenced with respect to the activities in Ukraine. We possess
combat-credible capability across all domains: air, land, sea,
space, and cyber. We will maintain and work to hone this
capability to deter our adversaries in defense of partners and
our interests.
The soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, guardians,
coastguardsmen, and civilians of USEUCOM appreciate your
support to defend the homeland forward and preserve peace for
the 1 billion citizens living in the Euro-Atlantic.
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, thank you again for
this opportunity, and I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Wolters can be found in
the Appendix on page 74.]
The Chairman. Thank you. Could both of you talk a little
bit about the information operations issue in Europe? We know
Russia has been very aggressive about spreading their message,
which is basically to undermine the West, undermine NATO,
undermine democracies, sow discord. And they've been very
effective at it.
And I know for a number of years now we have been looking
at responding to that. I know the combatant commanders have
been concerned about it. How are we doing on beginning to get
into that fight and counter what Russia's doing and get our own
message out? And I'd like to hear from both of you on that.
General Wolters. Chairman, if I could, with the assistance
of this committee, we were able to kick off with SOCOM [U.S.
Special Operations Command], our Special Operations Command
Combatant Commander Operation Influence Platform. And
underneath that architecture is what's called WebOps [web-based
operations], and it's specifically designed to go after
disinformation. And it's now a funded program with--with
milestones set for future years.
The Chairman. And what's--sorry to interrupt, but what's
our message? I described what Russia's message is, but what's
ours?
General Wolters. Promote democratic values and tell the
truth. And when disinformation is on the streets, highlight it.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Cooper.
Ms. Cooper. Sorry, I would point to the election, the 2020
election, as an example of Russia's aggressive disinformation
efforts to divide and sow confusion and chaos in another
population. It's a tactic that they've used in other places in
the world, around Europe, and it hit home here in 2020. But we
also saw it in our previous election.
And at the national level, we are working to deter such
actions in the future and to impose costs on Russia. And that
is why today, actually, the Biden administration announced a
number of sanctions on specific actors within Russia that were
involved in election interference.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. General, what capabilities are you
currently lacking in EUCOM that you've asked for in the past,
and why are they important?
General Wolters. Congressman, the two biggest have to do
with improving our overall strategic indications and warnings
in command and control. It starts with two destroyers to
improve our ability to see undersea, and it also culminates
with F-35s.
Both are forecast to arrive on continent very soon. We
anticipate receiving the first set of U.S. F-35s in the fall of
2021. And we're programmed now with the United States Navy in
the 2025 and 2026 timeframe to hopefully receive two additional
destroyers.
Mr. Rogers. As we do our pivot to INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-
Pacific Command], do you see any resources or capabilities that
you currently have being moved into that shift that would put
you at a disadvantage?
General Wolters. No, sir, not at this time.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Are you happy with the progress of
prepositioning capabilities and supplies in Eastern Europe, and
do you need any additional prepositioning, and if so, where?
General Wolters. Congressman, I'm very happy. And we're on
course on glide slope to close all of our Army preposition
stockpiles and our Deployable Airbase System to support aerial
ports in the 2024 timeframe. And with this committee's
assistance with the European Deterrence Initiative, if funding
continues as forecast, we should make it.
Mr. Rogers. And we talked yesterday about your interest in
having some additional prepositioning in the southeastern part
of Europe. Where in particular would you like to see that?
General Wolters. Absolutely, Congressman. In the Romania
area, we've put European Deterrence Initiative funds to improve
infrastructure in those areas, and we've had great cooperation
from Romania. And they also have the available ranges in
multiple domains to be able to sharpen our readiness.
Mr. Rogers. You know, we've heard that--both of you comment
about the buildup of troops by Russia on the Ukrainian border.
How can we improve our international partnerships in support of
Ukraine and help our NATO partners recognize that they need to
be prepared to help us act in the event of aggression?
General Wolters. Congressman, just goes back to the
information ops that was pointed out by the chairman. We have
to continue to tell the truth. And the good news is as a result
of this committee's support, we have a multinational joint
commission in Ukraine that's assisting us with that, and we
need to continue to support the joint military training group
Ukraine, where we can put troops in country with military
training team to allow the Ukrainian armed forces to improve
their readiness. And that is ongoing.
Mr. Rogers. Ms. Cooper, in that same vein, you know, you
made reference to the fact that we've been pleased to see our
NATO partners moving toward 2 percent for those who haven't
made it so far. But do we still have others like very healthy
economies like Germany who have not reached that threshold?
Can you tell me what, if anything, the administration is
doing to encourage them to continue on that path and not
backslide?
Ms. Cooper. Thank you, Congressman. I would say this is a
consistent feature of our dialog with all of the NATO member
states, but in particular those who have yet to meet their
Wales commitment. So this is something that came up as recently
as the Defense Ministerial that Secretary Austin attended, this
was a theme. And it also is something that we raise in our
bilateral conversations.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. And moving on here, just we have a
5-minute limit going forward, and a lot of times you will be in
the middle of answering a question when that 5-minute limit
hits and I feel rude cutting you off, but nonetheless, I will
do it. Because we want to get to as many members as possible.
So if you see that clock ticking down to 5 minutes, if you
could wrap up your answers, that would be great.
And with that, I yield to Mr. Langevin for 5 minutes. Jim,
are you with us? Well, Mr. Larsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
To start, just thanks for seeing us today. To start, Gerry
Connolly, Representative Connolly from Virginia, has a bill,
H.R. 922, it's the Crimea Annexation Non-Recognition Act. And
he's also the president of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly.
The purpose of this act is to basically say no Federal
agency in the U.S. Government can say explicitly, implicitly
anything that would imply a recognition of Crimea--the
annexation of Crimea by Russians. It's certainly--I support it,
and I ask the committee members to support. But I do want to
use that as an intro to talk about--ask about Ukraine.
The Russians see Crimea as an annexation, we don't. The
eastern oblasts are still within Ukraine, and they're seen as
separatists. Are we treating them differently, are we
approaching those region--those two areas of Ukraine
differently? And if so, how can we help you support those
approaches?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, I would say the nature of the on-
the-ground environment in both locations is different. In
Eastern Ukraine, you actually have a hot war right now. Just
within the past--since January, we've already had 30 Ukrainian
service members killed in the east. Whereas Crimea is an
illegal occupation. And so, so there's some realities on the
ground that are different.
A lot of our train and equip efforts are directed at
improving the capacity of the Ukrainian armed forces to defend
against the active war in the east. But in terms of overall
policy, it absolutely is U.S. policy to reject this illegal
annexation of Ukraine and to continue to impose the sanctions
on Russia as long as they hold this.
In fact, there were just a number of additional sanctions
imposed today on the Russian Government, to include the
builders of the Kerch Strait Bridge, which you may be familiar
with, for Russia's continued occupation of Crimea.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. General.
General Wolters. Congressman, it's a great question. And
having had the opportunity to visit from Kiev down to the
Donbass area, just as you pointed out, the tone and tenor of
soldiers in the vicinity of Kiev 2 years ago was a little bit
different as you got further towards the southeast.
But it's been my observation for the last 2 years as a
result of good work on behalf of the multinational joint
commission that that attitude, that support the whole-of-
government approach on behalf of Ukraine is improving the
farther you get to the southeast.
So there's--there's a changing environment, as evidenced by
the comments from President Zelensky as he continues to look
west and talked about accessions to NATO.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah, great. I want to make a pitch here. We
cannot yet do CODELs [congressional delegations]. The--our
leadership and the DOD is not yet allowing that. Let me ask you
this: have you thought through how we could do a COVID-19
socially distant, appropriate CODELs to EUCOM region, and have
you provided that advice yet to the Secretary so we can break
that loose?
General Wolters. We will, Congressman, and we very much
want the CODELs back. And we actually have a program of
actionable milestones that talks about our proposal of when and
where. We will get after that soonest.
Mr. Larsen. That's excellent. We need to--I do know the
parliamentarians, especially NATO parliamentarians, would like
to see us again, if only to yell at us in person. But we'd like
to return the favor sometimes as well, as well.
I'll just make a note and then yield, that the Washington
State National Guard now I think is headed to western Ukraine
or in western Ukraine as part of the training mission. And it's
another reason why it's important; I know other State and
National Guards are in the Balkans.
And just in terms of our presence, to send that message to
Russia that we care about Europe as much as Russia cares about
Europe is important. So I'll just leave it at that, and with
that I yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Turner is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, you and I had an opportunity before the hearing
began to talk about the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. Many of us
are hearing from both the service members and family members.
They're very concerned about service members and their
dependents who are deployed overseas.
The word we're getting is that there's been insufficient
planning for the storage and transportation of Moderna and
Pfizer vaccines. In many of our States, we're doing very well.
Ohio's down to age 16 and above.
But yet in many of the areas, our service members that are
actually deployed in areas where COVID is a greater threat than
it is in some of our home States are not having adequate access
to the vaccine. Some areas have been provided the Johnson &
Johnson vaccine, but of course there has now been a pause as a
result of CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention]
recommendations. What can you tell us as to how this can be
resolved?
And obviously, Johnson & Johnson was a later approval. So
the infrastructure and deployment for an ability to vaccinate
our service members should have been undertaken well before
Johnson & Johnson was even approved to give us some assurance
that the people that we care about that are every day serving
our Nation are going to be taken care of.
General Wolters. Congressman, I couldn't agree more. And
big DOD INCONUS [inside the contiguous United States] has
recognized this issue. And combatant commanders, specifically
myself and Phil Davidson from INDOPACOM, have both expressed to
the Secretary the need to accelerate the flow of vaccines,
mostly for the dependents of our military members in Europe,
and for Phil Davidson in the Pacific. And up to this point,
we've probably been a little bit off balance.
Secretary Austin was key to point out that the percentage
of those tier 1 military uniform members that have received the
vaccine INCONUS should be equivalent to the same in Europe and
the Pacific, and the same in--for the dependents. That has not
been the case, so we're working to fix that.
As we speak, Congressman, we are transitioning in Europe
from receiving 3,500 vaccines a week to be able to receive
18,000 vaccines a week and be able to store them and administer
them, with a surge capacity to 23,000.
Unfortunately, with the J&J [Johnson & Johnson] cutoff,
there's probably going to be about a 20 percent reduction to
those surges. And we're still working on the specifics. But the
site picture from within Europe for the military members and
certainly for the dependents will be significantly different by
the end of May than it is today.
Because we will actually triple our surge capacity. We have
the storage capability, we have the medical treatment
facilities, and the soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines who can
administer the vaccines. And my biggest concerns is not
necessarily the tier 1 military, but to get to the dependents
soonest.
Mr. Turner. Well, General, that doesn't provide me comfort,
by the way, that you don't say tier 1 military. I mean, our
service members need to be covered. And again, we knew this was
coming. I mean, the Federal Government has been very active in
the acquisition and distribution of vaccines.
And so I just, I appreciate your words, but I certainly
hope that this is addressed. Because this impacts people's real
lives. And of course the concerns of their families.
Shifting to the F-35, the--you mentioned it in your
statements and when the ranking member was asking you about
what else do you need in forward deployed. We now have the
United Kingdom, Denmark, Netherlands, Belgium, Norway. Poland
is apparently looking into entering the F-35. Italy, Finland,
and of course we currently have the ongoing competition.
Putin is going to be looking at a whole different world as
we begin to deploy the F-35 and our allies begin fielding it.
It is of course the plane this is going to be necessary to
keep, as you referenced, deterrence, because it is the dual-
capable portion of our mission. Tell us about the F-35 and its
importance in Europe.
General Wolters. Congressman, the F-35 contributes to
campaign momentum strategically for indications and warnings,
command and control, and obviously lethality. We have 81 total
in Europe right now that our NATO allies and partners are
using. We're programmed to get our first two.
It gives us access to be able to deter effectively anywhere
on the European continent. And if called upon, to conduct
interdiction. It allows us to put any target at risk, plus or
minus a millisecond, with great accuracy, and allowing for
access to do the same.
Mr. Turner. How are allies reporting the plane?
General Wolters. They're incredibly excited, incredibly
happy with its performance.
The Chairman. Thank you, the gentleman's time has expired.
One other announcement I should have made. We have a
classified version of this hearing at 2 o'clock over in the CVC
[Capitol Visitor Center]. So in order to give people a little
bit of a break in between, we are going to end this portion at
1:20. So we'll go until then, get as many members as we can.
And then break and reconvene at 2 o'clock in the CVC for the
classified portion.
With that, Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for the testimony today.
I want to turn my attention to UAVs [unmanned aerial
vehicles] and the threats they pose because of swarming
capabilities. I particularly want to focus on the lessons
learned from the recent Nagorno-Karabakh war. We saw Azerbaijan
use unmanned systems not as standalone weapons, but as complex,
synchronized attacks against air defense networks' conventional
units.
Given the successful unmanned swarm that attacked Saudi
Arabia in 2019, this isn't the first time that we've seen this.
So General Wolters, how would our current integrated air
defense system stand up in a similar situation, and who has the
cost advantage?
General Wolters. Congressman, we have designated the United
States Army to be the lead DOD entity for counter small UAS
[unmanned aerial systems]. More importantly in Europe, we have
to ensure that from an indications and warning standpoint, our
integrated air and missile defense programs take into account
the capabilities of these systems.
They do, it's not good enough. We have to continue to
improve. It's a program that's funded, we know what the
requirements are. But more importantly for me as a USEUCOM
commander, it's an issue that many of our NATO allies and
partners have the capability to deter against, and
strategically our new strategies and our plans all take into
account enforcing our NATO allies and partners to improve in
this area.
Mr. Langevin. As a follow-up, how would incorporating
emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and directed
energy improve our responses to asymmetric and near-peer
threats?
General Wolters. Enormous help. It allows us to see the
battlespace earlier, it allows us to approach and neutralize a
target at greater range with greater speed. So those are all
very helpful.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Next, Russia aggressively invests
in electronic warfare capabilities that are specifically geared
toward negating our technological advantages, which is--which
it successfully deployed, just by way of example, in Ukraine
and Syria.
General, what is your command doing to make your systems
more resilient in a communications degraded or denied
environment? And more importantly, how are you training your
personnel to operate in this environment?
General Wolters. We feel reasonably comfortable,
Congressman, with the gear that we have in place. The biggest
area is to ensure that the training keeps pace with the
adversary's EW [electronic warfare] TTPs, tactics, techniques,
and procedures. And my assessment at EUCOM is that we're in
pretty good shape.
We play close attention to advancing EW technologies that
Russia utilizes. We're able to witness some of that in the
battlespace that you're familiar with in the environment in the
vicinity of Syria, and we'll continue to improve. But for us
it's critical that when it comes to EW, you have to have very
good indications and warnings and you have to have very
protected command and control architecture, which we are
working towards.
Mr. Langevin. Yeah, it's essential to make sure that we're
paying close attention to that so that our enemies and
adversaries can't use that asymmetric advantage or capability
against us.
So let me just turn to something else. [Inaudible] cyber
attack response [inaudible] coalition of partner nations is one
of our most effective tools in deterring Russia, Russian cyber
actions. Right now, our response speed has been in months and
years, which is unacceptable, it's too slow.
Ms. Cooper, what is your information-sharing relationship
with the State Department regarding cyber attribution and how
could we improve it more effectively this time?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, thank you. If I understood the
question correctly, it relates to working in a whole-of-
government context on Russia cyber attribution. Is that
correct, sir?
Mr. Langevin. To shorten the window for attribution too.
Identifying and responding, real quickly.
Ms. Cooper. I see, thank you, sir. On this I can say we've
actually come a long way. We still have a ways to go. Today we
are attributing formally the SolarWinds cyber intrusion to
Russia's SVR, their foreign intelligence service. That
represents a public attribution that we are making in
coordination with allies and partners who have also been
affected by SolarWinds.
And you know, this is something that we initially were
focused on in the past few months. Obviously we have to get
this down to days, not just months. But we're also working on
the process of quick release and declassification----
The Chairman. And I do apologize, but the gentleman's time
has expired. If there is further follow-up there, you can take
it for the record and send it to Mr. Langevin.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 99.]
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to ask you both about lethal aid to Ukraine. In
recent years, Congress and this committee included has
authorized that. It was way overdue in my opinion, but I'm glad
we're finally doing it.
General Wolters, how has lethal aid that we have provided
to Ukraine helped ensure their security vis-a-vis Russia?
General Wolters. Congressman, thanks for the question, it
goes back to that military trust factor. When a fellow soldier
shows up with gear that actually convinces the Ukrainian armed
force military members that this will be effective against an
enemy to protect our sovereignty, whether it's lethal or non-
lethal. But when they can see both it's a plus.
And as you well know, with the assistance of this
committee, since 2017 the Javelin has been a very productive
program. And we've got approximately 360 missiles and a fair
amount of launchers in storage. And today, Ukrainian soldiers
know exactly how to grab those Javelins out of the storage
site, get to the foxhole, and if called upon, to use that
munition to defend themselves.
They have the confidence that they can do this. Not only do
we supply the munitions, but we rotate military training teams
in to make sure that their proficiency is where it needs to be.
And when I addressed earlier the mental disposition of the
Ukrainian armed forces as you work from Kiev up in the
northwest portion of Ukraine down towards the Donbass, that
improvement in attitude of the soldiers is partly due to this
increase in trust on behalf of these contributions.
Mr. Lamborn. Excellent. Ms. Cooper, what is your view?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, we're very proud to be able to
provide defensive lethal assistance. And in addition to the
Javelin capability that General Wolters mentioned, I think it's
very important that we have expanded our assistance to not just
focus on the land domain, but also the maritime domain.
So that means that the patrol boats that we're providing
will have a defensive lethal capability on them.
Mr. Lamborn. And are there additional steps that we should
take? I don't know if that's been actually--if that has
actually materialized yet or not. If not, we'd like to help,
I'd like to help assist in that regard. Is there--are there
additional steps that have not yet materialized that you would
like to see?
Ms. Cooper. Sir, from an authorities perspective, I think
we have the right authorities, and we have been able to provide
the right lethal assistance, again both on the land domain and
the maritime domain at this point. And we appreciate the
support of the committee.
Mr. Lamborn. General Wolters, anything to add to that?
General Wolters. Congressman, I think we're in good shape
as we've--as we look at what DOD is doing right now with the
Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative. Those funds are looking
to be targeted directly in these areas, and I don't see any
obstacles at this point.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. And General Wolters, changing
subjects, how would you characterize NATO support for the
ongoing modernization of our nuclear enterprise, the nuclear
triad, which each of those three legs are getting upgrades in
different ways. How does NATO view that, our NATO allies?
General Wolters. It's improving, Congressman. We actually
for the first time in 67 years produced a NATO military
strategy and a concept for the deterrence and defense of the
Euro-Atlantic area. And we approached NATO with the opportunity
to actually address this subject.
It was well received, and as we speak, we've had many
participants come into our NAC, North Atlantic Council, and
entertain discussions on the nuclear enterprise and what we're
actually doing.
So the campaign momentum is in the right direction. And we
now actually have plans that are being codified that address
the value of a triad and what it does for strategic deterrence.
Mr. Lamborn. Ms. Cooper, would you have anything to add to
that?
Ms. Cooper. Nothing to add, thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, and General Wolters, I would have to
think that when the 30 or so countries that are under our
nuclear umbrella see us modernizing, that gives them a lot of
reassurance.
General Wolters. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, you alluded to the--one of your top needs to have
two destroyers. And you cited the sort of undersea work that
they would do. Can you talk about that in a little more detail?
General Wolters. Yes, Congressman. For the last 3 years,
we've seen an increase in under-the-sea activity on behalf of
Russia in the vicinity of the Greenland-Iceland-U.K. [United
Kingdom] Gap. And we--I would adore the opportunity to talk
more to this in a different setting. But what I can say is a
consistent increase in activity, and the destroyers'
participation in the undersea warfare, C2 [command and
control], and I&W [indications and warnings] is absolutely,
positively critical.
And as you well know, we have four of those in Europe, and
they are the workhorses of deterrence, extending all the way
into the Black Sea, Eastern Mediterranean, all the way back
around the Mediterranean, all the way up into the Arctic and
the Barents. And as we continue to do the math for basic needs
to cover down adequately, we believe that two more is what is
required.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. Again, before COVID, a
number of us did a CODEL to sort of focus on anti-submarine
warfare. We actually visited Keflavik Air Base up in Iceland,
which the Bush administration had closed in the wake of, you
know, the Cold War coming to an end, quote--air quotes. And now
it's been reopened for P-8 flights.
Admiral Gary Roughead, the former CNO [Chief of Naval
Operations], used to testify before this committee that the
best anti-submarine warfare platform is another submarine. Can
you talk about, again, some of the work that, again, our
submarine force is doing in that arena?
General Wolters. So I certainly agree with Admiral
Roughead's conclusion, because he certainly knows best. And I
contend that our submarine fleet is performing admirably. But
part of the command and control apparatus that is involved in
this process involves other assets, to include maritime patrol
aircraft like the P-8, as well as what a destroyer does.
So to comprehensively defend in this area from undersea all
the way to 25,000 feet with a P-8, we need to make sure that we
have the right hardware and software involved. And we're
traversing in that direction, and our sub force is performing
admirably. But it's very challenging with respect to numbers.
Mr. Courtney. Right. I thank you. And I think General
Scaparrotti, your predecessor, described it as we're sort of
playing zone defense as opposed to man to man. But we could
probably get into that more in a classified setting.
You know, when we talk about Russia's sort of malign
activities, obviously the maritime domain. We saw it in the
Ukraine, where they seized the three ships in international
waters. The U.N. [United Nations] Convention just, you know,
unanimously reprimanded that action.
We've had other combatant commanders before this committee
in recent weeks and I've asked them all about whether or not
you think, given the fact that the, you know, we're in sort of
a new era, whether it's Indo-Pacific or in the European
theater, where countries, Russia and China, are trying to
exercise maritime control, which really goes up against the, I
think, norm of freedom of navigation, which has been basically
the rule of the road since World War II.
General, and I'm going to ask Ms. Cooper as well, I mean,
do you support like your colleagues who testified that the U.S.
should become a full participant in the U.N. Convention on Law
of the Sea?
General Wolters. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Courtney. And Ms. Cooper.
Ms. Cooper. I would just say that the administration has
not issued a formal review of this or opinion on this yet, so I
would have to defer the question to General Wolters's military
advice.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, again, we're, just so you know,
in the House, even though we don't get to vote on that, we will
have a bipartisan resolution with myself and Congressman Young
from Alaska calling on the Senate to really, again, the world
has been changing in the maritime sphere.
And not being able to be an active party or even observer,
which we found out in the Philippines's challenge to South
China Sea, it's just, it's ridiculous.
And we're in the company of, you know, North Korea, Libya,
Syria, you know, in terms of not being full, ratified
participants in this process. Which, again, worked in the case
of Ukraine. The U.N.'s decision actually ended up having Russia
release those ships and those sailors. But again, it shows it
has important value to this country, which is a maritime
country.
So I'll get off my soapbox and yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Wittman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Wolters, Ms. Cooper, thanks so much for joining us
today.
General Wolters, I'm going to go to you and build upon the
assertive efforts the United States has pursued in making sure
that our NATO allies spend the 2 percent of the GDP [gross
domestic product] on defense. I hope this administration
continues what has been that assertive effort.
But it's not only how much our allies spend, but it's how
they spend it, to make sure that it's complementary to the
assets within the theater, not things that are duplicative or
things that don't add to our capacity to deter and defend
within that particular region.
You know, one of the elements I think is incredibly
important is to look at, you know, how that's being done. Look
at what's happening with Russia with the snap exercises.
So are you seeing the spending by our allies there being
complementary or duplicative? And are we generating the
capacity to be able to surge and sustain if necessary, just as
the Russians practice in a way that I think is meant to send a
message, but also lets us look at their ability to sustain
also? So I want to get your perspective on that.
General Wolters. Congressman, I would say that the
transparency in alignment of our expenditures across the 30
nations is improving. And we've started by redoing a strategy
that is geared towards the 21st century that is more whole-of-
government, whole-of-nation, to include military contributions,
that takes into account all-domain awareness and winning in
competition, not waiting for crisis or conflict to win, but win
in competition.
So with all this in mind, the new strategy has allowed us
to go back and develop new strategic plans. And those plans
ultimately call for requirements to deliver the appropriate
competition effect in a particular area. And it allows nations
to establish military requirements to go after what is needed.
And that architecture had proven very, very worthy in the
recent decision by the United Kingdom with respect to producing
their military strategy. And what we've also done in the U.S.
as an example of a better transparency and alignment from the
plans to requirements standpoints to make sure that we can
generate more peace in Europe.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, General Wolters. Let me switch
gears a little bit and point to the political crisis that began
in 2014 in Ukraine that sparked a war that continues today.
Ms. Cooper, you pointed to the number of casualties that
are there today. On that track, casualties will exceed in 2021
what occurred in 2020. I think all those things are incredibly
concerning.
Another thing that's very concerning is to watch at what's
happening with the Russian Black Sea Fleet. And you see what
they are doing within that area and the capability that they
are building. Modernization efforts there I think are very
alarming, especially with the warmwater access that they have
through that Black Sea now that creates a strategic challenge
for the United States in many other ways.
Do you see that the modernization effort for the Black Sea
Fleet is disproportional to other Russian modernization
efforts? Do you see that as being a strategic challenge for us
within building that particular capability there?
And do you believe that them taking Crimea and claiming
that now gives them a strategic foothold in that area that
helps them in that effort to modernize the Black Sea Fleet and
to extend influence and create threats and uncertainty outside
of that area to the United States?
General Wolters. Congressman, I see a concerted effort on
behalf of Russians' maritime forces in the Baltics, in the
Barents, and in the Black Sea. Again, in all three of those
areas fairly comprehensive and fairly equal. And I certainly
agree with you. Our vigilance is sky high in all those areas
from a military maritime perspective.
And every point that you alluded to with respect to
potential intentions, we are preparing for and planning for and
expecting it to occur.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Ms. Cooper, any thoughts on that?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, I appreciate the question. On the
Black Sea, I would say that this is an area of increased policy
focus. And we're taking an approach that looks holistically at
all of our allies and partners in the region. We've started
with efforts to build maritime domain awareness capacity. This
is in Ukraine, Georgia, Bulgaria, and Romania.
And I already earlier referenced some of the maritime
capabilities that we're supporting the government of Ukraine
with.
Mr. Wittman. Very good, thank you. Quick question, I know I
only have a few seconds left. Choke point, the Turkish Straits
there at the Black Sea. Turkey being a NATO ally, the
unfortunate greater alignment now it seems like with Russia
than the United States. Is that a long-term issue for us in how
we deal with Turkey, and also with them as a NATO ally?
The Chairman. And sadly, that one will have to be taken for
the record or come later. The gentleman's time has expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 99.]
The Chairman. Ms. Speier is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you both for
your leadership.
Ms. Cooper, I want to thank you for always being available
to talk with me and others about many of the issues we have in
the region. I'd like to talk to you today about the large-scale
offensive that Azerbaijan engaged in against its neighbor
Armenia with the coordination of Turkey over the disputed
territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
It caused more than 5,000 deaths, displaced roughly 100,000
people from their homes, and caused immeasurable suffering.
Azerbaijan continues to hold over 200 Armenian prisoners of
war. And there's been abuse and mistreatment that's truly
shocking.
The U.S. provided $100 million to Azerbaijan in violation,
really in defiance, of nearly two decades' parity in U.S.
security assistance to Armenia and Azerbaijan. I think we're
sending a terrible message to Armenia. And because we did not
engage in terms of getting the parties to the Minsk Group table
for negotiations, Russia stepped in and now has yet another
foothold in that region.
And you mentioned in your earlier comments how critical it
was for us to engage in there. So my question to you is that
are you clear now of the relevance of maintaining parity
between the two countries in terms of aid? And what are we
going to do in terms of providing humanitarian assistance to
all those who've been displaced?
Ms. Cooper. Congresswoman, thank you so much for raising
this important issue set. The war this fall was a tragedy on so
many levels and we deplore the loss of life. We have spent a
lot of time trying to back then de-escalate the situation, and
now continuing to talk with Azerbaijan and Armenia about what
we can achieve in a peaceful way forward.
In terms of our--also in terms of the aftermath of the
conflict, we have been urging Azerbaijan specifically to
release the detainees. This has been a line that not just my
State Department colleagues have offered but also Defense
Department, myself included.
In terms of the paradigm for our assistance, we want to
have very strong and stabilizing relationships with all of the
countries in the region, with Armenia, with Georgia, and with
Azerbaijan. We believe that we can exert a positive influence
on all three countries.
In terms of Azerbaijan specifically, our assistance has
really been focused on areas that are important to U.S.
national security. It's been focused on the Coast Guard domain,
so Caspian Sea.
Ms. Speier. I understand that, but in the end, it allows
them money that they can then use as they did against Armenia.
So I just think we've got to look long and hard at their
conduct and not be rewarding them for bad behavior moving
forward.
Let me move on to General Wolters. Some organizations here
in the United States, such as the Anti-Defamation League, have
noticed an increasing connection between violent extremism,
white supremacy groups in the United States, and groups in some
of the European countries. We've looked at that in the Military
Personnel Subcommittee as it relates to service members as
well.
So, given this problem with extremism in some parts of the
military, what steps are you taking to combat this problem in
your unique position in--at EUCOM?
General Wolters. Thank you, Congressman. It's a--it's an
imperative that we continue to improve good order and
discipline and treat each other with dignity and respect. And
as we start down this path of embracing extremism, for the
duration of our military careers, and in USEUCOM I was quick to
point out to our commanders, extremism won't go away. And when
you take the oath and you put on the cloth, it will be a
responsibility of yours to be intrusive with respect to finding
it, getting rid of it, and finding ways to communicate with
others what tactics, techniques, and procedures need to go
forward to rectify it.
So the--the one-day session that we had for feedback was
very, very helpful. We've got a long ways to go. We're just to
the start. But we're going to have to embrace this for the
duration of our careers to fix it.
Ms. Speier. I encourage you to use the opportunity you have
within the Department to look at the social media of recruits
before they enlist to make sure we are not augmenting the
number of white supremacists within the military that already
exist. And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Hartzler is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. Thank you to our
witnesses. I'd like to cover questions about China and troop
movements and Turkey. But I don't know if we'll have time for
all of that. But I'll start off with General Wolters. You know,
there's no question that Russia is our number one threat in
Europe. They've shown time and again that they will invade a
country and have malign influence. But while they're doing
that, China also--it gives them an opportunity to expand their
influence--their Belt and Road Initiative, their economic
investments in the area. And I'm--really would like to get your
feedback on what you're hearing from our European allies. First
of all, do they recognize the threat of China? And what are
their steps, or counter steps--are they taking? Do you see and
do they see that 5G is a concern? And are--are the European
allies concerned about the growing expansion and partnership
with Russia in the Arctic and the Norwegian Sea? So a lot of
questions there, but I'd appreciate your perspective.
General Wolters. Congresswoman, first, the awareness of
malign influence with respect to 5G, with respect to seaports,
with respect to economic interest with aerial ports is--is
markedly improving. I would have told you a year ago with
respect to China, my number one concern was--was proliferation
of 5G. What has happened over the course of the last year--5G
with China Huawei and ZTE was--was spread into 15 separate
nations. As a result of the U.K.'s position with 5G to reverse
course and no longer go with China, other nations have followed
suit. As we speak, 8 of those 15 nations have enacted
restrictions against Huawei 5G and we're still working with the
other 7.
We're very concerned about the economic interest that China
continues to display with respect to ports--and you're very
familiar with the numbers with respect to what they--what they
do to impact shipping capacity. So today our number one issue
is proliferation with China economic interests with seaports
and aerial ports, and we're still concerned about 5G. But the
awareness on behalf of--of the NATO nations and our partners is
improving.
Mrs. Hartzler. Great. Well thank you for your work on that.
For several years I've been concerned about the--the ability of
our troops to move throughout Europe. You talked about the
exercise that we're going to conduct again this summer. But
specifically dealing with railroad track gauge size
differences, and when you enter the--the parts--the Baltic
areas and everything that used to be controlled by the Soviet
era, they--they're not compatible and you have a stoppage of
the movement of the equipment. So where are we at on that? And
what do we need to do to get after that problem?
General Wolters. We're improving. My goal was to improve
the speed of road and rail from Central Germany to the Eastern
European border with each passing day by at least a second. And
that is certainly taking case--and this committee's
contributions with EDI [European Deterrence Initiative] have
allowed us to improve infrastructure to put prepositioned
stockpiles where they need to be to take off some of the
pressure with respect to demand signals on road and rail until
we can get those fixed. We've set up a much better command
architecture. In NATO we established a three-star headquarters
2 years ago. The Joint Support Enabling Command--their sole
responsibility is to logistically cover down and tackle the
number one strategic is, move at speed in all domains from west
to east. So we're making gains.
Mrs. Hartzler. Something that I have advocated for is the
ability of the rail cars to be able to move and change very
quickly when they get to that point--the--to move the actual
wheels so that they can fit, rather than unloading everything
onto--is there some discussion of doing something like that?
General Wolters. Germany has some wonderful solutions in
that area, and they are moving out to enact that. We're still
challenged a little bit with some of the other nations. But--
but what we have today is a system in place that allows Estonia
to have access to the same kind of tactics, techniques, and
procedures, and advances that Germany sees. So we'll--we'll
gain quicker improvement.
Mrs. Hartzler. And very quickly, the--and I'll--I'll go to
Ms. Cooper. Turkey, S-400--what is the Biden administration's
policy with pushing back on Turkey in this realm? And what do
you see can be done in relation to Turkey and NATO and all of
our workings with them?
Ms. Cooper. Just in the interest of time, I'll--I'll
briefly just say that we do see S-400 as incompatible with F-
35. So they're out of the F-35 program. We have been urging
Turkey to remove the S-400. That is a consistent point of, you
know, diplomacy and in mil-mil [military-to-military]
conversations. But at the end of the day, they're a NATO ally.
And so we still work with them as a NATO ally and we value
their contributions internationally--to include in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Brown is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank our
panelists for your presentations today and making yourselves
available and your service to our country.
General Wolters, I'd like to ask you about infrastructure.
The United States, EU [European Union], and NATO have been
focused on European infrastructure over the last several years.
Everything from the EU committing 1.5 billion euros for
military mobility, to streamlining cross-border movements, to
adapting European transport networks for dual use to
accommodate the military needs. Can you talk a little bit about
your assessment about infrastructure to support our military
mobility, and also how you're using Defense Europe 21, the
exercise that began last month, to assess and to continue
prioritizing--perhaps reprioritizing the infrastructure needs?
General Wolters. Yes sir, thank you for the great question.
We're able to take these large exercise, Congressman, and we
can actually track a company and track a battalion. And when
they hit the port in Bremerhaven, we can time how long it takes
them to get to their foxholes on the eastern perimeter. And we
look for improvements over time. And with this committee's
great contributions with the European Deterrence Initiative, we
have been able to get after that infrastructure--not only from
a movement standpoint, but from a prepositioned stockpile
standpoint. And for Defender-Europe 21, they've--there's four
major exercises. The actual last portion is--is a C2 exercise
that looks back and examines how well we did in joint forcible
entry, how well we did at integrated air and missile defense,
and how well we were able to shoot, move, and communicate with
Army force elements--specifically timing their speed to get to
their foxholes. So it's a--it's an area of great concern to me.
Strategically I start with two initial concerns, speed and
posture. And speed has a lot to do with the subject, sir, and
we're making gains.
Mr. Brown. Thank you. And you're [inaudible] you're
comfortable with the level of coordination with our allies on
prioritizing that infrastructure needs?
General Wolters. I am, Congressman. And I am also
comfortable with our NATO allies and partners' willingness to
take the lead in this area.
Mr. Brown. Thank you. My second question--on Tuesday
Secretary Austin was in Berlin and he spoke to the expansion of
our presence in Germany by 500 personnel. He went on to say
that it's there to strengthen our deterrence and defense. And
he identified space and cyber and electronic warfare
capabilities as components of what those additional 500
personnel would bring. Can you speak to whether or not that 500
would be a permanent forward presence? Is it going to be a
rotational presence? And maybe more broadly speak about the--
the mix of rotational versus forward presence and whether we've
got the right balance today.
General Wolters. Congressman, I'll start with the latter
first. As you well know, the mix is always a--it depends--SOFA
[status of forces agreement] agreements, type of domain,
concerns for the service going forward. But right now I'm
convinced that we've got the right mix in the ground domain
with one rotational armored brigade combat team.
With respect to your first series of questions, there are
two elements to Secretary Austin's announcement, a multi-domain
task force and a theater fires organization. And our plan for
right now is for both of those to be permanently assigned
forces at Wiesbaden in perpetuity.
Mr. Brown. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Scott is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, last month you
moved us to WATCHCON 1, which is potential imminent crisis with
regard to Ukraine. We saw NATO planes have to intercept as many
as 10 Russian warplanes in a single day last March. And there
were public reports--the word that is used is ``massive''
buildup of Russian troops and equipment near Crimea. Is--is
massive the right word in your opinion to describe the buildup
of Russian troops in--on the borders of Crimea?
General Wolters. Congressman, I would adore the opportunity
to get to specific numbers. But what I can say is there is a
very large ground domain force that has moved from the Western
Military District and the Southern Military District to the
vicinity of--of Crimea and the Donbass. There is a sizable air
force. And there is also a notable maritime force that has
shifted as well. It is a----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
General Wolters [continuing]. Concern, our vigilance is
high.
Mr. Scott. And are they--are they pushing the supply lines
forward as well to supply those troops and the equipment that
is--that is moved into the area?
General Wolters. Sir, that activity has plateaued. And
again, I--I would like to talk more in a different environment.
But I can tell you as of right now that activity has plateaued.
Mr. Scott. Okay. I don't have any further questions, Mr.
Chairman. General, as we get into the--you know, the classified
briefing, my interest is in the number of NATO intercepts--
currently versus what they were over the last 6 to 12 months--
as well as what the size of the force is that we see from
Russia today versus where it was over the last several months,
and then what--what, you know, we're seeing from our NATO
allies as far as the--the lethal support for--for the Ukraine.
And I realize that all of those will have to be done in a
classified setting. So I will, out of respect for time, yield
the remainder of my time so that other members can ask their
questions and look forward to those answers in the classified
session.
The Chairman. All right, thank you. Mr. Keating is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll try to get to
three questions. First of all, just a quick follow-up, Ms.
Cooper, on the Azerbaijan-Armenia war that was terrible
[inaudible] but in my other capacity of chair of the committee
of [inaudible] working to reenforce the position of [inaudible]
release of those POWs [prisoners of war] that are there. And I
just wanted to know how hopeful the prospects are regarding
peace and stability in the region.
The Chairman. Did you get a--sorry, Bill, you're breaking
up a little bit. Did you get enough of that?
Ms. Cooper. I believe so. If the question pertains to peace
and stability in the Caucasus region, then I can--I can answer
that. Is that--is that correct?
Mr. Keating. Yes, specifically release of the POWs with
Azerbaijan and Armenia in the wake of the--the terrible war
that was there. And----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Prospect for peace and stability.
Can you hear? Am I breaking up still?
[Simultaneous speaking.]
The Chairman. Yes, we got that. We got that, thank you. Go
ahead, Ms. Cooper.
Ms. Cooper. Yes thank you, Congressman. I would say the
lead for the--the discussions on the release of the detainees
is with the State Department, so I am less familiar with the
day-to-day on that and would probably defer to them for their
overall assessment. I would say more broadly I do have concerns
about the peace and stability in the region. I do not see it as
a positive development that at the end of this conflict Russia
now has 2,000 peacekeepers--or so-called peacekeepers--in--on
Azerbaijan soil. They already have forces in Armenia and of
course they illegally occupy sovereign Georgia in both Abkhazia
and South Ossetia. So--so to me this is not a positive
development. That said, we are kind of looking at how we can
play a supporting role in the Defense Department to State
Department led efforts to----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Keating. Okay. Thank you so much. I hate to interrupt,
but I wanted to get to----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Ms. Cooper. Please.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Another question. The Wagner
Group--I don't know if we touched on a lot of what's going on
for [inaudible] will this curtail or help curtail the Wagner
Group activities given his association with this? And in
Europe, I know it's expanding in Syria into Africa--what's the
status of the use of the Wagner Group? Did you----
General Wolters. Congressman, I--I--this is General
Wolters. I got the last portion in--what I can say in this
setting is--is what we witnessed from--from the Wagner Group
starting 2 years ago has persisted in those geographical
regions that you addressed.
Mr. Keating. All right, again--just the last area--the
importance of the European Deterrence Initiative. You know,
there were cuts made in that and the--and I don't think in my
own discussions with people in Europe that that was well
received, although diplomatically--they were very careful with
what they said. What's the status of that? And would it require
more funding and more support? General.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
General Wolters. Congressman, this is General Wolters. We--
we've been very pleased with this committee's support for EDI.
I don't know what exactly will unfold in 2022, but I suspect
the EDI portion will be reduced. And I will tell you that every
single cent that is part of that EDI is incredibly important to
improve our campaign momentum in indications and warnings,
command and control, and mission command. So with any reduction
there are going to be challenges, but we certainly appreciate
the funding that has been in place and we hope it continues in
the future.
Mr. Keating. It's an area of my concern and I hope that we
can fund that to a greater amount. With that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. DesJarlais is recognized for 5
minutes.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. I apologize, he was there until--Mr.
DesJarlais, can you hear me?
Dr. DesJarlais. I can.
[Pause.]
The Chairman. It is not our day for technology. We're not--
we're not hearing.
[Simultaneous speaking.]
[Pause.]
The Chairman. Yes, buffering--which is not a good thing.
Wow. We just pretty much lost everybody.
Mr. Gallagher, we'll go ahead and let you give a shot and
then we'll try to get folks back online here. Mr. Gallagher is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to--I guess to
put it bluntly, what's the likelihood of an invasion of Ukraine
in the next few weeks?
General Wolters. Low to medium.
Mr. Gallagher. Say again?
General Wolters. Low to medium.
Mr. Gallagher. Low to medium? Thank you. I hope to follow
up in classified session as well. Russia has an assortment of
intermediate-range missile systems, including the Iskander
ballistic missile, which Janes reports is currently being
deployed along the Ukrainian border. Given this deployment and
the Russian threat, just how important are long-range precision
fires to your ability to deter aggression in Europe?
General Wolters. Tremendously important, and that multi-
domain task force that Secretary Austin just talked about is a
key step towards improving our ability to fire from ground to
ground.
Mr. Gallagher. And how would programs like the Marine
Corp's long-range precision fires program, or the Army's PRSM
[Precision Strike Missile] system contribute to your
operational flexibility as a combatant commander?
General Wolters. Great contributions.
Mr. Gallagher. And what would be the--some of the potential
future consequences if Congress were to refuse to provide you
with such a capability?
General Wolters. It would impact our campaign momentum from
a lethality standpoint.
Mr. Gallagher. And--sorry to keep beating this horse, but--
the budget summary released by the Biden administration last
week specifically calls out long-range fires and finds, quote,
the safety and security of the Nation requires a strong,
sustainable, and responsive mix of long-range strike
capabilities. Do you agree?
General Wolters. I do.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, sir. Now I will shift gears a
little bit. Just last week an anti-mining political party
blocked a Chinese-backed firm's access to some of Greenland's
massive rare earth deposits. Given the critical importance of
rare earths to the U.S. defense supply chain, it would benefit
us to pay greater attention to Greenland, its security, and
adversary activity there. I'd just be curious to get your
thoughts on--on the importance of Greenland.
Ms. Cooper. Thank you, Congressman. We--we agree that
Greenland is a very important location and our conversations
with the Kingdom of Denmark about the security of the broader
region to include Chinese investments and Chinese concerns in
the region have reflected that.
Mr. Gallagher. And going forward, how do you intend to
continue to ensure the security of Greenland and its resources
given that our adversaries obviously recognize it's important
economically? And where do you see Greenland's place in EUCOM's
broader strategic picture?
General Wolters. At the heart, Congressman, as you well
know, Denmark never lets me forget about the equities that they
represent in Greenland. And as we've developed that--that
concept for deterrence and defense of the Euro-Atlantic area,
it specifically points out the comprehensive geographical
approach that has to take place and identifies Greenland.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Crow is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin by
asking about Ukraine--just to follow on to Mr. Gallagher's
comment. He had asked about the threat of a Russian invasion of
Ukraine in the next few weeks. You had characterized that as
low to medium, General Wolters and Ms. Cooper. Would that
assessment be higher if I were to ask that and say, what is the
risk between now and the end of the year?
[Pause.]
General Wolters. The answer is it depends. And I would have
to take each and every second of the day from this point until
tomorrow to give you a different answer. So I know that's not
what you want to hear, but we continue to examine every single
part of the environment in all domains to make sure that we----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Crow. Well let me ask it this way. You were able to
make an assessment based on him asking over the next couple of
weeks. Based on the current trajectory, and what we know now,
does that threat continue to increase beyond the next 2 weeks?
General Wolters. It depends, Congressman, on the
disposition of the forces. My--my sense is, with the trend that
I see right now, that the likelihood of an occurrence will
start to wane.
Mr. Crow. So when you say it depends--so you were able to
make an assessment based on the next 2 weeks. You gave a--you
get a concrete assessment, low to medium. So you are only able
to give an assessment 2 weeks out, is that what you're telling
me?
General Wolters. In a different setting I can give you a
deeper assessment based on----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Mr. Crow. Okay, that----
General Wolters [continuing]. Strategic assets.
Mr. Crow [continuing]. That's the answer I need, then. We
can follow up this afternoon. Ms. Cooper, do you have any
additional thoughts on that?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, no, other than to say we're
watching this very closely at the highest levels.
Mr. Crow. Okay. Next question is, Mr. Bacon and I are co-
chairs in the Military Resiliency and Energy Caucus and we are
very concerned about energy resiliency for our installations
around the world. We've had a lot of discussions about the
reliance of some of our installations on Russian gas. Can you
just talk about the risk that a reliance on that Russian fuel
source poses to our installations in Germany in particular?
General Wolters. It's a high risk for those nations'
militaries that rely on Russian gas. As you know, Congressman,
in the U.S. we work very, very hard with our reserves to ensure
that we, to the max extent practical, do not as the U.S. DOD
rely on Russian gas.
Mr. Crow. But to our allies that we're integrated with,
there is a high risk?
General Wolters. It is.
Mr. Crow. And last, General Wolters, regarding Russia's
involvement in the Arctic--I have spent a fair amount of time
in Svalbard, actually, and have been to places like Barentsberg
and others. Is it your characterization--would love for Ms.
Cooper maybe to start on this--that the Russians are pushing
the boundaries of the Treaty of Svalbard to create logistical
supply chains at facilities there to enhance their ability to
project power into the Arctic?
Ms. Cooper. Thank you, Congressman. I would say I can't
give you a legal read of--of the treaty, but in general terms,
we are concerned about what we see as Russia's attempts to--to
control maritime traffic. And so this is something that has
been the focus of our, you know, bilateral conversations with
Russia. But also a topic of conversation among the Arctic
powers--you know, U.S. and our allies and partners.
Mr. Crow. General Wolters.
General Wolters. I concur. What I will say, Congressman, is
I am pleased with the strategic architecture by the European
nations to place greater focus in the vicinity of the Arctic
for the precise reasons that Laura Cooper talked about.
Mr. Crow. Thank you. General Wolters, you know, we--we're
limited in our ability during Defender-Europe to fully assess
transportation ability and the ability to move forces because
of the pandemic. What needs to be done going forward--I'd say
the next year, in the near term to address those capability gap
assessments because of the--the limited nature of that
exercise?
General Wolters. Great question, Congressman. We're going
to have two large sample sizes--one from Defender-Europe 20
that's already taken place--we're in the middle of it. We had
to curtail some of our activity. But we did get a lot of lift
and shift of massive forces. And then we'll take a sample of
what takes place with Defender-Europe 21 and be able to point
out after a good, constructive after-action review where some
of our LIMFACS [limiting factors] are. And we've got a red team
assigned in all domains to be an inhibitor of advancement. So
we're--we're excited about the fact that we're placing a lot of
emphasis in this area.
Mr. Crow. So you're--it sounds like you're pretty
confident. You have a plan in place to address those capability
gaps and make those--make those assessments over the next year?
General Wolters. Absolutely. And EDI is incredibly helpful
for mitigation.
Mr. Crow. Wonderful. Thank you. Well I thank you both for
your service to the country and for doing this important work
and look forward to the discussion in the closed session. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. We will give Mr. DesJarlais
another shot here. I believe we have the technical fixes. You
are up, sir.
Dr. DesJarlais. All right, thank you--thank you, Mr.
Chairman. General Wolters, could you just briefly explain the
importance of our nuclear weapons capability and how it serves
to reassure our allies in deterring these strategic non-nuclear
attacks from adversaries like Russia?
General Wolters. Congressman, we've certainly had the
nuclear triad in place as a strategic deterrence umbrella in
Europe for well over six decades. And--and the prosperous peace
that we've been able to enjoy is--is certainly attributed to
that. So it's--it's very important from that standpoint.
Dr. DesJarlais. If the United States were to adopt a no
first use policy, how do you believe this would be perceived or
received by our allies?
General Wolters. Congressman, I think you would get a mixed
return depending upon the ally's awareness of the nuclear
enterprise. And I--I'm not equipped to give you a country-by-
country return on that, but I think you'd get some mixed
responses.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. How do you feel about no first use
policy?
General Wolters. Congressman, I currently support the U.S.
position on not adhering to the nuclear no first use policy in
accordance with the Nuclear Posture Review of 2018.
Dr. DesJarlais. If we were to adopt such a policy, do you
believe that Russia in turn would restrict their own nuclear
policy in any substantive way?
General Wolters. Congressman, I'm not sure what Russia
would do, but I do know we--we would probably be in a position
to where we wouldn't trust the decision that they make.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I just have some concerns and I hope
the Biden administration is tuning in to this hearing because
in the past President Biden had expressed his support of a no
first use policy, and I hope he would seriously rethink that
position. And you know, look at what our allies would say.
Granted, you said there was a mixed response. Let's turn to
Israel for a minute. General, in your statement you noted the
tremendous strides Israel has made under the Trump
administration normalizing relationships with Arab world and
improving regional security. Do you foresee the momentum of
these accomplishments carrying over into this administration?
General Wolters. I do, Congressman.
Dr. DesJarlais. What are some of the obstacles that you see
in continuing these success--successes, and what can we do to
help overcome them?
General Wolters. I think the degree of cooperation for
exchange of information is--is productive. I think that needs
to continue. And if we wind up having obstacles in that area it
would be of concern. Right now the ability to information share
with Israel, mil to mil, is very, very effective.
Dr. DesJarlais. Ms. Cooper, could you explain the current
state of the Department of Defense's assessment regarding a
transfer of Israel from European Command to the Central Command
area of operations?
Ms. Cooper. Yes, thank you Congressman. The--the current
state of play is that there was a decision to affect the
transfer, but that transfer is still in--in process in the
sense that we are carefully analyzing every aspect to ensure
that only when we are confident that it will be a seamless
transition will that formal transition occur. And the concept
here is to ensure that there's nothing that is impacted
negatively in terms of Israel's tremendous relationship with--
with European allies and with European Command. But only that
Israel will benefit from greater access to mil-to-mil
relationships in the Central Command area of responsibility. So
that's--that's the criteria we're looking at. Over.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And--thank you both for your service
and for being here today. And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Luria is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you. And General Wolters, I wanted to
shift back to the discussion that some of my colleagues brought
up earlier about naval presence in the EUCOM theater. And I had
an opportunity to discuss this specifically a little bit
yesterday with General VanHerck with--relative to the Arctic
and kind of how the forces are allocated when we look at the
Arctic. And having three combatant commanders whose geographic
areas converge on that area.
So essentially with USINDOPACOM, they have a large number
of forces assigned, ``forces for'' [Forces for Unified
Commands]. You have some naval forces assigned, but not
particularly attributed to that mission, more in tune with
conducting ballistic missile defense and operating in the
Mediterranean. And USNORTHCOM [U.S. Northern Command] has zero
naval forces assigned by the ``forces for'' document. Can you
first describe any additional needs you feel that you have for
naval forces? I know you mentioned two destroyers earlier. But
specifically with regards to the Arctic. And then furthermore,
do you have any concerns about the command and control--the
operability for sort of a unified command when countering
threats in the Arctic because of the three combatant commanders
having geographic areas that intersect in basically one
theater?
General Wolters. Well, Congresswoman, with respect to the
command and control between the three U.S. combatant
commanders, I am very comfortable. We have operated for decades
across unified command plan boundaries and we understand ADCON
[administrative control], OPCON [operational control], and
TACON [tactical control].
As far as needs in the region are concerned, from a U.S.
perspective, as you well know through many of your initiatives,
we have worked with the Coast Guard and we plan on going the
direction of the addition of six additional icebreakers in the
future. And I think that is very, very important.
And my request with respect to the two DDGs [guided-missile
destroyers] has everything to do with the Arctic and what is on
the periphery with respect to what happens in the Greenland-
Iceland-U.K. Gap. I am very pleased with the European nations'
increase in involvement in the Arctic region. The Northern Sea
Route is very precious to them. It is a treasure that--the
nations understand that we need to protect it and they are
getting very, very involved with respect to establishing
military plans to assist in that cause. So I think the campaign
momentum with respect to U.S. activities, all the plans that
all the U.S. services have just recently completed for the
Arctic strategy, as well as codifying plans on behalf of our
allies and partners to assist, is very helpful.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you. And can you clarify, are you looking
for two additional destroyers to be permanently assigned to the
EUCOM AOR [area of responsibility] or are you looking for
rotational forces that would deploy from elsewhere on the east
coast?
General Wolters. It is a request for permanent, ma'am.
Mrs. Luria. Permanent. So then it wouldn't be two on
station all the time, it will be a rotational force that is
forward deployed to the European theater?
General Wolters. We currently have a set number of four and
the request is for two additional and we have infrastructure in
place to be able to house all six in Rota, Spain.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I understand that. So going back to the
multiple combatant commanders who intersect in the Arctic
theater. My question is about 2nd Fleet. So the Navy recently,
you know, a few years back stood up 2nd Fleet again and when
Admiral Richardson announced the re-establishment of 2nd Fleet,
he said that this was a fleet that would operate seamlessly
from the east coast of the United States to the Barents Sea.
And that covers two theaters, so the NORTHCOM AOR and part of
the EUCOM AOR. And then recently the Harry S. Truman operated
above the Arctic Circle doing exercises and I understand that
they were under USEUCOM command during that exercise.
Does the current arrangement with 2nd Fleet being a
numbered fleet that spans two combatant command AORs, do you
see any operational concerns with that arrangement?
General Wolters. We are very comfortable with that
arrangement and it is done in other domains often. And 2nd
Fleet coupled with JFC [Joint Force Command] Norfolk that I
know you are familiar with Congresswoman, we've worked out the
C2 relationships and supporting construct and I am very
comfortable with the path that we are currently on.
Mrs. Luria. Okay, and just with the little time remaining,
other than the request for two additional DDGs, do you feel
that you have received adequate naval presence in the EUCOM AOR
to meet all of your missions on a regular basis?
General Wolters. We could still use some more support in
undersea activity and I would adore the chance to talk to that
in a separate venue.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Thank you. I yield back the time
remaining.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Gaetz is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I wanted to give
our witnesses the opportunity to just discuss the importance of
air dominance in Europe.
General Wolters. Congressman, I will take a stab at that
because it is near and dear to my heart. It is a campaign
imperative to ensure that we can comprehensively defend and
share our responses and achieve effective deterrence in Europe.
And it will dramatically improve with the addition of the
United States F-35s that start coming in to the United Kingdom
in the fall of 2021.
Mr. Gaetz. And I know that when we make decisions about air
platforms, we are often analyzing the entourage effect, how the
F-35 can make the rest of the fighting force more capable. As
the F-35 starts to really take its position as the dominant air
platform in Europe with our allies, can we expect that they
will be able to scale and do more in their own defense as a
consequence of that entourage effect that we seem to analyze
very closely in our own fighting force?
General Wolters. Absolutely, Congressman. We have 81 F-35s
in continent as we speak. We anticipate that we will get to 450
by 2030. The F-35's contribution at the tactical level and its
ability to achieve access is unequaled to anywhere in the
world, but its contributions at the strategic level for
indications and warnings, command and control, and lethality
from a mission command standpoint are daunting.
Mr. Gaetz. Obviously, the chairman mentioned we are all
concerned about Turkey and their S-400 purchase. Is there
another shoe that we expect to drop? Is there anything you
picked up at the mil-to-mil level that should give us cause for
concern that U.S. products, U.S. capabilities are diminished in
the attractiveness to some of our partners?
General Wolters. Congressman, I haven't. The mil-to-mil
relationship that I have with Turkey at this moment remains
very strong.
Mr. Gaetz. With any other of our partner nations, are there
any places where you see that we might ought to give particular
focus or attention when it comes to ensuring interoperability
and capability with U.S. warfighters in Europe?
General Wolters. We work that every day, Congressman. I
think that is a requirement 24/7/365 [24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, 365 days a year]. I think what we have done recently with
respect to the codification of actual plans at the strategic
level and at the national level is a forcing function to allow
nations to ultimately establish requirements. And that in
itself has been very, very helpful so that we don't have
unnecessary duplicity and the alignment of our hardware and
software and troopers is what it needs to be to better generate
peace. I think we are traversing in the right direction. And
truthfully, Congressman, a big contributor in this area has
been the Europe Deterrence Initiative to get after these
issues.
Mr. Gaetz. I appreciate that. I just would give you a
chance if you thought there was any other area where we ought
to have this focus because I know in Armed Services, we had a
number of discussions about Turkey's decision before it arose
and maybe we should have done more to ensure that that was the
right decision. But it seems as though you are saying there is
not something with that level of acuity that we ought to be
concerned about. If there is, I would ask that you provide that
to our office as part of the record.
I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 99.]
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Jacobs is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank you to the
witnesses for being here.
We are currently seeing a rise in illiberal and
authoritarian states throughout Europe. I know there has been a
lot of talk about Turkey, but we also have seen authoritarian
cases in Poland and Hungary and some of these governments are
no longer being reliable or helpful partners. I know we have
already talked about the F-35 program with Turkey.
But Ms. Cooper, I was wondering in your assessment, how
does the Biden administration plan to update its military
partnerships for alliances with states that take repeated
actions that go directly against our core interests and are
these authoritarian developments being considered as the
Department works to implement its plan to realign the force
posture in Europe?
I am particularly interested in Poland where we have our
rotating armored brigade combat team.
Ms. Cooper. Thank you. I would say that the Biden
administration's policies regarding democracy and regarding the
promotion of U.S. values are very strong. And so this is
something that we feel not just over at the State Department
and Foggy Bottom, but at the Pentagon. So in general, this is
an important focus for the administration.
With respect to specific alliance relationships, we are
still working very hard in the context of the NATO alliance to
forge strong capabilities and a strong ability to deter Russian
aggression and respond should Russia proceed with aggression.
And that is where our NATO-related mil-to-mil investments
occur. And in the case of Poland specifically, we do have this
rotational presence that we are continuing with.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And on the question of Russia, the
question for both Ms. Cooper and General Wolters is why you
think sanctions are going to work on Russia since we have put
them on in the past and it has not been effective in deterring
Russian hacking. If anything, the problem has gotten worse.
And I understand if we need to go into more detail in the
classified briefing later, but just wondering what the
rationale is for continuing a process of sanctions that seemed
to me, at least, fairly ineffective to this point.
Ms. Cooper. Thank you, Congresswoman. I would urge Members
of Congress to take a close look at the specific sanctions that
we are releasing today because the details in the package, I
think, do speak to a level of clarity of purpose and clarity of
messaging that perhaps we have not always had.
In terms of the new Executive order that President Biden is
signing, this will enable us to have a tool that we can use not
just today, but also in the future to message our deterrence of
future Russian malign activities, so I do think it is important
to look at the specifics.
But it is not just sanctions. I mean we are not just doing
sanctions and it is coupled with other measures to include
today we are proceeding with the expulsion of 10 Russian
officers in the United States. And most importantly, it
revolves around alliance unity. I was very encouraged to see
that it wasn't just the voice of the United States today
calling out Russian malign actions. It was also NATO, because
we have a NATO statement that was issued today. So we are all
standing together unified. This is something that Russia does
notice and that can, I think, in the future deter their malign
behavior.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. General, anything to add there?
General Wolters. Congresswoman, anything we can do to
continue to curb malign behavior on behalf of Russia and
improve our deterrence posture, I am in support of.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chair, I will
yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Bacon is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I appreciate you both
being here and as a 30-year Air Force guy, I am real proud of
General Wolters and all the great work you are doing.
My first question is dealing with the Baltics. With what we
are seeing with what the Russians are doing with Ukraine and
Georgia, what can we do more to assure deterrence with our
great allies in the Baltics? And part of that, would you
consider having a permanent U.S. force in the Baltics to make
that deterrence more assured? And I defer to either one.
General Wolters. Sir, great question. Number one, I think
the glide path that we are on with enhanced forward presence
has been very successful. And I know you are familiar with it
and I know you visited. It affords the NATO nations to lead
from the front and participate to a greater degree.
I believe that the current rotational presence that we have
back and forth from a U.S. perspective with respect to Poland
and what we do with the other nations, Estonia, Latvia, and
Lithuania, is about right. It continues to promote all
involvement for many of our allies and partners and the success
that we are having with those battalion-sized battle groups in
each one of those four nations possessing the capability to
inherit and input all-domain data is improving our ability to
adequately deter in that region.
Mr. Bacon. I am the co-chair of the Baltic Security Caucus,
so we put a lot of time on this. I just fear, if we ever have
conflict in Europe it is going to probably evolve around the
Baltic States, so I just think we have to be so careful to
ensure there is no miscalculation by the Russians there. So
obviously I am for strengthening our deterrence capabilities
there and leaving any ambiguity out when it comes to that.
To the Russian gas question, there are some bases that are
reliant on Russian gas. And the reason I know that, we put it
in law that services have to ask for a waiver to do it and we
know the Army has done that. So for example, the new hospital
being built in Germany will be using Russian gas.
Does it concern either one of you or what we can do about
this? Because I think it is when the Russians can just turn off
the gas, we have got a problem.
General Wolters. It does, Congressman, and I am very
familiar with Rhine Ordnance Barracks Hospital and the
construction project, having commanded the air component at
Ramstein being part and parcel to that equation.
I think we have to continue with the demanding customer
that we have been up to this point to purge it out of the
system and our reliance on that should ultimately be a campaign
that drives this to zero.
Mr. Bacon. I know you have already talked to some F-35
questions here, but I have got to follow up on it. I was just
reading that some of the training, we are looking at 20 to 1
kill ratios. I even saw one where it was 100 to 1.
Would you say the F-35 is unmatched in its capability in
your theater?
General Wolters. Yes.
Mr. Bacon. Now there have been some folks who want to cut
the F-35 program. What is the impact to your theater if the F-
35 program is reduced in production?
General Wolters. It will reduce our campaign momentum to
more effectively see the environment from an indications and
warning standpoint, command and control, and provide feedback
as to what is taking place in the environment.
And from a lethality perspective, the ability to put
potential targets at risk will be weakened.
Mr. Bacon. Have you flown in the F-35?
General Wolters. I have flown the F-22. I have not flown
the F-35.
Mr. Bacon. I was just curious because you can compare and
contrast it perhaps if you had.
I have got a minute left, so I want to ask one other
question on electronic warfare. Four years ago, we took stock
over electronic warfare. We were behind Russia and China. We
stepped away from it in the mid-90s. We put a lot of emphasis
in this committee on trying to get this on track.
Are you seeing the work bearing fruit over the last 4
years? Are we rightsizing our electronic warfare program?
General Wolters. Congressman, we are improving, probably
not at a rate that pleases you or I. And the acquisition and
the proliferation of the F-35 will actually help in that arena.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I yield back and I appreciate you
both.
The Chairman. I do apologize for this, but I'm going to use
the chair's prerogative to follow up a little bit.
What impact, I mean the F-35, $38,000 an hour. Right now,
we wanted to get it at $25,000 an hour. Its mission-ready
capability is sub 50 percent at the moment and by 2030, the
engine is requiring so much repairs that roughly half the fleet
won't be able to go just because we don't have the facilities
to repair the engines because we won't have enough engines.
If that is the capability that you are getting, $38,000 an
hour, 33 percent to 40 percent capability rate, sinking down
because it doesn't have a functioning engine, how will that
impact your ability to do what you need to do in Europe?
General Wolters. Congressman, that will certainly have an
impact. We weigh it all together given what effect can be
delivered in the battlespace, but obviously it would have an
impact.
The Chairman. So it would be helpful if this committee
would put pressure on those making the F-35 to actually deliver
the product that they told us they were going to deliver at the
price that they told us that they were going to deliver it at.
And it would not be helpful to simply give them a free pass on
those important issues.
General Wolters. Chairman, I applaud your efforts up to
this point in that category and I don't argue with any of those
points.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. That was more rhetorical
than anything, but that is what I hope this committee will do.
The platform is fantastic. There isn't any question about that.
We are right now not getting what we are paying for and that is
not good for defense and it certainly isn't good for the
taxpayer.
With that, I will yield to Ms. Strickland for 5 minutes.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you, Chairman Smith. I would like to
talk a bit about protecting service members and their families
when they are deployed, especially given how the Kremlin and
other adversaries are targeting them with misinformation and
disinformation.
So I understand that when service members are deployed in
EUCOM's AOR, the Russian disinformation campaigns are
especially interested in service members and their families.
Can you discuss, as much as you can in this open setting, what
EUCOM is doing to combat disinformation, how we are educating
service members, and how we are improving their awareness of
this possibility? Thank you.
General Wolters. Thanks, Congresswoman. That is a great
question. Again, we have instituted programs with the
assistance of Special Operations Command that start at the very
top of the strategic level to go after malign influence and
misinformation to Active Duty members, reservists, guardsmen,
and their dependents.
The operations influence platform is specifically designed
to target misinformation at the strategic and operational
levels from Russia. And we have got a follow-on program called
WebOps that takes it even further to make sure that there is a
heightened awareness on behalf of all of the military members
and the dependents in the EUCOM AOR about the malign influence
from the information domain with respect to Russia.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you. Ms. Cooper.
Ms. Cooper. Well, I can just add to this at the strategic
level in terms of the whole-of-government effort that we have
to counter Russian disinformation. And actually, this is
something that General Wolters plays a leadership role in
because he is the co-chair with the State Department of the
Russia Influence Group. And so even as we are dealing with
these issues at the local level, at the installation level, at
the individual level, at the strategic level our focus is on
improving whole-of-government coordination to address Russia
disinformation.
Ms. Strickland. Right, and can you talk a bit more about
the families because sometimes they can be vulnerable,
especially when their loved ones are deployed?
General Wolters. We have had the luxury of hosting families
in Europe for decades and decades and this is a constant
challenge just to make sure that the military members conduct
town hall meetings at the commander level and the lower levels
to ensure that there is no degree of satisfaction when just the
military member is informed. The mission isn't completed until
the rest of the family members are. And we obviously use 21st
century means to get that word out.
But it is like anything, Congresswoman, you have to rebrief
the same subject about 10 times to convince yourself that the
word is actually out and we find ourselves in situations to
where we have to be comprehensive from a town hall perspective
to make sure that we can go person-to-person to get the word
and it has been a little bit challenging as a result of COVID-
19 conditions and I think this is driving a lot of your
questions. And we have worked very hard to conduct town hall
meetings with restrictions applied from a COVID perspective and
are having success.
Ms. Strickland. Well, great. Thank you for that. And we
know that, in general, messages start the thinking when we do
repeat them, so I appreciate your repetition strategy. That is
all I have. I yield back my time, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Waltz is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I don't think your microphone is on.
Mr. Waltz. How are we doing now? There we are. All right.
Thank you for both being here. I want to talk to you about
our European partners', our NATO partners' significant
contributions to Afghanistan over the last couple of decades.
And Ms. Cooper and I have spent many, many efforts working with
them to live up to those contributions and live up to those
pledges and fortunately, actually, had more troops on the
ground than the United States until the announcement yesterday.
I am hearing from many of my colleagues and then also
reading about grumbling and discontent and concern, frankly,
from--particularly from the Czechs, the Belgians, some of the
Eastern European states and those that were affected so
directly by the precipitous pullout of Iraq when ISIS [the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] then came charging to the
fore. We had a caliphate the size of Indiana, attacks into and
around Europe and the European capitals.
The intelligence community has been clear that terrorism
loves a vacuum. Al-Qaida is very likely to take advantage of
that vacuum in the wake of our withdrawal. What are you hearing
from a military standpoint and also to your military-to-
military contacts on the civilian side? Are those concerns
mirroring what I am hearing in terms of Europe's safety, number
one, but then number two, our ability to effect a CT
[counterterrorism] fight over, when this term over the horizon
noting the differences, our basing options in and around Iraq
are very different and far greater than they are without Bagram
in Afghanistan?
General Wolters. First and foremost, Congressman, and I
know you appreciate this. As the United States, we are
incredibly grateful for the contributions of all the nations.
And secondly, with this being an order, we will conduct a
deliberate, very well synchronized, and very safe, from a force
protection standpoint, withdrawal.
Yesterday, as you may have heard, at the North Atlantic
Council, the Secretary General convened all of the members of
the alliance to include the partner nations that have an impact
in the region and the support was resounding for enactment of
the withdrawal.
Ms. Cooper. And Congressman, I would just add that kind of
at the policy level, for the feedback that I have heard from my
colleagues who have been traveling with the Secretary and were
there in Brussels for this meeting is a sense of appreciation
by allies for the manner in which we have consulted with them
since the beginning of this administration to take into account
their perspectives, to have Secretary Austin and Secretary
Biden personally engaging with them in person. And also, the
sense that they also have been reflecting on the way ahead and
concerned about the future of the mission even before this. And
I think moving forward----
Mr. Waltz. So Ms. Cooper, yes, go ahead. That is the part I
want to talk about, moving forward.
Ms. Cooper. I think moving forward, the expectation--and I
think it is an expectation that we will absolutely meet--is for
this very close consultation process to continue every step of
the way so that we are working on this with all plans and we
are executing it absolutely together as an alliance.
Mr. Waltz. Our European partners will be the first to feel
the consequences of this decision, if history bears true in
what they felt with the withdrawal of Iraq and the ISIS
caliphate. So I certainly hope those consultations are ongoing,
but I do not see a plan in place and basing options for
continuing the counterterrorism operations. Are the Europeans
planning to participate in those operations with us as they
have in Syria? What is the plan?
General Wolters. We will start and conduct a synchronized
withdrawal and the intention of the European nations is
obviously by, with, and through those nations to be determined.
Mr. Waltz. Okay, so the plan is TBD, to be determined.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Veasey is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Veasey. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. General
Wolters, can you talk a little bit about Russia's military
modernization program and what modernization efforts are most
important for us to focus on to reduce operational risk in your
command?
General Wolters. The one that is of most concern,
Congressman, is the long-range missile capability. And we at
NATO are very focused on that. We certainly from a U.S.
perspective are focused on that. And the key for us is to
continue to improve our ability from an indications and
warnings standpoint and from a command and control standpoint
to make sure that we can characterize the environment and be
able to respond. That is probably the biggest concern,
Congressman.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much. Last week, I was at a
rollout ceremony in Fort Worth with the Danish military
receiving F-35s and as you know, they are obviously one of our
key allies and participants in the F-35 program. And I was just
wondering what was your opinion on the F-35s and the impact
that it has had both militarily and diplomatically with our
allies in the region?
General Wolters. Congressman, we are very fond of the F-35
because of its contributions to indications and warnings, and
command and control, and lethality. The nations in Europe have
been very happy with the product. We actually have just over 80
F-35s, non-U.S., in Europe as we speak. And we will soon get
U.S. F-35s to the United Kingdom in the fall timeframe. And we
are currently programmed to go up to approximately 450 F-35s by
2030 throughout all of Europe. We are very pleased with its
performance and we are very pleased with its contributions to
deterrence.
Mr. Veasey. And I hate to ask you to go back too far into
the history vault, but with other platforms where there have
been issues, and that the military has had to work with to
perfect, whether it has been a plane, a helicopter, you know,
battleship, regardless of what it is, for the mission that you
need for F-35s to perform for you right now, and you go back
and you look at other platforms where you have also had to work
with them until they could, you know, perform at the rate that
you wanted them to, where do you see this platform at right now
versus, again, just other problems in the past that you had to
correct?
I mean I remember when I was at the beginning of the V-22,
for instance, that there were some serious issues with that.
But Bell Helicopter eventually got that right and it has gone
on to become a good platform for the Marines and other
branches. And so could you just sort of touch on that a little
bit?
General Wolters. Congressman, the other platforms that I
have seen during my service in the military, we have had the
same experiences. And if I were to rate the F-35 with others, I
would just tell you that they are similar.
Mr. Veasey. Okay, well, thank you very much. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Bice is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The questions I have
may be better served in the classified hearing, but I'll go
ahead and just throw them out there now. I really want to hear,
we've talked a lot about the F-35, and, certainly, I can maybe
ask some additional questions, but I really would like to know
about how you were battling the cyber issues that are happening
with our adversaries, especially as it relates to what is
happening in that part of the region.
General Wolters. Congresswoman, I think the question had to
do with malign influence on behalf of adversaries with respect
to cyber; is that correct?
Mrs. Bice. That is correct.
General Wolters. I'll just start out by saying that the
posture in Europe has improved significantly. As far as the
organizations that we have, from a USEUCOM perspective, we have
a Joint Cyber Center; I have an integrated planning element;
and with my SACEUR [Supreme Allied Commander Europe] hat, I
have a SHAPE [Supreme Headquarters Allied Partners Europe]
Cyber Operations Center. And those three organizations come to
a total of about 150 individuals.
On top of that, that we have cyber protection teams in the
United States manned by the United States Army at Fort Gordon.
And many of the nations in Europe today are forming cyber
organizations from a military perspective. And I believe that
because several years ago the United States made the decision
to establish one military commander for cyber, the USCYBERCOM
[United States Cyber Command] commander, our direction and
guidance has been much clearer with much less ambiguity, and
the command and control and the organization of our units is
much better.
So we're improving, and the NATO nations are watching that
improvement and they are following in suit, and we are seeing a
marked good improvement on behalf of our NATO militaries to
improve our effectiveness, number one to better defend our
network and then, number two, worry about the other aspects of
cyber after that, once they're convinced that their nations and
their militaries and their whole of governments have an
effective network defense.
Ms. Cooper. And if I may, I think it might be helpful to
offer a national level perspective on this cyber question, and
I think the SolarWinds response that we announced today is
really a microcosm of how we handle cyber issues at the
national level.
There's a piece of this that relates to specifically
disrupting and imposing costs on Russian cyber actors, so what
you're seeing today is that we are sanctioning six specific
Russian companies that support the Russian intelligence
service. This is the SVR. So we're actually sanctioning these
specific companies.
Then you also see an element of this that relates to
raising awareness and providing the private sector with the
information and tools they need to be able to protect
themselves, so there's an aspect of that with the SolarWinds
response. And then there's building partner capacity piece
where we're working with our allies and partners to help them
become more resilient, and we have expanded our own Cyber Flag
exercise that is one of our premier cyber exercises to include
several allies as part of this response.
Mrs. Bice. And a follow-up to that. Do you feel like it
would be in our best interest to invest more in this specific
space to help mitigate some of the [inaudible].
Ms. Cooper. I would say this is, again, this is a whole-of-
government space, so I think we have to be looking at not just
the Defense Department but at our civilian agency counterparts
and their investments in this space.
And then it's also about the private sector. We have to
partner with the private sector, we have to share information
with the private sector, and we also have to encourage the
private sector to make themselves more resilient. That's also
why today we are reaching out to the private sector and
encouraging U.S. and international companies to not rely on
Russian software providers, Russian IT [information technology]
companies, because this can lead to a critical vulnerability.
Mrs. Bice. We may want to add China to that, as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. We have four people left
and 10 minutes. The math doesn't quite add up, but if those
four people move through quickly, we hopefully will be able to
get to all four. But we do have to stop at 1:20.
With that announcement, Mr. Panetta is recognized.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
that. And thanks to our witnesses for being here and, of
course, your service.
Look, in November of 2020, I got to say I and a number of
other of my colleagues were absolutely disappointed by the
withdrawal of the United States from the Open Skies Treaty,
which, basically, we saw the consequences of Russia
withdrawing, as well. I think some of the best examples of the
benefits of the Open Skies Treaty were in 2014 when we were
able to confirm the deployment of thousands of troops, Russian
troops, near the Ukrainian border, as well as in 2018 when we
conducted a flight following the unprovoked Russian attack of
Ukrainian vessels in the Kerch Strait.
I do believe that the treaty is worth it based not only on
the images but to the value that our allies have in it,
especially our Eastern European partners and friends. That's
why I introduced the Open Skies Stability Act to let our allies
know that we in Congress felt that way about the Open Skies
Treaty and the value that it brings to the stability and peace,
especially in Europe.
My question to you is what do you feel the future is of the
Open Skies Treaty for the remaining 32 members, and does it
serve a purpose without the participation of the United States
and Russia?
Ms. Cooper. I will attempt to answer this quickly,
Congressman, given the time, but this is actually a very
complex subject. And since it was actually my office that led
the charge on that flight that you mentioned over Ukraine after
the Kerch Strait attack, this is near and dear to my heart.
What I will say to you is that, first of all, we have been
very open to consultations with allies and partners on the
range of conventional arms control requirements and concerns,
to include the Open Skies Treaty, and we have, the Biden
administration has reached out to allies to open this dialogue
as the administration considers the way forward on all arms
control agreements. So I think that's very important to note,
and I think that's something that allies have appreciated.
I will say, though, that, from an intelligence value, the
Open Skies Treaty does have very limited intelligence value for
the United States. And even in that instance that I was very
proud of actually where we had that imagery following the Kerch
Strait attack, we haven't necessarily been able to capitalize
on the benefits of those opportunities.
So at this point, you know, we are in consultation with
allies. We know that Russia values flying over the U.S.
homeland as part of the treaty, and I certainly can't speak to
whether Russia would actually come back into compliance, which
is really the core issue here. Russia has given us no
indication that it would be willing to come back into
compliance.
Mr. Panetta. General Wolters.
General Wolters. Congressman, I concur with Laura Cooper's
comments on the consultation with allies, and I've received the
same reflections. Thank you.
Mr. Panetta. Fair enough. Knowing that, I yield the
remainder of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Franklin is recognized.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses here this morning. You covered a lot of ground on the
UNCLASS [unclassified] level, and I do have some things I want
to dive into deeper.
But just quickly for General Wolters, we haven't discussed
sealift, strategic sealift. It's often an area that gets
overlooked. But could you talk a little bit about the role
strategic sealift plays in our efforts to deter Russia, an
assessment of our capabilities, and do we have the tools
necessary for you to implement strategy in EUCOM AOR.
General Wolters. We do, Congressman. But it relies on
advanced warning, and, as you know, our TRANSCOM [United States
Transportation Command] commander works these issues every
second of the day. We were able to test sealift to a certain
degree with Defender-Europe 20. We didn't get the full,
complete test.
We certainly have some challenges. But when we have good
indications and warnings, and we can move our operations
farther and farther to the left of supply, we can typically
wind up putting ourselves in the position to where we can put
resources where they need to be to be effective. And right now,
for what is required on the European continent, we can be
effective.
General Wolters. Very good. Thank you General. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, very,
very good witnesses. Thank you for the testimony. Ms. Cooper,
thank you. Particularly delighted to see the sanctions coming
at a very, very important moment having to do with Ukraine and
other things that Russia up to now, let alone what they've been
doing in the past, a very good message.
My recollection is that every year or every other year the
Russians do an exercise in the western part of their country,
north one year, south the next year. This is the south year?
General Wolters. It is, Congressman.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. I want to--I don't expect an answer
now, but I want in detail because of the work that we need to
do in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act], the
posture in Europe with regard to EDI and the specific MILCON
[military construction] and other issues. Some $1.7 billion was
removed last year and the year before in that area. Do we
replace it or not? It's a long answer, and I'll take it in--
yes, General.
General Wolters. Thirty-six projects at $1.6 billion, and
we're working very, very hard to execute 34 of the 36, but,
obviously, it depends on future budget. We're on course to go
that direction.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. We need the details.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 99.]
Mr. Garamendi. Also, President Trump said he was going to
move a whole lot of things out of Europe and into Europe and
other places. Has that been reversed? If so, what do we do and
where does the future go? Ms. Cooper.
Ms. Cooper. Thank you very much, Congressman. I will just
say that, on posture in general, there is the global posture
review that is kicking off right now in the Pentagon. And so we
will be studying all of these issues, global posture, and this
summer we will have the Biden administration's conclusions. But
with respect specifically to Europe, President Biden did lift
the troop cap. In Germany, he announced that at the Munich
Security Conference. And then we were talking earlier today
about the 500 additional forces that Secretary Austin just
announced for Germany.
Mr. Garamendi. I understand there are many other things
also in play, so your timing doesn't quite work out with our
timing. So let's coordinate our timing with regard to these
issues.
Finally, the issue of NATO, it appears as though there is a
sea change from disrespecting NATO to respecting NATO and
working with NATO; is that correct?
Ms. Cooper. The Biden administration has been very clear
that NATO and alliances are central to its policy. And I think
our allies have responded very appreciatively.
Mr. Garamendi. General, would you like to comment?
General Wolters. Congressman, I've seen no breakdown in
trust of our NATO nations with the United States.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Wilson is recognized.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, General Wolters,
it's an honor to be with you, and I particularly appreciate it.
I'm the grateful son of a Flying Tiger who served in India and
China during World War II, and I know the difference you can
make on behalf of promoting freedom and liberty.
Additionally, I'm very grateful that I had led a
delegation, General, to Poland in 2017. I was there with,
gratefully, with Congressman Garamendi. And in Poland visiting
with our personnel in Operation Atlantic Resolve, it's been so
inspiring. And that has a personal connection, too. My
daughter-in-law, Jennifer Miskowicz, her heritage is Krakow,
Poland. And so to see us working together with our Polish
allies, how important it is.
And what is the most recent progress that has been made
with the joint declaration that we have with our headquarters
and possibly to have a headquarters unit in Poland?
General Wolters. Congressman, all those efforts with the
enhanced defense cooperation agreement with Poland are in work.
We've received tremendous contributions from Poland with
respect to working some of our construction projects, and we're
very excited about the status of the V Corps command post
coming in and Poland's willingness to work on their
infrastructure to receive our rotational forces and the
improvements that they've made on their ranges.
So we are traversing in a very good direction with Poland.
Mr. Wilson. Well, it's so inspiring to be there and visit
with our Polish allies.
For Secretary Cooper, I'm so pleased with the Biden
administration indicating a clear association with our allies
of Ukraine and also Moldova. Additionally, Poland, Georgia,
working with Romania and Bulgaria. I appreciate the President's
restatement of our appreciation in all of these countries.
And with that, what can we do to be more effective in our
working with our allies of Eastern Europe?
Ms. Cooper. Congressman, I think that we are on the right
track to work with our allies, both to build their capacity to
be able to be resilient against their near threat, Russia, but
also to be interoperable with U.S. forces and with NATO.
So I feel like we have the right mix of train-and-equip
programs. We also need to be vocal in our support of them.
Right now, with the pressure the Ukraine is facing, Ukraine has
really appreciated not just the fact that we're providing them
with tremendous high-quality equipment and high-quality
training but the fact that we're publicly vocal in our support
of their sovereignty.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you for your efforts. And it's been
inspiring to visit Novo Selo, the joint NATO Bulgarian-American
base. It's exciting to see our allies working together. Thank
you for your service. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. We are a couple of minutes over
time here, and we've got to get over for the classified
briefing. So I just want to close with one quick thing, and
that is I really want to thank the staff. You know, we've made
a couple of jokes about the technological issues here. It's not
easy, and the staff has really made this work in a way that has
been enormously helpful. So I really appreciate the
technological wizards who have enabled us to continue to do the
hybrid hearings the way we've done them and appreciate you
sitting through all that. And we'll give you just a brief
little break before we reconvene at 2:00 in the CVC.
With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:21 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 15, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 15, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 15, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Ms. Cooper. DOD continues to work with its partners within the U.S.
Government to refine and improve the process for quickly attributing
foreign malign cyber activities against the United States, including
providing declassified evidence to support our attribution when that
can be done without compromising intelligence sources and methods.
[See page 15.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Ms. Cooper. We seek cooperation with Turkey on common priorities,
including on countering Russian ambitions in the Black Sea region. We
have a strong interest in keeping Turkey aligned with the transatlantic
alliance on such critical issues. In the Black Sea, Turkey attempts to
balance several competing interests. These include Turkey's regional
ambitions, its NATO commitments, its desire to accommodate Russia in
some cases and to counter Russia's growing military posture in other
cases, and its long-term interest in promoting multilateral cooperation
with other Black Sea states, including several NATO Allies and Turkey's
growing bilateral cooperation with Ukraine. U.S. access, basing, and
overflight in Turkey, including at Incirlik Air Base, remain important
for supporting emergent U.S., NATO, and Coalition requirements and
missions in the region, including the Bomber Task Force mission in
Europe and the Black Sea region. On February 9, U.S. and Turkish forces
conducted a bilateral joint maritime and air exercises in the Black
Sea. The uptick in joint military efforts is a bright spot
demonstrating our continued bilateral cooperation and the maintenance
of our critical military-to-military relationship.   [See page 19.]
General Wolters. Turkey remains a strategic U.S. Ally, critical to
NATO and U.S. interests in Europe, Eurasia, North Africa, and the
Middle East. Turkey possesses the Alliance's second largest military
and contributes to NATO missions in Afghanistan, Iraq, Kosovo, and the
Mediterranean Sea. Turkey retains a pivotal role in countering Russia,
and despite limited but high profile dealings, the two are competitors
in multiple regions, whose relationship remains transactional. As
reaffirmed by Turkey's President Erdogan in April 2021, Turkey is
committed to impartially enforcing the 1936 Montreux Convention, which
enshrined Turkey's control of maritime traffic through the Dardanelles,
Bosporus, and Sea of Marmara.   [See page 19.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ
General Wolters. We work every day to build a cooperative and
cohesive approach so our mutual efforts result in increased
transparency and alignment. NATO plays an important role in creating a
unified framework to guide Allied force development programs and
national investments. The European Deterrence Initiative enables EUCOM
to meet U.S. national security requirements in concert with our Allies
and Partners. We also particularly appreciate Congress's support to
theater Security Cooperation programs that support allied and partner
efforts to achieve critical capabilities, such as Integrated Air and
Missile Defense in the Baltic region.   [See page 33.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI
General Wolters. Thirty-six (36) European Deterrence Initiative
military construction projects were deferred. Restoring key projects,
including strategic logistics storage, airfield upgrades, and staging,
enhances our speed and posture to execute in crisis. We seek
restoration for 15 projects. Eight projects ($143M) are ready to
proceed within 3-6 months upon funding restoration. Two projects ($93M)
continue with planning & design activities and will be ready in FY22.
Five projects ($115M) in Norway and Slovakia are pending Defense
Cooperation Agency resolution and are also expected in FY22. The
remaining 21 of the original 36 projects are either being funded
through reprograming, host nations, or are no longer required. The
highest priority projects for restoration of funds are Airfield
Upgrades to support P-8A aircraft at Sigonella Naval Air Station
($23M), Deployable Air Base System-Facilities, Equipment, Vehicles
Storage ($303M), and Munitions Storage/Handling Areas/Ammo holding area
($125M).   [See page 43.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 15, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. Major General Timothy C. Hanifen, U.S. Marine Corps
(Retired), wrote an article in the February 2021 edition entitled
``Revitalize Fleet Search, Rescue, and Recovery Operations.'' Is U.S.
European Command prepared for mass survivor search, rescue, and
recovery at sea?
General Wolters. Yes, through our maritime component Naval Forces
Europe (NAVEUR), we are capable of responding to mass casualties at sea
and we are bound to render aid and rescue at sea. We empower our ships
and aircraft commanders to assist those in distress and take prompt
action to save human lives. Under the existing international structure,
we coordinate responses via the regional Maritime Search and Rescue
Coordination Center, leveraging available NATO, European Union, and
Partner Nation military and Coast Guard units to provide assistance.
Mr. Scott. If the U.S. Coast Guard decided to equip their cutters
with ASW capability, would that be welcomed by EUCOM?
General Wolters. We welcome ASW capability on any platform in our
theater. ASW capability enhances our operational readiness and assures
our Allies and Partners. USEUCOM periodically incorporates Coast Guard
vessels throughout Europe, and would leverage every capability those
ships bring into theater.
Mr. Scott. What would the advantages be to EUCOM if the United
States paired the Navy's P-8s with the Air Force's B-1s to wage long-
range anti-submarine and surface warfare strikes?
General Wolters. USEUCOM benefits from the joint efforts by the
Services when able to conduct multi-domain tactical operations. We
defer to the Services to develop tactics, techniques, and procedures
and any option to improve our speed and ability to deter at range in
the maritime domain would add value in generating peace.
Mr. Scott. How is EUCOM addressing the emerging threat of drones
and drone swarming tactics?
General Wolters. Service components deploy Counter-small Unmanned
Aircraft Systems in the Area of Responsibility at select locations
coordinated with host nations. We engage host nations to obtain
appropriate permissions and coordinate to protect host nation and U.S.
assets and personnel. Additionally, USEUCOM provides updates on
information, intelligence, tactics, techniques, and procedures to the
Joint Staff Joint Counter-Unmanned Aircraft System Office Working
Group.
Mr. Scott. What are EUCOM's capabilities against a drone swarm
attack? Do we currently have the ability to defeat a drone swarm attack
and ensure we do not take out our drones?
General Wolters. USEUCOM deploys Counter small-Unmanned Aircraft
Systems across the Area of Responsibility to detect, track, and defeat
small Unmanned Aircraft Systems. We continue enhancing capabilities
with host nations to defeat drone swarm attacks. USEUCOM works with
country teams, Offices of Defense Cooperation and Embassy teams to
refine host nation authorization for enhanced protections against small
Unmanned Aircraft Systems threats.
Mr. Scott. What is EUCOM working on to defeat adversary drones,
singles and swarms, today and in the future?
General Wolters. The USEUCOM team is engaged with the Joint
Counter-small Unmanned Aircraft System Office (JCO) as the Executive
Agent for Counter Small Unmanned Aircraft System on technology updates,
training, and industry advancements to detect, defend and defeat small
Unmanned Aircraft Systems. Additionally, we continue to engage our host
nations to coordinate authorizations through spectrum management and
local laws and regulations.
Mr. Scott. What are the factors limiting your ability to deploy
counter-UAS systems in EUCOM?
General Wolters. USEUCOM deploys Counter small-Unmanned Aircraft
Systems across the Area of Responsibility to detect, track, and defeat
small Unmanned Aircraft Systems. We continue enhancing capabilities
with host nations to defeat small Unmanned Aircraft Systems. We work
with country teams, Offices of Defense Cooperation and Embassy teams to
coordinate spectrum management authorizations and refine host nation
authorizations to better align and enhance protections against small
Unmanned Aircraft Systems threats.
Mr. Scott. General Wolters, you've noted before that ISR is
critical to both monitor and deter Russian activity within your AOR.
How do you assess your current and future ISR needs?
General Wolters. USEUCOM's ISR allocation executes National Defense
Strategy priority missions to deter and compete below the threshold of
armed conflict with moderate risk. We request continued support for
funding and modernization of airborne and space-based ISR capabilities
and capacity. Specific regions and capabilities can be amplified in a
classified venue.
Mr. Scott. What do you need from Congress to ensure you have the
ISR resources you need to succeed in your mission?
General Wolters. USEUCOM benefits with continued support for
funding and modernization of airborne and space-based ISR capabilities
and capacity. Sufficient allocation of ISR to meet validated
requirements supports unambiguous indications and warnings against
adversary activity, provides critical force protection and threat
warning to USEUCOM operations, activities, investments, and supports
overall mission command. Robust policies and technology to support
imagery and automated data sharing between the U.S. and Allies and
Partners supports NATO convergence and interoperability.
Mr. Scott. In 2020, Congress responded to the combatant commanders'
call for more ISR resources by appropriating $250M for the ISR transfer
fund, which funded additional ISR activities in the EUCOM AOR. How did
you leverage these additional resources in 2020? For 2021, the Pentagon
did not request any funds for the ISR transfer fund and Congress did
not appropriate any additional funds. How will the lack of ISR transfer
funds in 2021 impact your mission?
General Wolters. We leveraged 2020 funds to enhance near-term
tactical and operational level theater ISR capabilities and modernize
unmanned systems with greater speed than the PBR cycle affords. These
efforts improve indication and warning intelligence and support our
deterrence efforts. Success in 21st century warfare demands that we
embrace competition and its activities below the threshold of armed
conflict. In order to win in competition, we must be laser focused in
maximizing investments in indications and warning, feedback and command
and control capabilities.
Mr. Scott. Do you think ABMS and Joint All Domain Command and
Control will have enough operational capability to fill the ISR gaps
that JSTARS will not be able to fulfill once it is parked?
General Wolters. In this era of global power competition, we
continue to adapt to changes in the operational environment to maintain
a combat-credible force. Under Joint Staff coordination, Joint all-
domain command and control connects distributed sensors, shooters, and
data from and in all domains, to all forces, enabling distributed
mission command at the speed and scale 21st century warfare demands.
USEUCOM joint and allied warfighters continue to train and demonstrate
the Advanced Battle Management System's ability to converge assets from
all domains across the Euro-Atlantic region.
Mr. Scott. I am a strong supporter of the National Guard's State
Partnership Program. My home State of Georgia is partnered with the
country of Georgia in your AOR. Can you talk about the value added by
the Georgia National Guard to this partnership with the country of
Georgia?
General Wolters. Georgia is a friend and key strategic partner of
the U.S., strengthened by the Georgia National Guard's partnership,
over 25 years strong. Years of deploying together side-by-side in Iraq
and Afghanistan have only strengthened our mutual trust and respect.
The Guard is instrumental in strengthening Georgia's capacity to train
and operate with our Allies and Partners in exercises such as our Noble
Partner and Allied spirit as well as in key areas like explosive
ordnance disposal, cyber-security, and professional development. Future
partnership activities will continue supporting bilateral efforts
focused on enabling Georgia to effectively defend its territory, resist
malign Russian influence, build interoperability with NATO forces, and
institute defense reforms which further its Euro-Atlantic integration.
Mr. Scott. Do NATO members have significant security interests in
the Taiwan Strait?
General Wolters. Each NATO member state has its own relationship
with China, with a variety of different concerns and interests, to
include the status of Taiwan. For U.S. policy, I defer to the
Department of State and the USINDOPACOM Commander.
Mr. Scott. Are you satisfied with the level of cooperation between
the United States and the other 29 NATO countries to deter Communist
Chinese aggression against Taiwan? If not, what more could our NATO
allies do to deter Communist Chinese aggression against Taiwan?
General Wolters. NATO is adopting a global approach and developing
closer relations with its four Asia-Pacific partners, namely Australia,
Japan, the Republic of Korea, and New Zealand. In December 2020, the
four Asia-Pacific partners participated for the first time in a NATO
Foreign Ministerial Meeting, discussing the shift in the global balance
of power and the rise of China. Political dialogue enhances mutual
situation awareness on security developments in the Euro-Atlantic and
Asia-Pacific regions. In today's complex security environment,
relations with like-minded partners across the globe are increasingly
important to address cross-cutting security issues and global
challenges, as well as to defend the rules-based international order.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON
Mr. Moulton. While Russia is the most immediate threat in USEUCOM,
we cannot take our eye off PRC influence in the region. General Wolters
and Ms. Cooper, you both referred in your testimony to PRC efforts to
expand access to European infrastructure, including through expanding
5G networks, and growing awareness about the risks of PRC state-backed
firms and investment. Where are we still losing ground to China in
Europe, or not getting that message of risk across? What additional
tools or efforts does the Department need to properly address this
threat in Europe?
Ms. Cooper. The Department regularly engages its allies and
partners across Europe on the importance of securing sensitive supply
chains, infrastructure, and technologies from undue influence by malign
actors, which is critical for our collective security. We have seen
progress among our European allies and partners, including strengthened
laws and processes for foreign investment reviews, Memorandums of
Understanding on 5G security, and other activities. The Department is
eager to work with our European allies and partners to accelerate
innovation and support the competitiveness of alternative suppliers. In
addition, the Department supports focusing controls and restrictions on
entities that further People's Republic of China (PRC)'s Military-Civil
Fusion strategy and encourages publicly sharing information about these
PRC entities with our European allies and partners.
Mr. Moulton. This administration has made it clear that rebuilding
international partnerships is a top priority, and this emphasis clearly
aligns with the Future of Defense Task Force recommendations I made
last year. In Europe, we have the opportunity to build common ethical
and responsible standards for tech use with like-minded partners. Ms.
Cooper, what steps are we taking right now to build those partnerships
and common standards, and what steps should we take going forward to
make progress on this topic?
Ms. Cooper. The United States and its European allies and partners
are making strides to build common ethical and responsible standards
for technology use. In February 2021, NATO Defense Ministers endorsed
NATO's Coherent Implementation Strategy on Emerging and Disruptive
Technologies, which promotes the development of new technologies to
maintain our technological edge within the confines of robust
principles of responsible use. This is a first step in building common
standards, and we will continue to work with our individual allies and
partners as well as through multinational institutions like NATO to
ensure that new technologies are developed and used in a manner
consistent with our shared values.
Mr. Moulton. Both the Kremlin and Beijing have subjected NATO
allies to regular cyber attacks in an effort to undermine our alliance,
and NATO's response thus far has clearly been insufficient to deter
further malicious cyber activity. What steps do we need to take to
modernize NATO in order to sufficiently address this threat to
infrastructure, operations, IP, and information access and to ensure
the relevance of the alliance in a contemporary security environment?
Ms. Cooper. NATO recognizes that cyber threats to the Alliance are
becoming more frequent and complex, disruptive, and coercive and that
the Alliance must continue to adapt to the evolving cyber threat
landscape. NATO has taken steps in recent years to recognize cyberspace
as a domain of operations and to integrate cyber effects, provided
voluntarily by allies, into Alliance operations and missions. Through
the Cyber Defense Pledge, NATO Allies undertook to invest in better
national cyber defenses, which will enhance deterrence through denial.
In the recent case of the SolarWinds public attribution, NATO issued a
statement of support for the United States in attributing this
malicious cyber activity in order to promote accountability for those
who carry out such actions. NATO is also in the process of updating its
governance and cybersecurity procedures through a process known as
``Cyber Adaptation'' to focus on cybersecurity responsibility and
accountability. Finally, NATO is in the process of updating its 2014
Enhanced Cyber Defense Policy to enable the Alliance to do more
collectively to address malicious cyber activities.
Mr. Moulton. While Russia is the most immediate threat in USEUCOM,
we cannot take our eye off PRC influence in the region. General Wolters
and Ms. Cooper, you both referred in your testimony to PRC efforts to
expand access to European infrastructure, including through expanding
5G networks, and growing awareness about the risks of PRC state-backed
firms and investment. Where are we still losing ground to China in
Europe, or not getting that message of risk across? What additional
tools or efforts does the Department need to properly address this
threat in Europe?
General Wolters. USEUCOM highlights our shared values, interests,
and equitable business practices with our Allies and Partners and
distinguish the U.S. as a partner of choice. European nations are
becoming increasingly aware of, and concerned about, the risks
associated with Chinese capital investments from the People's Republic
of China (PRC). We must hold the PRC accountable for its predatory and
unfair practices and make sure that our technologies are not
facilitating the PRC's military buildup or human rights abuses. A
whole-of-government, whole-of-nation, whole-of-alliance approach to
addressing a free and open globe are critical to sustaining peace in
the Euro-Atlantic.
Mr. Moulton. I recently published an op-ed with Dr. Tammy Schultz
in Time about the vulnerability of our troops to online disinformation,
much of which stems from Russia, and its impacts on mission readiness,
in particular the high rate of troops declining the COVID-19 vaccine.
General Wolters, what are you doing to ensure that troops in USEUCOM
are able to protect themselves from malicious disinformation, both in
their ability to recognize information campaigns and ensuring personal
discipline in what information they share online?
General Wolters. USEUCOM Operations Security (OPSEC) program and
annual training requirements provide cyber training and threat
awareness and response training to enable members to protect themselves
from potential adversaries and disinformation. USEUCOM, its components,
and commanders at all levels use installation websites, direct email
notification, commander led town-halls, social media engagements, and
unit-led discussions to relay truthful COVID-19 information that is in
line with both CDC and Department of Defense guidance. This ensures our
service members and families have access to factual, evidence based
scientific information to make informed decisions.
Mr. Moulton. Both the Kremlin and Beijing have subjected NATO
allies to regular cyber attacks in an effort to undermine our alliance,
and NATO's response thus far has clearly been insufficient to deter
further malicious cyber activity. What steps do we need to take to
modernize NATO in order to sufficiently address this threat to
infrastructure, operations, IP, and information access and to ensure
the relevance of the alliance in a contemporary security environment?
General Wolters. NATO continues to adapt to the evolving cyber
threat landscape. In 2020, NATO released the Concept for the Deterrence
and Defense of the Euro-Atlantic Area. To support this effort, NATO
bolstered deterrence efforts in cyberspace by establishing a cyberspace
operations center at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe in
Mons, Belgium. Integrating cyber and information effects in joint U.S.-
NATO exercises enhances transparency and alignment and advances
security cooperation. These combined efforts contribute to the
Alliance's ability to address malicious cyber activity in a 21st
century security environment.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. McCLAIN
Mrs. McClain. ISIS fighters are being repatriated to their home
countries in Europe from the Middle East. In your view, should our
European allies take back these ISIS fighters and their families? If
so, what steps is the administration taking in working with our
European allies to ensure these fighters will not commit acts of
violence or radicalize others in the future?
Ms. Cooper. Repatriating ISIS fighters and their associated family
members is an important long-term solution to ensure the enduring
defeat of ISIS. The Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) shoulder the
responsibility of the international community by detaining
approximately 10,000 ISIS fighters, including approximately 2,000 third
country nationals (neither Syrian nor Iraqi) at great cost to its
economy and local security. The United States maintains that countries
of origin should repatriate their citizens from northeast Syria,
prosecute the foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), as appropriate, and
rehabilitate and reintegrate their associated family members. The
continued presence of ISIS fighters in northeast Syria imperils
military gains achieved by the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS working
by, with, and through the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). Off the
battlefield, the SDF shoulders the responsibility of the international
community by detaining approximately 10,000 ISIS fighters, including
approximately 2,000 third country nationals (neither Syrian nor Iraqi).
DOD is also concerned about displaced persons--especially juveniles--
living in humanitarian camps such as al-Hol, which also place undue
burden on our local Syrian partners. Most camp residents are children
and some may be particularly susceptible to radicalization. In Syria,
the Department of State and U.S. Agency for International Development
provides humanitarian assistance, including some education and
psychosocial support, to the residents of these camps. The Department
of State is also working with European allies, by providing logistical
support on repatriations when appropriate, along with improving their
capabilities to rehabilitate and reintegrate individuals back into
their local communities, and collaborates with Coalition partners to
confront ISIS messaging globally via the Coalition's Communications
Working Group.
Mrs. McClain. As we begin to reexamine our involvement in the
Middle East, what steps are we taking to ensure that young men and
women are not radicalized in Europe and an ISIS 2.0 does not emerge to
fill any power vacuums that may be created?
Ms. Cooper. ISIS seeks to exploit local grievances, lack of
stabilization support, and security gaps to reconstitute and recruit in
territory it formerly held, as well as to execute and inspire attacks
outside the Middle East. To prevent the conditions for ISIS'
resurgence, the United States and Coalition partners must continue
stabilization efforts in areas liberated from ISIS. In concert with
Coalition partners, the Department of State directed programming to
further community resiliency, social cohesion, and reintegration for
liberated areas in Iraq and Syria. In Europe, the Department of State
leads efforts to encourage governments to implement policies that build
resilience to terrorist narratives, enhance the capacity of youth to
think critically, and challenge the influence of terrorist ideologies.
Because communication is now globalized, stabilization efforts in the
Middle East will help prevent radicalization elsewhere, including in
Europe.
Mrs. McClain. ISIS fighters are being repatriated to their home
countries in Europe from the Middle East. In your view, should our
European allies take back these ISIS fighters and their families? If
so, what steps is the administration taking in working with our
European allies to ensure these fighters will not commit acts of
violence or radicalize others in the future?
General Wolters. The Department of State is more suited to discuss
specifics on the Administration's actions to prevent radicalization and
violence in countries who repatriate ISIS fighters and their families.
Mrs. McClain. As we begin to reexamine our involvement in the
Middle East, what steps are we taking to ensure that young men and
women are not radicalized in Europe and an ISIS 2.0 does not emerge to
fill any power vacuums that may be created?
General Wolters. The Department of State is more suited to discuss
steps the Administration is taking to prevent radicalization.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. JACKSON
Dr. Jackson. Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Italy, the
Netherlands, Norway, Romania, Spain, the United Kingdom, and of course
the United States participate in the Euro-NATO Joint Jet Pilot Training
Program. This is the world's only internationally manned and managed
flying training program, and it was founded with the specific goal of
producing combat pilots for the NATO alliance.
General Wolters, could you speak to the value that these
international partnerships, like the one I just described at Sheppard
Air Force Base, provide and then elaborate how these partnerships
improve our ability to combat malign Russian aggression?
General Wolters. The Euro-NATO Joint Jet Pilot Training Program
(ENJJTP) is a long term success story, soon celebrating the 40th
anniversary of its official opening which trains over 50 European
fighter pilots a year. In addition to sharing a common airframe,
sharing best practices and common understanding of employment enhances
our transparency and alignment to train and operate alongside our
Allies and Partners.
Dr. Jackson. The Future Long Range Assault Aircraft program seeks
to modernize the vertical lift fleet by delivering the most modern,
versatile, and lethal power projection platform to ensure success on
the modern battlefield.
General Wolters, can you speak to the importance of the Future Long
Range Assault Aircraft program in deterring Russian aggression in
eastern Europe and in the Arctic?
General Wolters. USEUCOM benefits from the effort the Services take
in developing versatile power projection capabilities to meet
warfighting requirements. Any option to improve our speed and ability
to deter aggression at range in the air domain would add value in
generating peace.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. What message should the U.S. give European allies that
are considering adopting Chinese 5G technology?
Ms. Cooper. 5G is transformative and will touch every aspect of our
lives, including critical infrastructure, such as transportation,
electricity distribution, healthcare, and more. DOD wants to ensure
that information and communications technology (ICT) networks around
the world remain secure, resilient, and reliable. It is important that
European allies and partners consider the risks of using equipment from
Chinese providers in 5G, undersea cables, and other strategic ICT
areas--particularly where there are risks to how U.S. and allied forces
operate. We encourage further collaboration on vendor diversity, open
networks, and transparent standards. However, the United States must
and will protect its own information and networks, including by
reassessing how it shares information with countries that allow
untrustworthy vendors on their networks.
Mr. Moore. Since the Russian violations which led to the
termination of the INF Treaty, what steps has EUCOM taken to fill the
void of U.S. small-to-medium range missile deterrence?
General Wolters. USEUCOM benefits from the effort the Services take
in developing versatile power projection capabilities to meet
warfighting requirements. Any option to improve our speed and ability
to deter aggression at range in the air domain would add value in
generating peace.
Mr. Moore. What steps have our NATO allies taken to confront
Chinese aggression and increase their cooperation to guarantee a free
and open Indo-Pacific?
General Wolters. NATO is adopting a global approach and developing
closer relations with its four Asia-Pacific partners, namely Australia,
Japan, the Republic of Korea, and New Zealand. In December 2020, the
four Asia-Pacific partners participated for the first time in a NATO
Foreign Ministerial Meeting, discussing the shift in the global balance
of power and the rise of China. Political dialogue enhances mutual
situation awareness on security developments in the Euro-Atlantic and
Asia-Pacific regions. In today's complex security environment,
relations with like-minded partners across the globe are increasingly
important to address cross-cutting security issues and global
challenges, as well as to defend the rules-based international order.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. It is clear that the rising threat of white nationalism
and far right extremism is not just a threat here in the United States
but also overseas in Europe. What is your assessment of these threats
to both the security of the United States and Europe, and how are we
coordinating with our allies in addressing these threats? How can we
leverage our partnerships with European allies to share lessons learned
to identify and address these threats within both European and American
forces?
Ms. Cooper. Extremist violence/terrorism is not a new phenomenon in
Europe and the United States, but increasing incidents are a cause for
concern. Extremist movements have a long history, but now they have
additional tools at their disposal--namely social media and the ability
to propagate disinformation at a significant rate. The United States
works very closely with European allies and partners to counter
disinformation on a daily basis and regularly shares best practices via
NATO and bilateral mechanisms. The United States also works to lead by
example in addressing extremism within our own ranks, as evidenced by
the Secretary of Defense directing a ``stand-down'' day to ensure a
concerted effort to educate the military and civilian workforce about
the scope of this problem and to develop sustainable ways to eliminate
the corrosive effects that extremist ideology and conduct have on the
workforce. During this ``stand-down,'' with the goal of recognizing and
addressing extremism now and in the future, the Department reviewed
issues such as the importance of our oath of office; identification of
impermissible behaviors; and procedures for reporting suspected, or
actual, extremist behaviors. Several European allies and partners
sought information about curriculum used, and we will continue
willingly to share best practices to encourage continued attention to
this issue.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MORELLE
Mr. Morelle. Ms. Cooper, how are the policies and budget priorities
of the Department of Defense (DOD) shifting to support the Biden
Administration's increased focus of deterrence against Russia? What
does DOD intend to do differently as part of this policy, if anything?
Ms. Cooper. The United States has sought to deter Russian
aggression through the credible demonstration of strength, in close
coordination with NATO Allies and partners. The Department advances
this aim through the effective use of military forces to strengthen our
deterrence and defensive posturing and protect our core interests by
building resilience and reducing vulnerability--including among Allies
and partners. We will continue these efforts along with our Allies and
partners to counter Russia's aggressive actions. The Department will
leverage existing capabilities, build new ones where required, and
employ them in new and networked ways--alongside our Allies and
partners--to help ensure that Russia knows the costs and risks of
aggression remain far greater than any conceivable benefit. The
Department will pursue the right mix of technology, operational
concepts, and capabilities to create advantages for ourselves and
dilemmas for Russian planners.
Mr. Morelle. General Wolters, can you expand on the impact of
COVID-19 on competition with Russia and China in the European Command
area of operations, and any measures you believe would better allow us
to compete given the pandemic?
General Wolters. COVID-19 has presented challenges for nations
across the globe, including those in Europe, and our deepest
condolences are offered to all those impacted by this pandemic. In
USEUCOM, we continue working diligently alongside Allies and Partners
to ensure this health crisis does not become a security crisis. Thus
far, our collective team has been successful, and we are buoyed through
recent developments in vaccine production and distribution across the
USEUCOM Area of Responsibility.
