[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-40]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES HEARING

ON

AIR FORCE PROJECTION FORCES

AVIATION PROGRAMS AND CAPABILITIES

RELATED TO THE FISCAL YEAR 2022 PRESIDENT'S BUDGET REQUEST

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 8, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-342                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland           TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine, Vice Chair   JIM BANKS, Indiana
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama

Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.................     1
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........     3

WITNESSES

Hinote, Lt Gen S. Clinton, USAF, Deputy Chief of Staff for
Strategy, Integration and Requirements, Department of the Air
Force; Darlene Costello, Acting Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Department of
the Air Force; and Lt Gen David S. Nahom, USAF, Deputy Chief of
Staff for Plans and Programs, Department of the Air Force......     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Costello, Darlene, joint with Lt Gen David S. Nahom and Lt
Gen S. Clinton Hinote......................................    33
Courtney, Hon. Joe...........................................    29
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Golden...................................................    67
Mr. Norcross.................................................    67

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
AIR FORCE PROJECTION FORCES AVIATION PROGRAMS

AND CAPABILITIES RELATED TO THE FISCAL YEAR 2022 PRESIDENT'S BUDGET
REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, June 8, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Joe Courtney (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION
FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Good morning, everyone. This morning, the
Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee meets to hear
testimony on the Department of the Air Force fiscal year 2022
budget request.
Before us today to discuss that request are three witnesses
who are no strangers to our subcommittee, and we welcome you
all back this morning: Acting Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force for Acquisition, Ms. Darlene Costello; Deputy Chief of
Staff for Plans and Programs, Lieutenant General David Nahom;
and Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategy, Integration, and
Requirements, Lieutenant General Hinote. Thank you all again
for being with us.
The normal housekeeping that we have heard ad nauseam. I am
going to make a brief opening statement and then yield to my
friend, Ranking Member Mr. Wittman, to weigh in, and then we
will have the witnesses begin with their statements.
We have members of the subcommittee participating remotely
today. Members participating remotely are reminded to keep
themselves on mute until they are recognized to speak. In
addition, remote members are reminded that once they do start
speaking, there is a slight delay in the camera feed switching
its focus to you. As a result, please include a brief preamble
of some kind before you start into your questions to the
witnesses.
So we will get started now with my opening statement.
The bombers, tankers, and tactical airlifters under our
subcommittee oversight form the backbone of our ability to
project force and support operations around the world. With
increasing age and readiness challenges, the current airlift
fleet is already strained in meeting key warfighting
requirements.
Like fiscal year 2021, the Department of Air Force's budget
request for 2022 proposes force structure cuts across these
critical capabilities, retiring dozens of aircraft over the
next 5 years, and asks Congress to redirect a large share of
the recouped money towards modernization and emerging
technologies.
The question for our subcommittee as we begin our work on
the next NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] is whether
this budget request properly balances investment in the future
with the assumed risk of strained capacity today.
Important to note at the outset, this budget does bolster
investment in future bomber forces with increases in funding
for the B-21, readying Ellsworth Air Force Base to host the
first operational B-21s, and the modernization of the B-52
legacy bomber with new engines, communication systems, and
radars. Almost all of these efforts in the past have had strong
congressional support, and I expect that trend to continue.
The budget also continues to procure 14 new KC-46 tankers
in 2021, while retiring 32 legacy tankers. At the same time,
the Air Force plans to continue accepting new KC-46s for
limited operations despite the six Category 1 deficiencies on
the aircraft. We--I think all of us in this committee, who know
this issue well--expect consistent and transparent follow-up
from the Air Force to ensure that the platform that is being
delivered to our airmen is safe, [effective], and reliable.
As the witnesses know well, this subcommittee was very
engaged and active in last year's NDAA in the process of
addressing the deficiencies. In fact, just a few months ago,
myself and a dozen or so members had the opportunity to fly in
a KC-46 and utilize the Remote Vision System firsthand. That
visit reaffirmed to all of us that there still is a fundamental
problem with the original RVS design that must be fixed to make
this system fully operational.
The good news is, is that a real hardware solution has been
agreed to with the manufacturer. Now the task ahead for
Congress and the Air Force is to safely and expeditiously
execute that solution.
To that end, the budget asks this committee to authorize a
balancing act, including retirement of fully functional tankers
in exchange for the KC-46. I look forward to hearing from the
witnesses what level of risk this plan will create for the
[fleet] and its crews.
In addition, I know a number of members are concerned that
the Air Force's plan for sustaining the tactical airlift
capabilities of our Air National Guard. In the past, this
committee has pursued a two-pronged approach on this important
issue. First, directing congressional-directed investment in
modernization like upgraded avionics, safety-enhancing
propellers, and high-performance engines. And second, pursuing
congressionally directed procurement of new C-130Js.
I say ``congressionally directed'' because it has been
Congress, and in many cases this subcommittee, who has led
these efforts. The absence of upgrades in the proposed budget,
frankly, is confounding to me, particularly the propeller
enhancement, which, in my opinion, is all about safety. I would
note that this is an issue which has always had strong
bipartisan support.
Lastly, the B-52 investments proposed this year are mainly
in the Commercial Engine Replacement Program, known as CERP,
due to be awarded this year. The CERP supports nuclear and
conventional operations by replacing the current aging TF33-
Pratt & Whitney-103 engine on the B-52H aircraft.
As I stated earlier, you know, overall, I think there has
been broad consensus in the need to replace the existing
engine. However, I am particularly concerned that a lack of
adequate guardrails has resulted in a requested cost increase
in CERP to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars in just
1 year. If this reengining program was a regular program at
this point, that spike would clearly be approaching a Nunn-
McCurdy breach, which I think should be a serious concern to
every member on this subcommittee. And again, I am sure we will
be focusing on this issue today and certainly in the lead-up to
our mark.
Again, this covers my initial opening comments. And now I
would welcome opening remarks from my friend and colleague,
Ranking Member Rob Wittman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Courtney can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
VIRGINIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Wittman. Chairman Courtney, thanks again. Thanks much
for your leadership. And, you know, we have some challenging
things before us. I appreciate your reflecting on those, and I
would like to echo some of your concerns. And again, I want to
thank our witnesses today for coming in to testify.
Let me begin by saying this: A bad contract leads to
perverse incentives. And unfortunately, I think that we are
working with a bad contract with the KC-46A tanker. Think about
this: To date, the KC-46A has had problems holding the fuel it
has, delivering fuel it provides, and in some cases has the
potential to severely damage receiving aircraft. It even has
problems being able to hold the sewage from onboard passengers.
Boeing has reported to have lost over $5 billion to date on
this seemingly simple 767 conversion effort, and it is late in
delivering a myriad of aircraft, in some cases, dating back to
aircraft ordered over 5 years ago.
The Air Force has reported that it does not anticipate
having a fully functional tanker until 2024; a fully functional
tanker until 2024. Just think about that.
I think the root cause of this increasingly troubled
aircraft is a bad contract. And I further believe that Boeing
has little incentive to correct these debilitating
deficiencies.
Boeing has naturally responded in an attempt to stop the
bleeding and is seeking additional compensation in sustainment.
It has been reported Boeing has upcharged one of our FMS
[Foreign Military Sales] partners by a factor of 15 or 1,500
percent for previously negotiated spares.
Additionally, the Air Force has been unable to substantiate
over $10 million in additional spares and has decided to forgo
ordering other critical spares for this aircraft. Again,
perverse incentives. And we all know sustainment is reliant
upon spares.
We need to change the course on this troubled contract, I
believe, and I think one of two options needs to be pursued.
The Air Force could either change the contract incentive
structure and actively manage the KC-46A development or it
could seek a new path and pursue a nondevelopmental recompete
of the tanker effort.
Without pursuing one of these paths, at this point, I am
confident that we will continue to see poor performance and an
increasingly negative impact on tanker capacity. That capacity
is going to be diminished. And as we hear from folks across the
spectrum, whether it is Air Force, whether it is the combatant
commands, TRANSCOM [U.S. Transportation Command], and others,
that tanker is that critical link for us to be able to compete
with our pacing adversaries.
Additionally, I am concerned about the significant cost
increase in the B-52 reengining program. In fiscal year 2022,
the budget request in the Air Force projected a 50 percent cost
increase in development. This effort is being pursued under the
middle-tier acquisition authority that allows the military
services to accelerate prototyping efforts. But as we are
seeing in this case, the lack of rigor and concurrency of
effort also leads to cost escalation. We can and must do
better.
On a positive note, I continue to be impressed by the
active contract management in collaboration by the Air Force
with Northrop Grumman on the B-21 contract. So there are good
things going on. This close cooperation and efficient incentive
structure leads to success in production and should
significantly improve long-term maintenance. And I am very much
looking forward to seeing the first flight of this aircraft
next year and supporting advanced production of B-21 aircraft
in our fiscal year 2022 NDAA.
To quote one of our Nation's foremost physicists, Albert
Einstein, he said this: We cannot solve our problems with the
same thinking we used when we created them.
I believe that we need to revamp our acquisition processes
to ensure desirable outcomes. We need to be aware of the perils
of fixed-price development contracts and concurrency of
development. In the end, we need to emulate the successes of
the B-21 and replicate this development and production effort
across a multitude of other acquisition efforts.
Our witnesses today have the authority to make these
desired changes, and I will look forward to their testimony.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Courtney for having this
important hearing, and I want to thank him for his leadership.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Courtney. I totally agree with you that that so far has
really been a pretty strong bright spot in terms of
acquisition. And I tip my hat to the Air Force in terms of the
way they have been handling that.
So it is my understanding that one of the witnesses is
going to sort of quarterback the opening comments, General
Hinote. So I will now turn the floor over to you. And again,
welcome to you and your colleagues for being here this morning.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN S. CLINTON HINOTE, USAF, DEPUTY CHIEF OF
STAFF FOR STRATEGY, INTEGRATION AND REQUIREMENTS, DEPARTMENT OF
THE AIR FORCE; DARLENE COSTELLO, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY AND LOGISTICS,
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE; AND LT GEN DAVID S. NAHOM, USAF,
DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR PLANS AND PROGRAMS, DEPARTMENT OF THE
AIR FORCE

General Hinote. Chairman Courtney and Ranking Member
Wittman and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for having us here today as we provide testimony on the
Department of the Air Force's 2022 budget request. And
additionally, thank you for your leadership and dedication to
the United States military and to the Department of the Air
Force's 689,000 Total Force airmen serving around the world
today. They face, and by extension we face as we support them,
a complex set of current and future security challenges that
require that we think differently and act with urgency. And I
have to agree with Ranking Member Wittman's use of the Einstein
quote, and what I hope to be able to invite you in is our new
thinking, especially regarding the future Air Force.
Our chief of staff of the Air Force, General C.Q. Brown,
has articulated what is at stake. He says: Unless we make
significant changes to the Air Force's programmed force, we
will not meet the pacing threat of China in 2030. And unless
something changes, we will not be able to accomplish the Air
Force's core missions in the future operating environment.
So one of my responsibilities on the Air Staff is to lead
the team that assesses our position vis-a-vis our competitors,
including China. And one of the most remarkable differences
between us and China is the difference in the sense of urgency
to change and modernize.
We can say definitively that China's actions show a sense
of urgency. They see a future that is very different from the
one that we would want to see, and they are moving with purpose
to realize that future. Their efforts include a massive buildup
of military power and a clear intent to use that military to
create leverage on us and on our allies and partners.
I think the members of the bipartisan Future of Defense
Task Force, on which some of you serve, put it well when they
concluded China represents the most significant economic and
national security threat to the United States over the next 20
or 30 years. As I have talked with many of you about this, I
sense a shift in our collective thinking. And even in today's
hearing, I think we sense a sense of urgency that is changing.
We are waking up to this challenge, and 2022 offers us another
opportunity to change so that our actions match that growing
sense of urgency.
Together we have done it before, and under this committee's
oversight and leadership, along with our industry partners and
innovative airmen, we have built the preeminent power
projection capability in the world today. And I am going to
discuss briefly the elements of that capability and how we
intend to keep these viable as we go into the future.
The Air Force provides the sole long-range bomber
capability for the joint and allied forces, and our fleet is in
high demand across the globe. Combatant commands have
discovered the flexibility and messaging power of the Bomber
Task Force. And this is why you have seen the recent headlines
highlighting how our bombers are operating with our allies in
places like Japan and Norway.
Our 2022 budget continues to fund this flexible bomber
capability, while setting up a transition from three bomber
fleets to two, the B-21 and the rebuilt B-52, and we recognize
the importance of the CERP program and look forward to
discussing that today.
As we also discuss power projection, we must remember that
the Air Force provides air-refueling capacity that makes power
projection possible for both the joint force and for our
allies. As we transition to a two-tanker fleet of modernized
KC-135s and the new KC-46, we will divest of the KC-10,
primarily so that we can free up the airmen we need to build
the KC-46 into the capability the taxpayer has paid for.
And, Ranking Member Wittman, I think we absolutely
understand the concern that you have. And as we do what
Chairman Courtney called the balancing act of being able to
draw down the KC-46 while we stand up the KC--sorry, draw down
the KC-10 while we stand up the KC-46, our primary driver, our
limitation is our airmen. We just don't have the manpower to
keep one at one level while we build the other one up, and that
is the balancing act that we have to do, understanding the
limitations that we have had with the airframe so far.
And what I can say as someone, like Chairman Courtney, who
has flown in the aircraft recently, is that I think three
things are true. Number one, this is going to be a good air-
refueling aircraft for us in the future. Number two, it today
has the capacity and capability to take some of that daily
responsibility off of the joint force. And we can certainly
talk about the risks associated with that. But number three,
and I agree with Chairman Courtney on this, that camera is not
ready for combat and we have to fix it. And it is frustrating
to everybody that, well, what we are doing, but we are going to
go fix it. And that is why our plan makes use of the KC-46 in
the near term while also fixing that camera as soon as
possible.
One area where investments have paid tremendous dividends
is in airlift. Our airlift fleet is the envy of air forces
around the world. And this year's budget continues to invest in
the C-5, the C-17, and C-130 fleets.
There has been a lot of discussion about tactical airlift
in the future, and I think it is important to me as the Air
Force's futurist to say something about it. The risk associated
with tactical airlift, and especially when you consider the
potential conflict with China, is relatively low when compared
to other parts of the Air Force portfolio, as well as other
parts of this committee's power projection portfolio.
In areas where we run significant risk in airlift,
especially in conducting logistics under attack, the C-130
capability is not well suited to address this risk. And that is
why we believe we need to retire a certain number of the older
C-130s, while addressing this airlift in new ways with new
capability.
In closing, I want to say a personal thank you to the
members of this committee and the broader House Armed Services
Committee, past and present. When I came into the Air Force,
your predecessors, and even some of you, had worked to develop
a force that gave my generation what we needed to defend our
country and interests around the globe. Together, we need to
modernize and work together for that future generation so the
next generation can say the same thing about us. We have done
it before together and I am confident we can do it again.
I am honored to serve on the same team as Ms. Costello and
General Nahom. I have to tell you, they work tirelessly to
think differently about how we plan, program, and acquire the
force that our future airmen are going to need. And we
appreciate you having us today and really look forward to
answering your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Ms. Costello, General
Nahom, and General Hinote can be found in the Appendix on page
33.]
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, General. And thank
you again for coming over earlier this Congress for the Air
Force 101 briefing, which, again, had very, you know, good
attendance and lots of good feedback afterwards.
I am going to ask one question, and then I know there is a
lot of interest, particularly on the KC-46, from some of the
other members, so I am going to hold off diving into that
topic.
But, Ms. Costello, you know, on the B-52 reengining
program, again, I think, you know, everybody on this
subcommittee would stipulate to the fact that, you know, those
are old planes and they need, you know, to have new engines.
And again, I don't think there is really any question about
that.
The budget that came over--again, just to set it forth for
the record this morning--includes a total of $715 million in
RDT&E [research, development, testing and evaluation] and $74.9
million in procurement, which, again, the staff sort of looked
at those numbers and sort of compared it to a normal regular
program, I guess you would say, in the Department of Defense.
And as I mentioned in my opening comments, and the ranking
member reiterated, you know, that exceeds a 50 percent increase
over last year.
You know, I realize, again, by law, Nunn-McCurdy doesn't
apply to a contract like this, but I am wondering if you could
just talk about that a little bit in terms of the sizable
number.
And also, you know, given the fact that the contract award
was supposed to have gone out last December 2020, it is now
September is the latest we have heard. What is the timing, in
your mind, in terms of getting this actually executed?
Ms. Costello. Well, thank you for the question. B-52 CERP
is actually not--the dollars that you see across the full setup
is for a multitude of programs, actually. The first part is the
rapid virtual prototype, where we are going to literally
virtualize, digitize the solution, and then down-select to one
engine and then move to another mid-tier acquisition program to
do a physical prototype. The reason we are doing that is to get
a better estimate on cost and to reduce risk before going into
a traditional program. It is our plan to end up in a
traditional program before we start all of the procurement.
So along the way, because there are multiple decision
points put in, and September is what you mentioned, that is the
next major decision point of whether we continue down this path
or make a change, will be to look at the rapid virtual
prototype status, its cost, its risk. Basically, a technology
risk assessment will be--something like that will be conducted
in the mid-tier acquisition. And we will use that information
to determine if we are going to go to the next step and do the
physical prototype. And then there would be another decision
point before we would go forward with full, full production for
replacement.
We know the capability, it needs to be replaced. So there
is, you know, a lot of incentives to find a way to do this in
an affordable and timely manner, but we are also learning our
way as we go through mid-tier acquisition. I would say this
program started--was one of the early mid-tier acquisition
programs and maybe didn't have the rigor of the definition that
we are now putting on these mid-tier acquisition programs. So
sometimes when you look at a number from early on till now, it
might be different. But I have been working very hard with our
program teams to properly define it. So for this mid-tier
acquisition effort, we will have the right dollars and schedule
and will measure against that. The same for the next one and
the same for the ultimate program.
We may decide early to just go to a traditional program,
depending on the data. That is what we are going to be looking
at. This is our chance to look and see if there still is good
[inaudible] or if it is time to go forward with a program of
record.
Relative to the timing, we talked September and the dollars
that we have. You know, I have a feeling that some of the
dollars you are looking at are for a variety of efforts that
may not only be for the mid-tier acquisition CERP dollars, but
we will make sure that we clarify that, because there is a lot
of B-52 work that falls into program lines. And it even
confuses me sometimes. I always have to ask for the breakout,
because there is B-52 CERP, RMP [Radar Modernization Program],
there is lots of other efforts going on, and sometimes the
dollars get confusing. But we are watching carefully the
guardrails we set up, and we are looking forward to shaping the
program properly.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. I mean, again, when we got
the budget, I guess it was like about 10 days ago, I mean, that
$800 million increase kind of jumped off the page. So our
staff--and again, I know Rob, you know, Dave Sienicki and Phil
and Kelly Goggin, you know, are going to be definitely
scrubbing that one in the days ahead.
So I will now yield to Mr. Wittman for his questions.
Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
your perspective and your leadership there. There are a lot of
challenges in this NDAA coming up that this subcommittee will
address, and I am confident with your leadership that we will
do that successfully.
Ms. Costello, I want to begin with you in asking you about
the KC-46 contract. And I just want to get your perspective if
you believe it is delivering the desired capability to the
warfighter. And if it is not, should the Air Force pursue
changes to the contract structure to improve performance? I
just want to get your perspective on how you believe that is
unfolding before us.
Ms. Costello. Thank you for that question. So, obviously,
we are not getting the full capability that we contracted for,
but the contract does enable us to get that capability, you
know, at a future time without us having to expend additional
money, at least for the RVS.
Mr. Wittman. Yeah.
Ms. Costello. Looking back, we would definitely--I think we
would have definitely chosen a different contract structure.
But at this point where we are in the program, to go and reopen
this contract, I believe, would cost the government a lot more
than continuing forward, which is why we are continuing with
the contract and accepting the deliveries of these aircraft,
with Boeing committed to funding the fixes when they are
completed with their design and implementing those so that we
will have full capability.
Reference was made to the active management. I think the
MOA that we did, the memorandum of agreement last year relative
to the RVS design in our engagement is an example of how we are
trying to apply the active management to a fixed-price type
contract. It is an each, but it has worked out to get us the
solution we need, and we just need to finish that design and
get it installed so that we can provide our airmen what they
need.
Mr. Wittman. Sure. Well, Ms. Costello, I would say that,
you know, even the RVS agreements and changes, I still believe,
leave something to be desired as far as how that all had to
come about. I think it has gotten to a better point, but it
took a long time to get there. And the myriad of other
deficiencies with the aircraft I think just point to the
problems with the contract.
Again, I want to emphasize, I think the structure of the B-
21 contract is what the Air Force needs to replicate going
forward. I am still not convinced that it wouldn't be better to
recompete the KC-46A contract. But that being said, I want to
get your perspective too about KC-46A spares. It has been
reported that they have increased, the cost has increased by
1,500 percent. Give us an idea about your perspective on that,
and what are you doing to pursue this deficient effort? I just
think it is mind-boggling to me to understand that that is
where we are.
Ms. Costello. So relative to the KC-46 spares and the
reference you make to the inflated cost for the Japan FMS in
particular, so we are dealing with commercial of a type in this
case. So for our FMS customers, the government goes forward and
tries to get a fair and reasonable price and serve them well.
And that is what our head of contracting and our contracting
team was working on.
We did find that there were several components or spare
parts that were considered commercial, I will say out of type,
because they are not sold in like Home Depot or anything, and
it is not being sold to anyone other than the government, so
finding data prices was challenging. So there are rules that we
had to follow, and our head of contracting looked at that and
for 18 months was trying to get additional data from Boeing.
Boeing was unable to get it from some of their subcontractors.
So it did cause us a dilemma, which was a very hard decision
for our head of contracting to make.
But in the end, because we had to consider the needs of the
Japan air force and what they needed these tanker and they
needed the spares to be there when their tanker arrived, that
was heavily considered. It was a difficult decision, but our
head of contracting is allowed to make that, considering all of
these factors. So that is the decision that was made.
It was, you know, in the end, within the budget that Japan
had allocated for it. And we were very transparent with Japan
all along and told them of what we knew we had fair and
reasonable pricing on and the amount that we did not. So there
was full transparency along the way, and in the end, they
wanted to go forward with that.
Now, relative to going in the future, we are looking at
setting up an IDIQ [indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity]
competitive spares contract to use for all the KC-46 assets so
that we can be more responsive and not have to deal with sole-
source contracting on every part with Boeing necessarily. So we
are actively working on that and accelerating that.
Mr. Wittman. Well, I think that is going to be critical. I
think this is a very deficient effort, by any measure. Foreign
military sales, I think, are critical for the United States and
it just doesn't seem in any way, shape, or form fair to find
ourselves in this particular situation with the cost of these
spares, so any way with that.
Lieutenant General Nahom, let me go to you very quickly. I
want to ask you about reducing the C-130 force structure and
transitioning the C-130H squadrons to other missions. And last
year, as you know, General Brown said the Air Force is
committed to only remissioning a C-130H unit if it is agreed
upon and suitable replacement remission can be arranged. So if
the respective State opposes a C-130H remissioning initiative,
my question is, is will General Brown pursue a C-130 reduction
over the State's opposition? I think it is key to understand
what is that dynamic going to be in that realm.
General Nahom. Ranking Member, thank you very much for the
question. Our position has not changed at all from the Air
Force. We are not intending to force a unit conversion. Our
vision is a C-130 fleet slightly smaller than what we have
right now. Outlined very correctly by General Hinote about the
amount of risk we are buying across the Air Force and the risk
we have in the tactical lift portfolio, those two are
inconsistent. We actually have a lot more risk in other parts
of the portfolio.
We believe the C-130 fleet at 255. We have actually really
good data to support that. And I welcome a conversation at a
classified level so I can show you the data that shows where
255, we believe, is the right number. We have said all along
that we will try to get to 255 at the case at which we--that we
can get there. We are working very closely with the units.
We need these units. We don't need any units to go away.
There is a lot of mission that we have as we look forward to
future combat. A very good example is what we are doing in
Alabama with the Air Force Reserve C-130H unit. We are going
to--our intention is to transition them to the MH-139 training
site for our newest helicopter. We believe it is a win-win. The
unit is very excited about it. The State is very excited about
it. And it is a wonderful place to train helicopters because it
abuts directly up with the Fort Rucker helicopter airspace. And
so we are looking for win-wins like that across the enterprise.
We were able to leave the Martin State unit in the A-10,
which the unit wanted to stay in the A-10, and that actually
helped us out as well in the Air Force. So, again, I think we
can find some win-wins out there. Will we get to 255? I don't
know. I would like to so that we could utilize that manpower
for other things.
One mission we are looking to expand and we need to find a
wing that wants to expand into cyber warfare. And so we are
actively looking at is there a wing, a State interested in
opening a cyber warfare wing. We think it is a very attractive
mission and one we absolutely need to expand into more as we
look at future warfare, not to mention in the domestic side as
well.
So we think there is a potential there, but, again, we will
continue to work with these units, and we have no intention of
forcing the unit to transition.
Mr. Wittman. Well, Lieutenant General Nahom, thanks. I know
Virginia has been one of the first States to open up a cyber
unit with its National Guard, so I am sure the Air National
Guard element there would also be interested.
Thanks, too, for emphasizing--I think you hit the nail on
the head. With our C-130H units, it is about working in
conjunction with the States. The greatest asset that we have
there is not the aircraft. Listen, the aircraft is great. The
greatest asset we have there are the aircrews and the pilots
that keep those aircraft in the air.
Tactical lift is critically important. Maintaining the
skill level and the experience with those aircrews and those
pilots is key. So whatever the Air Force can do to continue
along on those lines, I think is going to be critically
important as we go in the future.
So thanks again.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Rob. I appreciate that and your
comments particularly about the Air Guards.
So next up is Mr. Langevin, and he will be followed by Mr.
Kelly.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our witnesses for their testimony today; very insightful.
I want to turn further to great power competition and the
challenges that we face if conflict ever breaks out. Clearly,
we are going to be fighting the away game and it is going to be
significantly challenging, to say the least.
During my CITI [Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems] Subcommittee hearing on electromagnetic
spectrum [EMS] operations, one of the witnesses mentioned that
DOD [Department of Defense] EMS investment is heavily tied to
legacy platforms and consolidated in limited expensive
programs.
The Air Force's first fielded ABMS [Advanced Battle
Management System] capability, the Airborne Edge Node seems to
fit this trend. So it will cost, as I understand it, three-
fourths of the Air Force's ABMS RDT&E budget and is designed
for the KC-46.
Ms. Costello and General Hinote, should we continue to
expect big expensive projects from ABMS?
General Hinote. Representative Langevin, thank you for the
question. And as always, you are well informed with many of the
things that we are doing.
So you mention the idea of the electromagnetic spectrum in
large platforms, maybe expensive exquisite platforms. And what
you are seeing right now--in fact, I had the opportunity
yesterday to sign off on a very different set of requirements
for our activities in the electromagnetic spectrum. And what
you are seeing right now is we are walking a very intentional
path away from specific solutions that are attached to specific
platforms to much more general or modular solutions that can be
upgraded, that can be software defined, and even coded on the
fly. Happy to come over and talk to you more about that,
because there are some very interesting developments both in
our R&D [research and development] as well as commercial R&D to
make that transition.
I will say that one of our tensions within our Advanced
Battle Management program is the incremental advances versus
the disruptive advances. And so what you see in our Increment 1
or our Capability Release 1 on the ABMS is an incremental
advance. We want to make sure that the F-22, the F-35, and the
KC-46--three key elements of power projection for the joint
force--we want to make sure that they are connected well. And
after that, what we want to be able to do is build out away
from that, from that core. So, yes, that is in many ways an
incremental way of looking at our advancement.
At the very same time, we have disruptive programs that are
really more like efforts in the hopper ready to go. And as we
experiment and learn, we expect that we are going to be going
from that more incremental, more traditional way of connecting
our platforms to something that looks much more modular, much
more software defined, much more flexible and, frankly, that
has a government reference architecture that we can scale
across all of our platforms.
And so I will turn it over to Ms. Costello to see if she
has anything further on that.
Ms. Costello. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. I did want to get to just, if I could,
General Hinote, can you talk to what we are doing to improve
the projection forces' survivability in an era of great power
competition? And I also wanted to ask how you would incorporate
directed energy into the Air Force's projection force, before
my time runs out.
General Hinote. Okay. Sure. Yes, sir. As we think about
power projection and especially as about bombers and tankers,
certainly as we are thinking through the types of capabilities
that, say, our future bombers, future ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] equipment is going to need,
we are going to need to be able to incorporate the most
advanced electromagnetic waveforms and techniques. And what you
are seeing right now is, the inside of those programs is
developing a much more modular system for that, much more
software-defined.
And this is where we have a brand-new, very exciting effort
going on with our electromagnetic spectrum wing. These are
going to be the airmen that are going to be in charge of making
sure that we go from the library of electromagnetic threats--
that is the traditional way of doing it. We just have a huge
library; we upload the library every few months--and what we
are going to is a much more programmed, on-the-fly capability.
And I would need to come over and talk to you more about
that in a closed forum to be able to get into the details of
that.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney. And that is a really important question, and
hopefully, you know, we will figure out a way to take you up on
that offer, because I think it is a point well taken.
Mr. Langevin. Yes. Please, let's do. And I apologize to Ms.
Costello that I didn't get to her. Five minutes goes by fast,
and I needed to get those questions in.
Mr. Courtney. All right. Well, next up is General Kelly,
and he will be followed by Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
witnesses, for being here today.
I recognize the importance of a strong Air Force Reserve
Component that can provide needed surge capability to the
Active Component during times of peak demand. The Reserve
Component is an especially critical force provider of inter-
and intra-theater mobility assets to the United States
Transportation Command via the Air Force's Air Mobility
Command. To that end, I am concerned that the Air Force
continues to divest legacy aircraft from the Reserve Component
while it modernizes the Active Component.
Lieutenant General Hinote, can you describe the Air Force's
sustainment and modernization plans for the global fleet of C-
17 and C-130 aircraft broken out by Active and Reserve
Components?
General Hinote. Sir, I am going to have to let General
Nahom take that one. That is in his job jar, so we will pass it
off here.
General Nahom. Congressman, thank you for the question. You
know, I assure you, as we look at the fleet for U.S. Air Force,
we always look across the total force. It is certainly not a
divesting of our Reserve forces at their expense for the Active
forces, not at all, because when we fight, we fight as a total
force. And we know we look--we look at the entire fleet as
that.
In terms of the C-17, the C-17 is a long-term platform, and
the modernization efforts are fully funded. And again, that is
across the entire fleets, Guard, Reserve, and Active Duty.
On the C-130 side, C-130Js, we obviously still have some
congressionally procured aircraft coming in over the next few
years, and we will be upgrading those to the [Block] 8.1 to
make sure we get those to the level we need.
In terms of the C-130Hs, the center wing boxes, all the
required avionics, AMP [Avionics Modernization Program]
[Increment] 1, AMP 2. And then in cases where we needed the
added performance, would be the propellers and the motor--and
the new motors.
If you look at our C-130 fleet, when I said 255, you know,
that breaks down--right now we have 163 C-130Js either existing
or on order. And then that breaks down to 92 C-130Hs, which we
intend to upgrade that to a level we need to and move forward
with that fleet. And I certainly know we want to maintain that
fleet moving forward, but I will tell you also, in a tactical
airlift fleet--and I do want to pass to General Hinote real
quickly because we have got to look beyond. When we look at
lift, especially tactical lift, we have got to look to the
future, because it is not just C-130s. There are other things
we need to do in--if you don't mind if I pass it off to you.
General Hinote. No. And, in fact, there is a really
exciting story to be told here. It is not reflected in this
budget yet because we are still looking to see where we could
go with this. But, clearly, as we think about logistics and
logistics under attack, they could be under attack by China,
Russia, or any other adversary. What we see is that the
capability for vertical lift is going to be really important
for us, i.e., getting away from the fixed runway so that we can
do logistics in a way that is somewhat disruptive and, frankly,
a lot harder to target.
So there are quite a few efforts going on. As an example,
we are following very closely with the Army's Future Vertical
Lift set of programs. And at the very same time, we are
exploring vertical lift programs inside of our RDT&E as well.
And what we think is that this may be a very important Reserve
Component, part of the Reserve Component, because the idea of
vertical lift could also play a huge role in some of the
responsibilities that, say, Governors have.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. Let me--I have got one more question I
want to get to, if I can. And I apologize for interrupting, but
like they said, 5 minutes is a short time.
I propose that we put tail numbers on the new aircraft that
we are issuing to our Guard and Reserve. And I am getting a lot
of pushback on that. And I want you guys to tell me why I think
a fleet of rental cars would be managed better than a personal
automobile that I own myself that I make the payment on. And so
I am getting a lot of pushback on that, something that we have
done for--going back to World War II, people had their names
painted on aircraft. They named them. They loved them. The
crews and pilots loved that aircraft, and they took care of it
because it was theirs.
But I am getting pushback in wanting to do a study. Well,
we don't need a study. We know airmen take care of the aircraft
they own that is theirs. So can you guys explain to me why we
would not want, other than to take away all--push all the
legacy equipment to the Guard and Reserve, can you tell me why
we wouldn't want to put aircraft tails on aircraft that we have
been doing for a century or as long as we have been flying?
General Nahom. Sir, I think--I am sure I don't have the
time. I may have to dive into this question a little more. When
aircraft are in the Guard, they actually stay in the Guard and
the Active Duty. We don't switch those aircraft. And the only
time an aircraft leaves a location [is] when it goes to long-
term depot maintenance and, historically, it comes back to that
unit.
Now, there is some differences in some of our heavy fleets.
I know the tankers and others, that they actually, when an
aircraft goes to depot, they take the next one off the depot
line and bring it back. There is some switching there, because
it makes the most sense in certain fleet management.
I grew up in the fighter world where a tail was owned by a
unit, whether it was the Guard, Active, Reserve, and it
returned to that unit following depot. So I think we very
carefully manage these things. And I think we are actually in a
really good spot. And certainly we do not give the oldest
platforms to the Guard. I tell you, the F-35 beddown is the
perfect example. And that is four beddowns that are all going
to Guard and Reserve units.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. General, I am sorry.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney. Because I actually was very interested in
hearing the answer to that question. And hopefully we will
continue, Trent, because I can feel your passion coming
through.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Courtney. Okay.
Mr. Norcross is up next. And I think Mr. Carl was slated
next. I am not sure if he is still with us or not. And if Mr.
Carl is not, then Mr. Vela was after him. And I am not sure if
Fil is still with us or not, and if Fil is not with us, then it
will be Mr. Golden, followed by Mrs. Luria.
So, Don, you are up.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just the conversations we continue to have with KC-46, it
is so frustrating, but we are getting closer by the day. But I
want to talk about the B-52 engine issue.
Ms. Costello, you talked about the reason for the mid-tier
acquisition was so that you could minimize the risk. I am
paraphrasing. Exactly what risk are you speaking of? Is it
technological? Is it cost? Is it time? Which risk in this
program is your biggest concern?
Ms. Costello. So for the B-52 Commercial Engine Replacement
Program and the mid-tier acquisition associated with that, the
first one is the virtual prototype. So it is taking
commercial--modern commercial engines and basically creating a
digital twin, a digital model of how that would be in the B-52.
So it is integration risk. It is making sure that everything
will fit and function properly.
And doing that instead of starting a brand-new program and
going 2 years before you can even get to that phase, by using
the mid-tier acquisition we can start that modeling working
with industry right away, working with multiple, and then we
can select which one we want to go forward. So that is the risk
that I was thinking of in this first phase.
Mr. Norcross. So, it is all of the above then. Because, you
know, the chairman talked about that $800 million, and that
certainly has caught people's attention. The idea of going
through was it was a more mature engine that could much easier
have been shifted over but, also, the costs should have been
relatively more focused. We shouldn't be getting those type of
surprises.
Are you comfortable where the numbers are coming in from
the program?
Ms. Costello. So, we will be having a review in the future
that will work with the cost estimate, and that is coming up in
the summer, before we go forward with the program beyond this
point. Again, I believe the budget numbers includes a variety
of things within B-52. And I would like to be able to provide
that clarity to you all in a separate--provide that product to
you to make sure the visibility of how the funds break out
within the B-52 program, because there are a variety of
efforts. And it is easy to, you know, compare that number to
what was a number before. I just want to make sure we are all
with the right number. So I will get that back for you all so
we have that.
Mr. Norcross. I appreciate it.
General Nahom, the KC-46, from when the original program of
record started to where we are now with the RVS, has, (a), been
primarily a [inaudible] time, we lost the time and you really
can't make up for that. But would you say the system that we
are looking at now, that it is probably unparalleled in the
world for the accuracy in what it can do?
General Nahom. Sir----
Ms. Costello. Are you speaking on the RVS system
specifically?
Mr. Norcross. Yes.
General Nahom. As General Hinote said in the lead-in, as
well as what Ranking Member Wittman said, we couldn't agree
more, the RVS system--we have to fix the RVS system. Now, that
being said, it can refuel airplanes. And we both flew on that
airplane that day with a bunch of the members. And you watch
it, it works. There is limitations----
Mr. Norcross. I am talking about the system that we agreed
or close to agreeing upon. We wanted much different with a
three dimensional. That system is 10 years newer than we would
have gotten if we accepted the original one. Is that correct?
Ms. Costello. That is absolutely true. The RVS 2.0 digital
system is the latest, greatest technology. It is not what was
on the contract initially, and we wouldn't have gotten it on
the day of that contract award. So the RVS 2.0 effort that we
have gotten is taking advantage of current technology and state
of the art.
Mr. Norcross. And that would be helpful if we go to an
unmanned system. It can work much better under what would be
the new configuration for the next generation. Isn't that
correct?
Ms. Costello. We do consider that is a step in the right
direction for an unmanned system, and I believe Boeing also
does.
Mr. Norcross. Can you agree--we can have the conversation
here--the EMP [electromagnetic pulse], a hardening of a KC-46
versus the legacy KC-10 and 135. Can you talk about what each
of those platforms can and cannot do in the event of a pulse?
Ms. Costello. I don't have that data with me to compare
among them, but I would be happy to take that for the record
and get that information to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 67.]
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
The point I am trying to make is, time is lost and there is
no excuse in the world. And I am not defending Boeing at all,
but we have a platform that will be a communication mode that
is unparalleled going forward. We just wish we could have done
it a lot quicker.
With that, I yield back my time. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Don.
Next up is Mr. Golden followed by Mrs. Luria.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Chairman Courtney.
Ms. Costello, the United States Air Force has proposed to
move 11 National Guard KC-135s from the primary mission
aircraft inventory [PMAI] to the backup aircraft inventory
[BAI]. As I am sure you know, the fiscal year 2021 NDAA,
Congress opposed this move understanding that it could possibly
result in a reduction of training hours, manpower, and base
funding for existing National Guard aircrews.
So I wanted to ask, have any changes been made in the last
year that would yield a different result to the National Guard
with the proposed KC-135 from PMAI to BAI move in fiscal year
2022?
General Nahom. Sir, this is General Nahom. I apologize, it
was a little hard to hear you. I think this is about the 11 KC-
135s from PMAI to BAI. Is that correct, sir?
Mr. Golden. Yes, sir. I don't know if you are hearing me
better here. But I guess the question is, given the fact that
we rejected this as a body last year, what has changed?
General Nahom. Sir, we are working very closely with,
obviously, your staffs as well as AMC [Air Mobility Command] to
try to get this PMAI/BAI right. And we do want to continue the
discussion, because I think it is a really good discussion to
have. Because when you look at our fleets--I will broaden this
out just for 2 seconds on the rest of the fleets. We have many
fleets that are misaligned.
BAI is very important because when aircrafts go into long-
term maintenance depot, that is one of the reasons why you have
BAI, so you don't have airplanes that should be on the line
flying missions, where you have crews that you are spending
money on flying hours, weapon system sustainment, and other,
for airplanes that are sitting in long-term depot.
The 135 fleet was very much out of line, like many of our
fleets were that we had an excess amount of airplanes in depot
and much less airplanes that were actually BAI. So the bottom
line is we had many PMAI airplanes sitting in depot, where back
at the units we--not only do you have crews, but you are also
paying for weapon systems sustainment and flying hours on
airplanes that aren't there. We did this very successfully with
the F-15E. We are doing this right now with the Active Duty F-
16s, because they are a little bit out of line with some of the
mod [modification] lines.
So we make sure that we have our fleets better aligned.
Because I tell you, from being a commander, there is nothing
worse than not having enough airplanes on the ramp to keep my
crews current, and that happens if you are out of alignment.
And that is what we are attempting to do with the KC-135 fleet
as well.
Mr. Golden. Thank you for that.
Lieutenant General, I appreciate you working with my staff
and other committee staff. You know, clearly, upping
maintenance is an important issue and we want to make sure that
they have what they need from the manpower and training hour
perspective. That is, as you know, a very important mission up
there. The refueling mission is what I am talking about.
I guess another question in the same vein, how does the Air
Force envision itself maintaining the Air Guards' training,
funding, and readiness levels with the proposed KC-135 force
structure alignment?
General Nahom. Sir, I guess I may have to take that for the
record and work with your staff because I am not really sure.
Right now, we are doing everything we can in terms of readiness
to maintain all our funding, because I tell you, readiness, you
know, when you look at--as we look at austere times with budget
cuts or flat budgets like we are looking at now, you know,
modernization, readiness, and force structure are the three
bins. And I will tell you, we are doing everything we can to
protect readiness. And I don't make that statement for Active
Duty; that is Guard, Active Duty, Reserve, that is the Air
Force. We have got to maintain our readiness.
And I will tell you, this PMAI/BAI I think is an important
part of that, because we have to make sure our readiness
dollars are correctly aligned through all our fleets, and the
135s is certainly a big part of that. But I can certainly work
with your staff if I am not hitting the mark on that answer,
sir.
Mr. Golden. Yes. I certainly look forward to continuing the
discussion and getting something back on the record. Thank you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 67.]
General Nahom. Sure.
Mr. Courtney. All set, Jared? Okay. Thank you.
And next up is Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you. And I want to thank our witnesses
for being here for this hearing today.
I want to go back to a comment that General Kelly made
along the theme of divest to invest. I see this to be a theme
with all the services in this budget. And I specifically wanted
to focus in on the B-21 bombers.
In your budget request for this year, I see that the Air
Force plans to decrease its bomber inventory by 17 B-1s this
year, but the B-21s are not yet ready to replace these
aircraft. So by retiring aircraft earlier, we are leaving a gap
in countering our current growing threats today with China and
Russia and other malign actors. Can you quantify that and how
you will mitigate for any gap that is being left by retiring
these aircraft?
General Hinote. Representative Luria, thank you for the
question. And it gets directly after what I think is the
fundamental tension that is facing the leadership of the
Department of Defense right now. You correctly say that all of
us are dealing with this tension.
And when I was talking about the relative risk of different
parts of the portfolio, and, frankly, different parts of the
portfolio that this subcommittee has oversight on, this is a
perfect example. And when we look at the, as an example,
tactical airlift risk versus the bomber risk, I will tell you,
I am much more concerned, there is a bigger sense of urgency in
the bomber portfolio than in the tactical airlift portfolio for
the exact reason that you are saying. And it is just true that
we can't get the B-21 fast enough as these aircraft, these--
specifically the B-1s, have become, in essence, more--it costs
more to sustain them than the benefit you get from them.
And those were decisions that were made a long time ago to
defer modernization and focus on readiness. We could go back to
the sequestration years. But this is why we say risk is not
equivalent across all the portfolios. You correctly identify a
big risk that we have.
I will turn it over to General Nahom to talk about how we
are trying to mitigate that as much as we can.
General Nahom. Yeah. I will tell you, ma'am, and the 17 B-
1s is very important. So we had a fleet of 62. We very
carefully went through, we analyzed. We thought the number was
going to be higher. We actually looked at each aircraft and
said which ones are, frankly, too expensive and too hard to
fix, because we overflew this fleet so much over the ensuing
years. Seventeen was the number. And by reducing the fleet by
17 and leaving 45 there, keeping the same level of manpower, in
maintenance manpower, until the B-21 arrives, we think we can
get the readiness level of that bomber actually higher. We can
actually have more airplanes available for the combatant
commanders in the interim by getting rid of the oldest, most
problem aircraft in the fleet. We think that is actually paying
off.
Now, it is important that we work together and we maintain
45 until these units shake hands with the B-21s as they arrive.
We have no intention of going below 45 because the combatant
commanders need that bomber firepower in the next 5, 7, 10
years until the B-21s start showing up in the numbers we need
them. But we are watching it very closely.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And I want to clarify. So you have mentioned the number 45.
And I was going to ask about the combatant commanders'
requirements for their most limiting OPLANs [operation plans]
and the different scenarios that you are evaluating globally.
Because, obviously, we can't count on the fact that, if we
encounter one conflict, that we won't have, you know, malign
actors elsewhere.
With 45 in this current plan, can you meet those
requirements in our most limiting OPLAN or conflict for which
we are planning?
General Nahom. I will tell you right now, ma'am, we--this
leads a little into what General Hinote was saying about, you
know, we are going to have to look at some near-term risk if we
are going to get our Air Force and certainly our DOD--but, you
know, we are concentrating on the Air Force--to where we need
it to be for peer competition in the future.
Mrs. Luria. I am not asking about the future----
General Nahom. Our 45 and up----
Mrs. Luria. General, I am sorry, I am not asking about the
future; I am asking about today. I am asking about today and
the next 3 to 5 years before the B-21 starts coming online.
General Nahom. First, I will say, I think 45--I will let
you answer, but I will tell you, it is better than we had, the
extra 17 airplanes, because we are able to concentrate our
maintenance on the 45 that are left and give ourselves more
capable airplanes.
Is it enough? I would say probably not, but I will let----
General Hinote. No, ma'am. I mean, I will just be flat-out:
No. This is why I say the risk in the bomber portfolio is high.
We have to do better. We have to accelerate the B-21
capability as quickly as we can. But, in the short term, the
answer is no. Those decisions were made 5, 10, 15 years ago,
and we are now----
Mrs. Luria. Is there anything that this committee can do--
--
General Hinote [continuing]. We are now facing that----
Mrs. Luria. Sorry, I am about to run out of time, but as my
last question: Is there anything this committee can do to help
accelerate the delivery of the B-21?
I know, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
Ms. Costello. So, relative to B-21, the most important
thing for us to do is get through the design and complete it
and not introduce the concurrency like we have talked about in
some of our other programs.
Once we get through that design and get the first ones
delivered, we can adjust production rates and maybe affect them
that way. But we have to get through the engineering with solid
discipline.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So am I understanding that this aircraft
is not even fully designed and we are retiring aircraft and we
don't even have the design for the aircraft that is meant to
replace them?
I would love to follow up on that and----
Ms. Costello. We have the design. There are two test
aircraft built, but it will take a little while to get through
all of the testing, and, therefore, there could be some changes
as a result of the testing. So that is all I was just talking
about there.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you.
And, again, it is my understanding that I think Mr. Wittman
and Mr. Norcross may be organizing a trip out to Palmdale. And
I would encourage all the members to get out there and see
firsthand. Because, you know, again, concurrency is, you know,
obviously, a negative, you know, place to be. But having said
that, I think, you know, that this program, as Mr. Wittman said
at the outset, is really probably an all-star right now in
terms of procurement. But, still, you know, we want to make
sure the risk is reduced as much as possible.
So, again, we have now completed the first round of
questions. I actually did want to ask another question, and we
have some members that have stayed with us here. So, certainly,
we, you know, I think, actually have done well today in terms
of moving right along, and I certainly would invite them to ask
a question or two.
Again, to the witnesses, you know, one program which we
have not talked about this morning is the Air Force One
recapitalization.
And, General Nahom, you know, I guess, based on the latest
in terms of what is in the budget and, you know, certainly some
of the feedback that we are hearing about this program--again,
for the record, the Air Force request is for $680 million
RDT&E. The Contract Management Agency has assessed that Boeing
is at least 1 year late on the delivery of the first VC-25B
aircraft, the Air Force One. COVID is apparently cited as one
reason, as well as the bankrupt subcontractor for the interior
of the plane.
So, you know, certainly the, you know, rumor mill is that
there is going to be a request for equitable adjustment to
extend the schedule and increase the VC-25B fixed-price
contract cost. You know, obviously, this is a disappointment to
all of us, you know, which we thought maybe this was a program
where the government actually maybe got a good deal here.
I was wondering, you know, can you tell us when we are
going to see a new schedule? And any other, you know, updates
regarding the status of Air Force One?
Ms. Costello. So thank you for that question. I will take
that one.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. Sure.
Ms. Costello. We have received from Boeing notification of
a revised schedule on their part. We are in the midst of doing
a schedule risk assessment, our program is. And at that point,
when they complete that probably later this summer, we will
determine if we need to make any adjustments to the schedule.
What they came in with was about 12 months later than
before, and they did make reference to impacts from their
contractor going out of business, as well as COVID impact. We
will assess all of that.
You made reference to a potential REA [request for
equitable adjustment]. They have submitted an intent letter, is
what they have been asked to do, if they believe they have been
impacted by COVID, with an intent letter to tell us, and then
we start that negotiation process too.
So we have had a couple of those come in at a smaller level
on some other programs. In our negotiation process, we
typically have been much, much smaller than [inaudible].
So, at the moment, we are assessing the schedule that they
have submitted. We have completed recent design activity
[inaudible], and we have also been working with our
[inaudible], as this is an ACAT [Acquisition Category] 1-D
program, to make sure they are kept informed, and we have been
transparent across the board on the program.
As soon as we get the updated schedule, we will determine
if we have to adjust our baseline or schedule, and we will make
sure you all are informed of that information. I expect it will
be in the fall, September time.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you for the update. I mean,
obviously, that sort of begs the question about the fact that,
you know, the existing Air Force Ones, which are getting a
little long in the tooth, are--you know, we are going to be
faced with a lot of the same questions we've talked about this
morning with other platforms, which is that, you know, trying
to extend their service life is, you know, carries an
additional price tag.
So, anyway, thank you for the update, and we will obviously
be tracking that and following it very closely.
Mr. Wittman, did you have any other follow-up questions you
wanted to ask?
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any additional
questions at this time. But, again, thanks to the witnesses for
joining us. I think that there are a number of challenges out
there with KC-46A, as well as how we are going to
operationalize in a continued way the C-130s and making sure we
are cognizant of the incredible asset that our Guard units are.
So we will continue to focus on those issues.
Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
I see Mr. Langevin still on the screen with us. Do you have
any follow-up questions? The floor is yours.
Mr. Langevin. Sure. Sure. I will take advantage of that if
that is okay. Thank you for the extra time.
Just on your question, Ms. Costello, I wasn't clear on the
answer. So how much time are we set back by the Air Force One
program right now? Is it significant?
Ms. Costello. So Boeing has proposed or informed us that
they believe that it will be about 12 months beyond their
original schedule. That doesn't mean that we agree with that
yet. We are in the middle--our program team is looking at what
they have assumed in their schedule and doing a--what we call a
schedule risk assessment to come up with what the program
schedule would be. I wouldn't expect it to be more than what
Boeing would say. We will look at that and determine if there
is any additional risk or different risk that we see, and we
will adjust our schedule accordingly. We have been--being
transparent with OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense]. And
probably in the September time period is when we will expect to
have a new schedule, if there are changes required.
Mr. Langevin. Is that specific to the two new 747 models? I
know there are other models that are also classified as Air
Force One within that Presidential fleet.
Ms. Costello. Yeah, that is relative to the VC-25B program,
which is the two brand-new replacement--what would replace the
VC-25A. And, of course, it will be important when we see what
the VC-25B schedule is to determine any impact to VC-25A and
when it stays in service or goes out of service. We may need to
put in one more maintenance cycle for that aircraft, depending
on the time delay.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Switching gears to the other question I didn't get to
earlier. Last year, Dr. Roper said that tankers were going to
be the first platforms to get fielded ABMS equipment. Ms.
Costello, since tankers are easy to shoot down high-value
targets for our adversaries, why are we focusing on the tanker
fleet first for ABMS? And that goes to my--you know, when I set
up the question earlier about looking at, you know, great power
competition fighting the away game.
General Hinote. Representative Langevin, I will take that,
if you don't mind. Because we have quite a bit of both gaming
data, modeling and simulation data on the use of tankers in a
power projection situation. And what we focus--you are right in
that, in fact, it is a high-value asset that our adversaries
want to shoot down, which means that we have to protect it. And
there was a time not that long ago where we didn't worry that
much about protecting our high-value assets in the air, and
that time has passed. And we have got to, in our tactics,
techniques, and procedures, protect the tanker.
But because the tanker is so important, that gas in the way
that we fight is such a critical input to the combat
capability, we must protect the tanker. And it is one of those
essential elements that you must protect and even forward as
you need to.
And so what we find is we structure the design around our
force of being able to protect the tanker. What that means is
the tanker will be there. And because the tanker will be there,
it is a great platform of opportunity for a node, not--you
know, we are going to have thousands, hundreds of thousands,
maybe millions of nodes eventually in our command and control
architecture. But this will be one important node, and we can
count on it when it is on station to have excess power, a
significant amount of space, as well as the connectivity back
to other parts of the joint force.
Because of that, we are going to take advantage of it. And
that is why our Capability Release 1 of the Advanced Battle
Management System puts a capability inside the KC-46.
Mr. Langevin. Very good.
Anybody else have anything to add?
Ms. Costello. No, I think he covered that one well.
Mr. Langevin. All right. Thank you very much.
I appreciate the extra time, Mr. Chairman. I will yield
back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Jim.
Ms. Costello, just to follow up really quickly on the Air
Force One, you know, question that Mr. Langevin asked. So
assuming, let's just say, a 12-month delay was granted, again,
the delivery date as of now was 2024. Is that right? Just--is
my memory correct?
Ms. Costello. That is correct.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. So if it was 12 months, it would be
2025?
Ms. Costello. And that is what we are looking at in our
schedule risk assessment.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. Thank you.
I see Mrs. Luria is still connected. I am not sure if she
is--she is not on the screen. Oh, there she is.
Elaine, do you have any follow-up questions you want to
ask?
Mrs. Luria. Mr. Chairman, no. Thank you so much again to
our witnesses, but I think that they addressed my question in
the first round.
Mr. Courtney. Very good.
All right. Well, like everyone else, I do want to thank all
the witnesses for their, you know, very straightforward answers
this morning. And we have obviously got some work to do on a
pretty compressed schedule. So I am sure, you know, you will be
on speed dial over the next few months or so as we move
forward.
So thank you again to all the members for joining. And at
this point, I will declare the hearing adjourned. Thank you,
and have a good day.
[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 8, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 8, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 8, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS

Ms. Costello. The KC-46 is designed to be survivable in a nuclear
environment and has met its requirement threshold for operations
following an EMP. The KC-46 is continuing further survivability testing
for the nuclear environment. The KC-135 has latent airframe EMP
protection built into the original construction of the aircraft. KC-135
modernization efforts have not been fully EMP tested and do not meet
current EMP survivability standards. The KC-10 does not have EMP
protection.   [See page 16.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GOLDEN
General Nahom. Thank you for your 8 June 2021 question, expressing
your concern for the 101st Air Refueling Wing at Bangor Air National
Guard (ANG) Base, Maine. I appreciate your interest and support of the
KC-135 enterprise in regards to maintaining training, funding and
readiness levels with the proposed KC-135 force structure alignment.
The KC-135 fleet is a critical lever of the Air Force's ability to
project power and support the National Defense Strategy. Therefore, the
Air Force is committed to ensuring the 101st Air Refueling Wing (ARW)
is ready to fight at a moment's notice. Each year the Air Force
examines how we are allocating funding and resources as part of the
annual Program Objective Memorandum (POM). As requirements continue to
evolve we will adjust KC-135 manpower, flying hours and weapon system
sustainment (WSS) funding to ensure the KC-135 remains a vital lever
for our national defense.
Military Operations and Maintenance manpower authorizations are
determined based on wartime requirements (i.e., Unit Type Codes--UTCsf
UTCs are the baseline for the military requirement. The Full Time (FT)
manpower requirement is based on many factors to include the number of
primary aircraft, flying hours, sorties, crew currency and aircraft
maintenance history. FT manpower is earned to perform the Organization,
Administration, Recruiting, Instruct, and Train (OARIT) functions of a
KC-135 unit. The ANG feels confident the manpower requirements and
funding are appropriate to meet requirements and readiness.
Therefore, the Air Force decreased the entire KC-135 fleet's flying
hours in the fiscal year 2022 (FY22) POM, commensurate with forecasted
reduced tasking levels; however, manpower and WSS were not reduced in
ANG units. Additionally, the Air Force plans to retain ANG unit's
primary aircraft inventory (PAI) at the FY21 PAI levels.
Thank you yet again for your dedicated support to the men and women
of the Air Force and the ANG. [See page 18.]

[all]
