[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-80]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST
__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 27, 2022

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-584                       WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 MATT GAETZ, Florida
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       DON BACON, Nebraska
JASON CROW, Colorado                 JIM BANKS, Indiana
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
Chair                            STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
SARA JACOBS, California              LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
JIMMY PANETTA, California            PAT FALLON, Texas
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
Vacancy

Brian Garrett, Staff Director
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Ryan Tully, Professional Staff Member
Natalie de Benedetti, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     3
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Brown, Gen Charles Q., USAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force......     6
Kendall, Hon. Frank, III, Secretary of the Air Force.............     4
Raymond, Gen John W., USSF, Chief of Space Operations, U.S. Space
Force..........................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Kendall, Hon. Frank, III, joint with General John W. Raymond
and General Charles Q. Brown...............................    67

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Bullet Background Paper on Ground Based Strategic Deterrent
Military Construction Program..............................    93

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mrs. Bice....................................................    97
Ms. Escobar..................................................    98
Mr. Fallon...................................................    98
Mr. Gaetz....................................................    97
Mr. Gallego..................................................    97
Mr. Horsford.................................................    97
Mr. Waltz....................................................    97

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Brown....................................................   128
Mr. Horsford.................................................   114
Dr. Jackson..................................................   113
Ms. Jacobs...................................................   111
Mr. Keating..................................................   127
Mr. Kelly....................................................   104
Mr. Morelle..................................................   109
Mr. Scott....................................................   120
Ms. Speier...................................................   102
Mr. Turner...................................................   101
Mr. Waltz....................................................   107
Mr. Wilson...................................................   129
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 27, 2022.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. I will go ahead and call the committee to
order.
Thank you all for being here this morning.
We have a full committee hearing on the Department of the
Air Force fiscal year 2023 budget request, part of our ongoing
posture hearings, as we take a look at the President's budget
and prepare for how we want to handle it, for the process for
the rest of this year.
We are joined by the Honorable Frank Kendall, who is the
Secretary of the United States Air Force; General Charles
Brown, Chief of Staff, the United States Air Force; and General
John Raymond, who is the Chief of Space Operations for the
United States Space Force. Thank you, gentlemen, all for being
here.
This is a very interesting time, as we try to figure out
how to meet our national security needs at the moment, and at
the same time prepare for a rapidly changing future. And I
think that is the main theme of this hearing. Both within the
Space Force and within the Air Force, you have a fairly
complicated set of plans to figure out what platforms you are
going to need to meet the missions that you are being asked to
do.
On the Air Force side, we are juggling a variety of
different systems to try to figure out how to get to the
appropriate number of air wings; what to do with the F-35, as
we continue to await the delivery of the Block 4, the
capability that we really want; while at the same time dealing
with legacy aircraft systems like the A-10 and the F-22.
So, General Brown and Secretary Kendall, we are most
interested to hear sort of what is the vision of how that plays
out. I know those plans have changed quite a bit from year to
year, as the situation has evolved, cost has evolved, and as we
have learned more about what we are going to need going
forward. It would be good to get sort of a quick summary of
where you are at now today and your confidence level, both in
what the plan is and our ability to implement it in terms of
funding and, also, in terms of building those capabilities.
And I think the thing that has changed the most, which is a
continuing theme for this committee, is how survivability in
weapon systems has really changed. And we are certainly seeing
that in the fight in Ukraine. Missiles and drones and
information systems have changed everything. Platforms are not
as survivable as they used to be, and we need to figure out how
they can operate within hostile environments, and how we can
build better platforms that can operate within those hostile
environments.
If a swarm of relatively low-cost drones can deliver a
better punch and is more survivable in an environment than an
incredibly expensive airplane, how does that change our plans
going forward in terms of what we need? Because I think, as we
look at the fight in Ukraine again right now, the number one
biggest thing that we all wish we had more of is missiles, and
number two is drones. And so, how does that factor into our
plans?
And then, of course, long-range fires that are a huge part
of survivability as well, of being able to hit the enemy from a
greater distance than they could hit you matters enormously.
How does that fit into those plans going forward?
There are some similar challenges within the Space Force. I
mean, certainly, the information systems, space is absolutely
key to that--the ability to gather the information we need and
distribute it to the people who need it, when they need it, and
to make sure we can protect it. That is increasingly important
on the battlefield these days, and also, more and more
challenging to make sure that those systems are survivable, as
we need to upgrade that. So, very curious to see how all of the
systems are being upgraded to make sure that they meet those
requirements.
Then, of course, the other huge thing in space is we are
planning on launching a lot of satellites in the next 20 years.
Part of how we want to develop that survivable infrastructure,
that survivable information system infrastructure, is to have
more redundancy. Instead of relying on a few exquisite
platforms, have more spread out that are more survivable and
more redundant. But to get there, that is a lot of work in
terms of building satellites, launching them, maintaining them.
I am curious to see how that fits within the budget.
And we do have to figure out how to fit within the budget.
I know there will be a lot of discussion today about whether or
not you have enough money. Does anybody, other than Elon Musk,
that is, ever really have enough money? You know, I am
interested in that, certainly.
Inflation, supply chain, these issues are complicating
everything that I just said and everything that you are trying
to do. We are curious to know how you are looking at handling
those issues. But, also, whatever you have got, you have got to
spend it well. And it has just been my experience throughout
life that you can give somebody 10 times as much money, but if
the person with one-tenth the money spends it better, they are
going to win. So, how do you make sure that you are spending
the money in an efficient and effective way to deliver what you
are trying to get?
And so, I am curious about all of those issues.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Rogers for his opening
statement.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the witnesses for their service to our
country and for their preparation and attendance today.
I do remain extremely concerned about President Biden's
budget proposal. The budget request does not keep pace with the
threats we are facing from China or Russia, and it does not
keep pace with the historic levels of inflation we are
currently experiencing.
Inflation is eating into the buying power of the Department
and impacting the livelihoods of our service members and their
families, and it is not going down anytime soon. We are going
to be dealing with this problem well into fiscal year 2023 and
beyond. But the budget request doesn't account for it. General
Milley testified to that fact last month. This means nearly
every dollar of increase this budget has, is eaten up by
inflation. Very little, if anything, will be left over to
modernize or grow capacity. That forces our service chiefs to
make unnecessary choices about which requirements to fund and
which to defer.
The $5.2 billion unfunded priorities submitted by General
Brown and General Raymond are a testament to that fact.
Priorities such as F-35s, hypersonic weapons, missile warning
and tracking, and the critical weapons and facilities
sustainment all went underfunded in this budget. These are
exactly the priorities we should be funding.
The budget continues the Air Force's strategy to divest
capabilities that aren't survivable in a fight against China
and use the savings to invest in advanced technologies capable
of prevailing in that conflict. While I support that approach,
we should ask tough questions about how much risk we are
absorbing and for how long.
Many of the divestments in this year's budget would
undermine the service's ability to continue to meet critical
requirements until the next decade. That is because
replacements are still early in the development process, while
delivery timelines continue to move to the right.
To make matters worse, the budget cuts the buy for many of
the capabilities we need to bridge the gap. It means the
administration is gambling that China, Russia, or some other
adversary won't force us into conflict before 2030. Given the
atrocities we are witnessing in Ukraine, that is a dangerous
bet. Divest to invest is important, but it can't leave our
combatant commanders trying to fill near-term requirements with
an empty toolbox.
Finally, I am glad to see the increased investments
proposed by the Space Force. We must continue to push forward
with distributed architecture in space in a smart way that
provides capabilities to the warfighters now, while
accelerating future systems.
I also want to highlight General Raymond's request to make
it easier to move [Space Force] guardians between Active and
Reserve status is a great move. This is exactly the type of
innovative approach to warfighting that we envisioned when we
created the Space Force.
I know there are several issues to work through on this
proposal, but I look forward to seeing it happen.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Secretary Kendall, you are recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK KENDALL III, SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE

Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Rogers, members of the committee.
I am honored to have General Brown and General Raymond join
me in representing the nearly 700,000 airmen and guardians that
defend our Nation. We are all thankful for your consistent
support over the years.
Speaking in 1940, General Douglas MacArthur said the
following: ``The history of failure in war can almost be summed
up in two words: `too late.' Too late in comprehending the
deadly purpose of a potential enemy. Too late in realizing the
mortal danger. Too late in preparedness. Too late in uniting
all possible forces for resistance, and too late in standing
with one's friends.''
I believe MacArthur made this comment after France fell to
Nazi aggression, but before the attack on Pearl Harbor drew the
United States into a war in Asia--a time that in some ways may
be analogous to today.
What my colleagues and I are trying to do, and what we need
your help with, is to ensure that American Air and Space Forces
are never too late in meeting our pacing challenge, which is
China. We are also concerned about the now obvious and acute
threat of Russian aggression.
Many of you have heard the China threat briefing that we
presented. It lays out China's efforts to develop and field
forces that could defeat our ability to project power in the
Western Pacific. Today, we will say more about how the
Department of the Air Force is responding to that threat
through our fiscal year 2023 budget and through future budgets.
Our budget submission provides a balance between the
capabilities we need today and investments in transformation
required to address emerging threats. With the requested
budget, the Air and Space Forces will be able to support our
combatant commanders in the continuing campaigns that
demonstrate our resolve and support and encourage our allies
and partners around the world.
Simultaneously, our fiscal year 2023 budget represents a
significant early step in the transformation of the Air and
Space Forces to the capabilities needed to provide enduring
advantage. An important feature of our budget request is a
substantial increase in research and development funding. This
investment is a down payment on production and sustainment
investments and hard choices that are to come.
We are comfortable with the balance struck in this budget
submission, but we also want to ensure the committee
understands that hard choices do lie ahead at any budget level.
In this request, we are asking for divestiture of equipment
that is beyond its service life, too expensive to sustain, or
not effective against the pacing challenge. These divestitures
are necessary to provide the resources required to transform
the Department of the Air Force to support integrated
deterrence. We appreciate the committee's support for the
divestitures we requested last year, and we ask for your
support his year and in the future. Change is hard, but losing
is unacceptable, and we cannot afford to be too late.
The work we have ongoing in the Department of the Air Force
to define the necessary transformation is focused on seven
operational imperatives, each of which is associated with some
aspect of our ability to project power. As of today, there
should be no doubt that great power acts of aggression do
occur, and equally no doubt of how devastating they can be for
the victims of that aggression.
First, if the Space Force is to fulfill its mission of both
enabling and protecting the joint force, we must pivot to
transformational space architectures and systems. In fiscal
year 2023, we are asking for funding to begin the
transformation to resilient missile warning and tracking and
resilient communications networks.
Second, we must integrate and efficiently employ Air and
Space Forces as part of a highly lethal joint force through an
Advanced Battle Management System, or ABMS. This budget
continues funding for early increments of ABMS and the ongoing
work that will define additional investments that the
Department needs to cost-effectively modernize our command,
control, communications, and battle management networks.
Third, to defeat aggression, we must have the ability to
hold large numbers of air and surface targets at risk in a
time-compressed scenario. This budget funds the E-7 Wedgetail
as an interim AWACS [Airborne Warning and Control System]
replacement, while supporting work to define the transformation
to a resilient combination of air and space intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance systems.
Fourth, our control of the air is being challenged, and we
must proceed to an affordable Next Generation Air Dominance
family of systems. The budget increases funding for the NGAD
family of systems, to include a sixth-generation crewed
platform and uncrewed, unmanned combat aircraft.
Fifth, we must have resilient forward-basing for our
tactical forces. This budget continues funding for Agile Combat
Employment in both the Indo-Pacific and European regions, while
we define the most cost-effective mix of hardening, active
defense, deception, and dispersion activities.
Sixth, we must ensure the long-term viability and cost-
effectiveness of our global strike capability. This budget
begins the transition of the B-21 from development to
production, and it continues the work to define a more
extensive global strike family of systems that also includes
uncrewed combat aircraft.
Finally, the Department of the Air Force must be fully
ready to transition to a wartime posture against a peer
competitor. In particular, we must strengthen our cybersecurity
and our resilience against attacks on the information systems
and facilities that we depend upon to go to war.
Members of this committee, I look forward to your support
as we work to ensure that America's Air and Space Forces are
never too late. ``One Team, One Fight.''
We welcome your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Kendall, General
Brown, and General Raymond can be found in the Appendix on page
67.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
General Brown.

STATEMENT OF GEN CHARLES Q. BROWN, USAF, CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S.
AIR FORCE

General Brown. Good morning, Chairman Smith and Ranking
Member Rogers, and distinguished members of this committee. It
is an honor to appear before you and represent the 689,000
total force airmen serving today. Thank you for your continued
support to our airmen and their families.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today with
Secretary Kendall and General Raymond to testify on the fiscal
year 2023 budget submission--a budget that continues to
accelerate the Air Force's rate of change to address the
national security challenges articulated in the National
Defense Strategy; a budget that continues to build on successes
of fiscal year 2022.
The world looks to the United States Air Force as a leading
example. Our airmen make air power look easy; it is anything
but. A world-class Air Force requires world-class airmen that
are organized, trained, and equipped to remain the world's most
respected Air Force.
But if we do not continue to transform, this may no longer
be the case. We must continue to communicate and collaborative
with this committee and key stakeholders, so we can accelerate
change.
Last year's budget communicated the Air Force the Nation
needs for 2030 and beyond. Our message has not changed for
fiscal year 2023 and won't change in future budget submissions.
We must modernize to counter strategic competitors. The
People's Republic of China remains our pacing challenge, and
Russia remains an acute threat. So, we must balance between the
demands of today and the requirements of tomorrow. Failure to
do so puts our ability to execute the National Defense Strategy
at risk. It puts soldiers, sailors, Marines, guardians, airmen,
along with our allies and partners, at risk. It puts our
ability to place air power anytime anywhere at risk.
The only way our Air Force and Nation will be successful
balancing risk between today and tomorrow is if we collaborate.
In fact, collaboration is the critical word in accelerate
change or lose.
We are beginning to see success of our collaboration
efforts transitioning to the future. This year's budget brought
substantial increases to research and development, focused on
placing meaningful military capability into the hands of our
airmen--investments in systems and concepts that allow our Air
Force to penetrate and dominate in any scenario.
Just as important in our investment efforts, we have been
successful beginning to divest systems that are increasingly
irrelevant against today's and tomorrow's threats. We didn't do
this alone. The support of Congress is much appreciated.
Accelerating change is the impetus behind the Department of
the Air Force's operational imperatives. It means moving with a
sense of urgency and doing so in the right direction. This
year's National Defense Strategy provides us the needed
direction. And when you combine the operational imperatives and
the National Defense Strategy, you see this year's budget is in
alignment with our Nation's needs and demands of our Air Force.
The Air Force we are building is critical to integrated
deterrence, campaigning, and building enduring advantages.
Because the nuclear deterrence is the backstop of any
deterrence, this year's budget ensures our nuclear portfolios
are fully funded.
Current events are emblematic of how our Air Force is
campaigning. We deployed Air Force assets within days; shared
vital information and increased interoperability with our
allies and partners.
Finally, the Air Force is investing in enduring advantages
that allow us to defend the homeland, project air power
globally, and operate as a joint, allied, and partner force.
More than anyone, I want tomorrow's airmen to be ready to
respond when our Nation calls. This includes investing in
programs that allow all of our airmen and their families to
reach their full potential.
As the United States Air Force celebrates its 75th
anniversary this year, we committed to remaining the world-
class Air Force America can be proud of.
Current events demonstrate the world is growing more
complex and uncertain. But I am certain we will need air power
anytime anywhere. I am certain this year's budget is another
step towards the transformation of our Air Force, and I am
certain there is still work to be done. Therefore, we must
continue to communicate and collaborate, so we can accelerate
change.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today,
and I look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
General Raymond.

STATEMENT OF GEN JOHN W. RAYMOND, USSF, CHIEF OF SPACE
OPERATIONS, U.S. SPACE FORCE

General Raymond. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers, and
distinguished members of this committee, it is an honor to
appear before you today with Secretary Kendall and General
Brown, and I am truly privileged to be part of this leadership
team.
On behalf of almost 14,000 guardians stationed around the
world, let me begin by thanking you for your continued
leadership and strong support of our guardians and their
families.
As we testify before you today, we find ourselves at a
strategic inflection point where we are faced with an acute
threat from Russia and a pacing challenge from China. The
Russian invasion of Ukraine has showcased the importance of
space to all instruments of power. Information derived from
space, including commercial imagery, has been instrumental in
dominating the information environment, communicating with
forces, detecting missile threats, and sharing of information
among allies and partners.
It is clear that the character of war has changed, and
space is foundational to that change. However, Russia's recent
direct-ascent anti-satellite missile test in November is just
the latest evidence of efforts to deny our Nation the
advantages that space provides.
Just as concerning, our pacing challenge, China, is
integrating space into their military operations to detect,
track, target, and strike the joint force, putting our
soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, and guardians on the
ground, in the air, and on the sea at high risk. We cannot
allow potential adversaries to gain an unchallenged ability to
conduct space-enabled attacks. Our joint forces will remain at
risk until we can complete the transformation to a resilient
architecture and protect the joint force from space-enabled
attacks. This is critical to supporting all aspects of the
National Defense Strategy--integrated deterrence, campaigning,
and building an enduring advantage.
To remain the world's leader in space, this President's
budget request prioritizes space and invests $24.5 billion to
ensure our assured access and freedom to maneuver in the
domain. The largest share is research, development, testing,
and evaluation funding, almost $16 billion to modernize our
forces, a portion of which will begin the pivot to a more
resilient and mission-capable missile warning and missile
tracking force design. Notably, this includes funding for the
Space Development Agency, which is included in the Space Force
for the first time this year.
In contrast to legacy approaches, this architecture will be
built to survive and degrade gracefully under attack, help
manage escalation, and be rapidly reconstituted. This
transformation will allow us to capitalize more fully on two of
our national advantages: our commercial industry and our allies
and partners.
To increase readiness, we are funding operational test and
training infrastructure. This ensures that we can get the right
capability on orbit in the hands of operators trained and
operating in a contested domain. Robust test and training
capabilities are also critical to fielding our next generation
of modernized systems.
Other key investments include increased funding for weapon
system sustainment, a more resilient Global Positioning System,
and next-generation satellite communications.
And finally, and most importantly, we invest in our
guardians and our families. Over the past 2 years, we have
overhauled how we recruit, assess, train, develop, promote,
employ, and take care of our guardians. Resilient space power
isn't just about satellites; it is also about guardians and
their families.
This is one of the reasons why we are seeking the
integration of the Active Duty and Reserve forces into a single
hybrid component structure. This Space Component is central to
our human capital plan and will allow us to best align our
full-time and part-time members. This is our number one
legislative proposal, and we look forward to working very
closely with this committee and Congress writ large to
implement this bold and transformational approach.
As Secretary Kendall said in his opening comments, ``Change
is hard, and losing is unacceptable.'' The transformation we
are beginning now is essential to protecting the joint force
and the security of space.
Thank you again for your leadership and support for our
Space Force. It is an honor to appear before you, and I look
forward to your questions. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Secretary Kendall and General Brown, when it comes to the
Air Force and you are trying to figure out the mix between the
F-35, the F-15EX, and then, legacy programs, the A-10, F-22, as
you are looking--I mean, we are very focused on the competitive
fight. You know, how do you survive in an environment going up
against what China and Russia can throw at us in terms of the
air defenses and the difficulty of surviving in that
environment? And then you run into platforms like the A-10,
which is incredibly effective in a permissive environment. And
maybe we will find a permissive environment or two along the
way. Certainly, that was the case in Iraq and Afghanistan.
When you are looking at those plans, to me, that is one of
the most confusing aspects. So, how do you balance that? You
can look at a fight and say, if it is a permissive environment,
this is what I want; if it is not, this is what I want. How do
you balance that, and how has that informed your plans for what
air platforms you want? This applies to tankers and bombers as
well. How are you balancing that and figuring out what your
plan is for the next decade and beyond?
Secretary Kendall. That is great question. It is an
important question.
General Brown will have some comments about this also. He
has talked about the fighter mix in the past.
We do need a mix of capabilities because we are supporting
combatant commanders from around the world for a variety of
missions, and there is constant demand for air assets
everywhere that there are American forces and American
interests.
Because of that, we maintain a mix, which traditionally was
kind of a high-low mix--more expensive aircraft that are more
capable for the more higher requirements; and then, a lower-
cost part of the force that allowed us to give us more quantity
and more capabilities overall. That balance traditionally has
served us fairly well.
What I observe as Secretary is that what we have currently
in the pipeline, and that will populate our future force, tends
to be all high-cost, higher-end capabilities. When you look at
NGAD, the newest system under development, it is quite
expensive. If you look at F-22, it was a fairly expensive
aircraft. That is the one that NGAD is replacing. F-35 was
intended to be at one time kind of the low end of a high-low
mix, but it is an $80-million-a-copy aircraft; it's fairly
expensive. So, then the rest of the force is filled out with
legacy aircraft we have already acquired to a large extent.
So, when I look at all of that--and F-15EX is now in the
mix, too, which has unique reasons why it is in the mix that
make good sense, but it is fairly expensive also, partly
because of the quantities we are buying, but it is just a more
expensive airplane.
So, basically, we need a more affordable mix for the
future. And the question is, how do we get there? And that is
one of the reasons I am introducing the idea of uncrewed combat
aircraft that are much less expensive and can be attritable,
not necessarily expendable. They are not munitions, but they
can be used up at a higher rate and help populate our force
structure. Now that is a ways away; that is quite a few ways
out. So, in the meantime, we have got to maintain the mix that
General Brown has talked about, which is a combination of the
F-35, the F-15EX, the F-22, and the F-16.
So, we are going to be evolving towards a new set of
capabilities in the future, but I am very much driven by both
affordability requirements and mission requirements, as we try
to build that capability.
And I will let General Brown talk about the mix from an
operational perspective.
General Brown. Chairman, we get to this approach based on
analysis, wargaming, experience, and in conversations with our
combatant commanders as well.
As Secretary Kendall described, it is a mix of capability
that we need to be able to have multi-role capability because
you don't know if you are going to be in a permissive or non-
permissive, and I would expect more non-permissive environments
in the future. So, we have got to have that capability.
The A-10 is a great platform for any non-permissive
environment. I don't see very many non-permissive environments
that we are going to roll into here in the future. And this is
why we are focused on--you know, the F-35 is a cornerstone of
our fleet, and continue to get it upgraded to get to TR3 and
Block 4 so it provides with the capability against a very
advancing threat from the PRC.
The F-15EX, which actually is an E model, more of a weapons
truck that can carry some high-end weapons, some of the weapons
we are developing, like hypersonic missiles that can fit on a
fighter.
We will also upgrade the F-22. As it transitions and
eventually becomes the NGAD, will replace the F-22. And then,
the F-16, which will be our low end. And we still have a number
of the post-Block or newer Block F-16s that we will keep for a
period of time.
So, that is the mix of capability that we will have for a
fighter. And we do the same thing, not only in the aircraft,
but it has also got to be the mix of munitions to go with it,
and the other support, aspects of the missions that go with
that fighter mix.
The Chairman. That is a very important point, and I think I
have been a little misleading in my question, mentioning China
and Russia, but the truth is what is developing. And as you
said, there aren't going to be too many non-permissive
environments because you don't have to be a China or a Russia
these days, as we are witnessing again in Ukraine. You know, a
small country, a relatively small military can still have air
defense systems that will defeat even the most high-end
aircraft.
So, we are going to have to be prepared to operate in far
less permissive environments than we have over the course of
the last couple of decades. And that requires a huge mindset
shift in terms of what we are going to build.
Just a quick question for General Raymond on the satellite
architecture. We have really had a massive evolution from 20
years ago, when we had United Launch Alliance, that we could
only afford to have one provider because there wasn't enough to
go around to create competition. Sorry, that didn't make a lot
of sense. You didn't have enough stuff that you were going to
buy. So, one company was all that could be there. And now, it
has just proliferated. You know, all manner of different
companies are developing both the ability to build satellites
and to launch them.
So, how do you see, you know, once we get through the phase
two purchases, where do we go in order to make sure we create
that competition, but also it is not spread so thin that
companies don't see a possibility of really making it work
economically when they are selling those launch capabilities?
How do you balance that in the next couple of decades?
General Raymond. Yes, that is a really good question. We
are at really a transformation point in space.
We go back to three tenets on our launch strategy. It has
been to have assured access to space, and that gets to your
point about not spreading them too thin. We want to make sure
that we have got the capability, but we have got the right
capability to put things in orbit.
The second part of our strategy was to promote competition.
And so, I think there are opportunities here with a manifest
that is becoming more significant in numbers, that there is
room for increased competition.
The third area was to get off the RD-180 engine. And we
have bought all the RD-180 engines that we need. In fact, it is
less than what Congress allowed us to do, and I am very
comfortable we are in a good position on that front.
I think one of the big changes that we have seen, though,
in these smaller constellations that are launched, in the past,
historically, a rocket would put one satellite up or two
satellites up. What we are seeing now is a rocket putting 80
satellites up, if you will, at a time.
And so, all of that goes into account, as we look forward
to what a phase 3 would look like.
The Chairman. And just put a quick plug in for competition
because I very much believe in that. I think we have a huge
opportunity in space, that there are so many companies;
certainly, the big ones that we have heard about, you know,
SpaceX, Blue Origin, others, but, then, gosh, probably a dozen
others that are smaller. And if we can encourage that
competition, I think we can get a better product for a better
price. So, I want to make sure we do that.
Thank you.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Raymond, you and I and General Hyten have talked
for years about how overclassified our space systems are. He is
gone now, but you are still there. I know you have been working
at trying to get some of this declassified. How is that going?
General Raymond. He is gone; I am still here, and so is our
problem. We are working it and we have made some progress. We
have restructured how we--what I've learned over the years is
not only were we overly classified, we were overly classified
in kind of a non-normal way. So, we have tried to normalize
that.
We have reduced classification on some programs. For
example, our GMTI [ground moving target indicator] program from
space, which was a higher classification, we reduced it, so we
could work with our partners in industry better.
There is a task that came out of the National Defense
Authorization Act this past year that was tasked to the
Secretary of Defense to do a review of all security
classification of all space programs. Assistant Secretary John
Plumb, Dr. Plumb, is working that, and we are integrated with
him.
There is more work to do, but we have got the right focus
on it, and I am convinced that we are going to make some
progress.
Mr. Rogers. Well, it is important. The fact is, the
American public still doesn't really know what Space Force is
about, and it is about satellites, as you know. And it is just
incredibly overclassified. We have got to get this information
out, not just for the public, but for our adversaries. I think
they need to know what we can do in a more open way.
And this is for you and General Brown: in fiscal year 2022,
we increased your budget by 6 percent, and as you know,
inflation was over 8 percent. How are you all dealing with
that? Give us some examples about what it means to you to have
inflation that is greater than the increase in your budget.
General Brown. Ranking Member Rogers, as we built the
budget, and not really having a good, full understanding of
where the inflation numbers were going to be--what we will have
to do, as we go back into our budget, is look at more detail
and figure out the areas that we are going to need to plus-up
in certain areas or make some choices internal to the Air
Force, and then at the same time work inside the Department of
how we articulate what the impact is from an inflation
standpoint on the key areas, because inflation impacts
different parts of the force in different ways. And so, it will
be some ongoing analysis that we will have to do.
General Raymond. I agree. I will tell you, though, as I
said in my opening statement, the Department prioritized space
in this budget pretty significantly. We have a pretty
significant increase to be able to do the critical work that we
are doing. It is going to have to be a balance, and we are
going to have to work with Congress throughout the year to make
sure that we can do it right.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I make that point because, you know, the
same thing is happening this year. As you have all seen, the
SECDEF [U.S. Secretary of Defense] and the Chairman testified
before this committee, acknowledging that the 2.2 percent that
is cooked into this budget proposal is not adequate and they
are going to have to revisit that, which means you are going to
have to revisit that as this year progresses and we try to
fashion what the top line is going to be. So, I do hope you
will be giving some thought to what you need to make sure that
you can meet your requirements to deal with current threats, as
well as the modernization that we expect from you all.
Secretary Kendall, just a minute ago, you were talking
about how pricey the F-22 and the F-35 are. The last F-22 we
bought cost $131 million. The F-15EX, $90 million per copy. F-
35, between $90 and $100 million. What can we do to get those
costs down? I mean, this is incredible numbers. You said $80
million a copy for F-35. It would be nice if it was $80
million. What can we do to get this down?
Secretary Kendall. Ranking Member, as you know, I spend a
lot of time working the acquisition side of the defense
business. And a great deal of that effort was spent on trying
to get costs down. We drove the cost of the F-35 down
substantially, as it was in development and transitioning into
production. We need to continue to do that.
Sustainment offers an opportunity for additional cost
reductions. And it is important to keep in mind that that is at
least half the cost of our weapons systems, is in sustainment
side.
But the key to keeping costs under control starts with
requirements. What are you buying? You know, if you put a lot
of capability and sophistication into an aircraft, it is going
to be more expensive, and that is exactly what we did with the
F-35.
Mr. Rogers. So, it has been a moving target, requirements
have been?
Secretary Kendall. Requirements have evolved, as the threat
has changed. But requirements need to be something that you
trade off against cost early in a program, and then
continuously, as you go forward. It requires tight cooperation
between developers and operators to ensure that we don't just
set a rigid set of requirements initially, and then, you know,
spend until we get there. That is not the right way to do it.
And I mentioned the operational imperatives earlier. Each
of those operational imperatives is led by a combination of an
acquisition person or a technical person and an operator. And
it is because we have to have that dialog between those two
communities to get to what is reasonable and affordable as part
of the mix, that also meets operators' needs, but isn't gold-
plated.
I think we are getting, at the end of the day, a very
capable aircraft in F-35. I think we are going to get an
aircraft that meets mission needs, the unique mission needs of
the F-15EX. I am watching the Next Generation Air Dominance
platform, which I put in motion when I was Under Secretary for
Acquisition, very carefully to see if we could keep the cost of
that down. As the F-22 replacement, it is going to be a very
capable aircraft. It is going to be the one that gives us air
superiority in the future.
But, again, as I mentioned earlier, I am introducing a mix
of uncrewed capabilities as well, which should be much less
expensive than the NGAD platform itself.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5 minutes, and he is on----
Mr. Langevin. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me
okay?
The Chairman. Yes, we have got you loud and clear. Go
ahead, Jim.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Okay. Thank you very much,
Chairman.
And I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today.
Secretary Kendall and General Brown, let me start with you.
We talked this morning about how much we have invested in,
and were dependent on, our overhead architecture [inaudible]
advanced technological capabilities. But with that comes real
vulnerabilities. And one of the things I am really concerned
about is that the Air Force's Link 16 crypto modernization
effort is behind. It's impacting readiness and safety. I am not
happy about this delay. What is the current status of the
effort and when will it be complete? And what are the barriers
to a faster timeline and what can be done to accelerate it?
Secretary Kendall. That is a good question. I am not sure
how much I can say in an open session about it.
We have been addressing the crypto mod requirements for a
Link 16 and became aware of it a few months ago and took steps
immediately to put the resources on it that were necessary to
get us where we need to be.
As we have gone through the last 20 years of being focused
on counterterrorism/counterinsurgency campaigns, where there
wasn't a sophisticated threat to our data links, that has been
neglected, quite frankly. So, we had to put resources against
it.
The lead time is, basically, we are replacing radios. So,
we have to buy the radios. So, there is some lead time
associated with that. But it is a problem we are well aware of.
That isn't the only concern we have with Link 16. We have
some others that go beyond that that I don't want to talk about
and can't talk about in an open forum. And we really need to
get to a next generation of capabilities as well. So, that work
is getting started also.
Mr. Langevin. I am concerned that this has been--the can
has been kicked down the road a lot, and I hope that that is
the end of that and we are going to actually get this done.
Secretary, let me switch to this: it is my hope that in the
near future the Department will continue to capitalize on
additive manufacturing and be able to, for example, 3D-print
spare parts for our platforms. This, clearly, would save time,
money; increase readiness; extend the usefulness of platforms
for years. So, how is the Air Force thinking about things like
3D printing?
Secretary Kendall. There is quite a bit of effort going
into that. It is a remarkable technology. I was involved in the
establishment of the Additive Manufacturing Innovation
Institute under the Obama administration. And in those days, we
had a very small number of materials--this was several years
ago--plastics, initially, but we have moved to a variety of
metals now. We have moved to some very complicated and
sophisticated geometries. So, there is huge potential there.
Tinker Air Force Base has done a lot of work piloting on
this for maintenance, particularly for building parts for some
of our older aircraft, which have been kept so long that things
that people thought would never wear out are now wearing out
and have to be replaced. So, we are using additive
manufacturing for that.
It has a lot of potential from a whole bunch of different
attributes. And so, we are continuing that technology and we
are looking for ways to address some of the problems that we
have with airworthiness certification, for example, the parts
that are built that way.
Mr. Langevin. All right. Thank you.
Secretary Kendall. So, it is one we are very bullish about
and doing quite a bit to take advantage of.
Mr. Langevin. Good. There should be no such thing as
obsolete parts anymore. We shouldn't have to cannibalize, say,
one aircraft to keep others running, if we can harness the
power of 3D printing.
General Raymond, our military depends on many critical
services that were built before we were concerned with things
like cyber threats. So, the capabilities our satellites provide
us with are extremely important; we all know that. And the
attack surface with the cyber breaches against them is
enormous.
How is the Air Force preparing for these threats and
creating a culture that integrates cyber from the ground up
proactively in our future plans and acquisitions? And how would
you integrate the JADC2 [Joint All-Domain Command and Control]
concept into your plans and acquisitions?
General Raymond. Yes, thank you for the question.
Space capabilities are basically a computer in space that
has a link to the ground. And so, it has, as you mentioned in
your question, cyber vulnerability. And one of the things that
we have done when we established the Space Force, is to enhance
our cyber posture. We brought cyber operators in from the Air
Force and from other services to be part of our service. We
have built an O6-level command that is focused on cyber. We
have put detachments at every one of our other operational
units. We have put cyber operators embedded on the ops floor,
sitting side-by-side with our space operators to better
understand the cyber terrain.
So, although I will never be comfortable that we have got
this solved, I am comfortable that we have got the right focus
on it, and we come to work every day making sure that we can
protect and defend our space capabilities from a full range of
threats--from cyber, on the one hand, to kinetic destruction on
the other.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Courtney [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Langevin.
The chair now recognizes--I believe Mr. Wilson is not
here--so, I would recognize Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This morning, there is a story in the Colorado Springs
Gazette regarding a report by the Government Accountability
Office [GAO] on the previous basing decision for U.S. Space
Command. I requested this report last year, and this request
was granted because of my ranking member position on the
Readiness Subcommittee of this committee. And as was reported
in this news article, and as I strongly suspected would be the
case, the GAO's investigation of the Space Command basing
process, quote, ``identified significant shortfalls in its
transparency and credibility.'' Unquote.
So, I am deeply concerned that the urgency to achieve full
operational capability for our space warfighters as quickly as
possible was not adequately addressed in the siting decision
because of a flawed process.
General Raymond, I know that Space Force posture does not
directly impact the basing decision for Space Command. However,
I have some questions for you I hope will shed some light on
the magnitude of the challenges that we are facing in space.
And I know you share my concerns regarding the rapid expansion
of these threats.
Challenges we face in space have accelerated greatly in the
last 2 or 3 years. How significantly do you anticipate the
threat will grow in the next 2 to 3 years?
General Raymond. There is a significant threat that exists
today, as I mentioned in the answer to the last question, and
it is a spectrum of threats--everything from reversible jamming
to kinetic destruction. And all of our intelligence suggests
that that is not going to slow down.
Mr. Lamborn. Space defense hinges on having accurate and
relevant data. Every day, guardians in my district work side-
by-side with the Commander of Space Command on this essential
task at the National Space Defense Center. The NSDC is where
the Department of Defense and intelligence community experts
train for and monitor threats to our space infrastructure.
Would you agree that maximizing the commander's access to
timely information through physical colocation of essential
functions is an advantage in maintaining space superiority?
General Raymond. We have the ability to command and control
from various places. U.S. Space Command actually has two
command centers: one in Vandenberg, California, and one in--
Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and one in Colorado
Springs. And so, there are ways to do this without being
physically colocated. Obviously, being colocated helps that you
can go visit more routinely, but you can do it in multiple
ways.
Mr. Lamborn. But is reduced decision time that comes from
working side-by-side and the lessening of security threats is
something you would prefer, as opposed to not having?
General Raymond. I guess I would ask--that is a question
for General Dickinson from his U.S. Space Command hat. In the
operational commander, in the Space Force role, I organize,
train, and equip and provide him capabilities. That would be
better addressed to him.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, we certainly will.
Given the rapidly changing character of space as a
warfighting domain, would your military advice generally be to
accelerate our ability to defend space by any means that we
have at our disposal?
General Raymond. I think it is important that the Nation is
prepared to conduct operations in space and to protect and
defend those for the good of our Nation, for the good of our
joint coalition forces, and for the good of the world.
Mr. Lamborn. To me, reaching full operational capacity for
Space Command as quickly as possible should be our highest
priority as a country. The threats are too serious, and the
threats are not going to wait. We have no other choice.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and with that, I yield back.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
The temporary chair now recognizes himself for a few
questions.
Secretary Kendall, one program that does seem like it is
not too late is the B-21 program, which, again, we can't get
into much details here. But I did want to ask you about a
question that you and I discussed a couple of weeks ago, which
is that, on the sustainment side, the contract that was used
for the B-21, which you were involved with in your prior
service in Washington, took a different approach in terms of
how the software ownership and proprietary rights were going to
be set up. And maybe you could just talk about that in terms of
the impact that it is going to have--hopefully, a positive
impact--in terms of the sustainment cost for that program in
the future.
Secretary Kendall. Sure. There are two points I would make
in that regard. One is that, with the digitized world that we
lived in, designs now are all entirely digital. And I have
given guidance to our acquisition people that we should be
taking delivery of our designs going forward for all of our
programs.
There was an era in which there was a philosophy about
letting the prime contractor basically take life-to-death
responsibility for a program. That was not effective. It
basically put people in sole-source position forever. It didn't
work out well for the government.
B-21, which Dr. LaPlante who is now the Under Secretary for
Acquisition and Sustainment, who was then the Air Force
acquisition executive, and I, when I was Under Secretary for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, we put in place a plan
to transition software maintenance to the government. The Air
Force has had some very good experience with doing this with
some other programs, and it is a job that allows the government
to maintain control of the technical baseline, if you will, to
own the product fully, as it goes forward, and to take control
of how it matures from a software perspective. So, we have had
good experience with that, and that is the approach I think we
are taking on the B-21.
Mr. Courtney. Yes, it may seem like a pretty sort of arcane
point, but we have had numerous hearings with GAO's weighing
in, in terms of how the software was handled for F-35. And it
really has been, I think, a big, according to the GAO, factor
in terms of driving up the cost of sustainment.
So, again, it is one of those programs which it is part of
the recapitalization of the triad, as well as having a
conventional mission. So, time is of the essence. And it looks
like, again, it is not going to be too late. So, hopefully, we
will all keep working together in terms of making sure of that.
Mr. Lamborn talked about the decision in terms of the Space
Force headquarters. There was another decision that was made in
the last year or so regarding the C-130J basing decisions,
which some of us recall, actually, a decision was made before
which preceded appropriation for that facility. And that
certainly left some of us a bad taste in our mouth in terms of
just how that was managed. We are now back in--there was no GAO
report but I think, honestly, the facts sort of speak for
themselves.
We are now back in a new round of C-130J basing. And I just
would simply ask you, and maybe General Brown, just to assure
us that there will be full, open communication and transparency
during this upcoming selection process. Because, again, I think
that is critical to, I think, the confidence of this committee,
and the Congress in general.
Secretary Kendall. Yes, I want to assure you that our
strategic basing process, or whatever process we use to make
basing decisions--sometimes we do it through the budget
process, basically--will be clear, open, transparent, and
apolitical. If there is one thing I have learned in my
experience in this position so far, it is the extreme concern
that people like yourself have for basing decisions.
And I want to be able to present all of our basing
decisions in a way which you can fully understand them and
understand what the basis was for them. You may not agree with
it, but you will understand that it was set up to be in the
interest of the Nation and in the best interest of the
Department of the Air Force, and that was what was behind any
decision that we made.
Mr. Courtney. Great. I appreciate that.
General, I don't know if you want to weigh in.
General Brown. Well, it ends up being the Secretary's
decision. But what I focus on is ensuring that, when we look at
it from a mission perspective, we are able to, one, do the
mission, but at the same time it supports the mission, but also
if there are airmen and families that come into those
communities as well. But we will be very open and transparent
with you.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank our witnesses for joining us today.
Secretary Kendall, I want to begin with you.
Last year, you said, ``If it doesn't threaten China, why
are we doing it?'' I couldn't agree more. We had that
conversation the other day. You also said, in your words, that
you are focused on the shortest path possible to a better
generation of actual fielded capability.
Last year, General Brown, you acknowledged, again in your
words, by saying, ``China continues to move its modernization
timelines left at a rate of change that is outpacing the United
States.''
This year's budget submission from the Air Force over the
next 5 years retires 646 aircraft and builds 246 aircraft. That
is a deficit of 400 aircraft. And I understand NGAD and
modernization, and all of the things that we want our aircraft
to do, unmanned platforms. But 400 [aircraft] is one heck of a
big vulnerability, capacity and capability gap that, in light
of your words about the things that scare China, or the things
that we need to move our efforts to the left because we are
being outpaced by China, just doesn't seem to add up. Can you
give me your perspective on what operational risk you think
that we will be facing in the next 5 years, as we spin down 646
aircraft and build back 246?
General Brown. I appreciate the question.
There is operational risk, and this is something, when I
talk about balancing risk over time, there is a balance between
the operational risk we will see today, as we make that
transition, versus the risk we will have in the future if we
don't start to modernize. And this is a conversation that I
have internal to the Air Force. It is a conversation I have
with our combatant commanders, and naturally, with this
committee and others.
We do have to make some tough choices. I also look at not
just the numbers, but I look at the overall capability and
capacity--not just the airplanes, but what goes with the
airplanes, as I mentioned earlier, whether it be the weapons,
our trained airmen, the support systems that go with. And so,
it is a complete package.
But I agree there is some risk there, but I would rather
take a little bit of risk now than a lot of risk later in a
future conflict.
Mr. Wittman. Let me ask this to both Secretary Kendall and
General Brown. What investments do you support that would
accelerate these modernization timelines; that would--however
you term it--buy back some of that risk or reduce that risk
over time?
Secretary Kendall. I was thinking as you spoke earlier,
Congressman, about China and their relative performance
compared to ours. I have looked at the data on this. Their
engineers are not faster than our engineers. Their lead time to
field any given capability is comparable to our own.
But what they have done that we have not probably done
enough of is start a lot of new things, and then take them
through to fielding. And when I look at the scale and the
breadth of what they are doing to modernize, they seem to be
very open to integrating new technologies and integrating them
and using them in creative ways. We have got to be more
forthcoming about that sort of thing.
But that requires some cultural changes, if you will;
acceptance of uncrewed combat aircraft, for example. We have to
actually do what we talk about in programs like JADC2 and ABMS
and get to real capability.
When I look at what we have done, particularly, over the
last few years, we have done programs that were designed to go
fast, but they weren't necessarily going in the right
direction, and then, didn't necessarily get to the place you
want to get to. It is the hare and the tortoise problem.
Going quickly to do a demonstration doesn't get you very
far down the road to a real fielded, production-ready
capability. So, I have asked our acquisition people to look at
all those programs and make sure they are structured to--and my
guidance is--to get meaningful military capability, not just
one or two of something, but meaningful military capability as
quickly as possible.
At the end of the day, that is going to be about resources.
Production is much more expensive than R&D [research and
development], and sustainment is comparable to production. So,
at the end of the day, we are going to need the support of this
committee and others to move some of those programs forward and
get them into production.
We will accept some risk. We can accept quite a bit of risk
in early experimental phases, where failure is acceptable, and
we want to try things. But once we commit to a real product, we
want to manage that risk so that we do get the product. And it
includes tradeoffs between requirements sometimes and cost and
other things, and risk. It requires prudent investment to draw
down risk, to drive it down as efficiently and quickly as
possible.
And General Brown was talking about risk over time. I am
very aware of the increasing threats that we are going to be
facing, looking out at what their programs are and what they
are going to be fielding. And as much as we might have concerns
today, they are going to be much worse in the future if we
don't make the right investments.
Mr. Wittman. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, gentlemen, thank you for your service and thank for
appearing here today.
General Raymond, among the support groups you have
available to you are National Guard units. There has been a
discussion about how those National Guard units might be
integrated into the Space Force. Would you please discuss how,
if--how this might be done or if you intend to do it?
General Raymond. Yes, sir. We have operated--first of all,
let me just say we have operated with, when we were in the Air
Force, part of the Air Force, we operated with the Air National
Guard for 25 years. There are eight States that have Guard
capabilities, space capabilities, and one territory in Guam.
That represents 836-or-so professionals that do the space
mission.
When the law was passed to establish the Space Force,
Congress directed that we do a study on how best to integrate.
If you have a service that has 14,000 people, there might be a
way to do this more effectively. We did that study. And as a
result of that study, we came up with the one component with
the Reserve and Active being put together.
And then, on the Guard, there are several ways you can do
it. And so, you could keep the Guard in the Air National Guard
and have the Air National Guard continue to provide support.
Option two is you could take the Space National--or the men and
women out of the Air National Guard and stand up a separate
Space National Guard. Or you can take those capabilities out of
the Guard totally and put them in an S1 component. So, there
are multiple ways. The law--this NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] directed us to do some more study on the
best way to do that.
Mr. Garamendi. Then you are fully aware that at least the
California Air National Guard would like to have the space unit
of that National Guard unit become a space--directly into the
Space Force?
General Raymond. Yes, sir, I am aware. They provide great
capability. As I mentioned, eight different States have this
capability, and they provide us great----
Mr. Garamendi. My understanding is they are not the only
National Guard unit around the Nation.
General Raymond. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. Thank you.
We are aware of this. We are going to follow it, obviously.
General Brown, not my favorite subject, but one that you
and I have spent some time on. The GBSD [Ground Based Strategic
Deterrent], you are not hiding the ball by changing the name,
are you?
General Brown. Not at all.
Mr. Garamendi. I didn't think so, but I want to be clear
about it.
Presently, the Minuteman III is expected to continue to
perform until the late 2030s, is that correct?
General Brown. We will have aspects of the Minuteman III
that will continue to perform because, as we bring on Sentinel
or GBSD, we have got to make sure we still have the nuclear
capability that is part of our integrated deterrence. So, it is
a transition. It is not a flip of a switch to get from one to
the other. So, we are going to have to continue to maintain
Minuteman III capability to make that transition.
Mr. Garamendi. So, the answer is the Minuteman III can be
and will be maintained until the late 2030s?
General Brown. Aspects of the Minuteman III will be
maintained through the 2030s. You will not have the full
capability required to support what we have as a requirement
right now.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, that gets into a lot of detail, some
of which is classified, and we will continue to pursue it.
Have you figured out what it will cost on the military
construction side to replace the Minuteman III systems?
General Brown. We have done the analysis on that, and I
don't have the number, the exact number, for you, but I can get
that for the record.
Mr. Garamendi. There is no number, is there?
General Brown. No, there is.
Mr. Garamendi. You really don't know what it is going to
cost on the military construction side to replace all of the
facilities necessary for the Sentinel/GBSD.
General Brown. There is a number, and I know we have been
working with your staff. And I will get back with you to give
you more detailing and also more for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 93.]
Mr. Garamendi. It is presently not in the budget that has
been presented to us, is that correct?
General Brown. I would have to double-check on that.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. Fifty seconds.
The chairman raised an exceedingly important point in his
opening comments, and that is the world seems to have changed
rapidly in the last 3 months. And the most sophisticated
airplanes and facilities of the Russian military seem to be
incapable of overcoming some rather less sophisticated systems.
I want to have a full discussion this year about what the
chairman raised about maybe big, very expensive, very
sophisticated systems may not be the future. We don't have time
to go into it, but that issue needs to be fully discussed, as
we complete this NDAA.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank each of you for being here. I was, again, so
happy to point out how grateful I am for my dad's service with
the 14th Air Force in India and China. And so, I have just
grown up--and I grew up in the Holy City of Charleston, South
Carolina, in the shadow of the Charleston Air Force Base. And
so, I have a nephew in the Air Force, too. So, hey, very proud
of you-all's service.
Secretary Kendall, you have clearly articulated the urgent
need to transform and modernize the U.S. Air Force. I support
the Air Force's plan to modernize its fighter fleet; where
smart and necessary, divest aircraft to maximize our ability to
field the most ready and lethal force possible.
I am concerned, though, that the Air Force is taking the
path of least resistance when it comes to fighter roadmap. I
understand the Air Force basing plan simply places the F-35 at
F-15C locations, instead of those locations best suited to
build and preserve F-35 combat readiness.
What is your position that current and future F-35 basing
decisions will include both a short- and longer term readiness
criteria, and that you will expand the candidate list beyond
the installations with retiring aircraft?
And second, will you ensure that you will direct your staff
to seek out and evaluate creative basing solutions that provide
for cost-effective, innovative basing solutions?
Secretary Kendall. Now, Congressman, I haven't had a chance
to look at F-35 basing decisions yet in my tenure, but I will
promise you to do so. Mission performance is going to be a very
fundamental concern. I don't think we should be overly
constrained as we look at, at that, that metric.
We need to support combatant commanders in all the theaters
where we need to worry about high-end threats. But, also, we
need to have forces that can flex and go support where they are
needed when they are called upon.
And I know we are deploying F-35s and basing F-35s forward,
both in Europe and in the Pacific. Alaska is one of the bases
that we selected which can provide support in either direction
fairly efficiently.
So those, those things I know are taken into account. But I
haven't had a chance to review them personally. And I am open
to creative ideas about this. I am always open, I hope, to
creative ideas to improve our performance or our capabilities.
I will let General Brown comment. I am sure he has more on
that.
General Brown. I appreciate the question.
One of the areas is we are really looking at more broadly
across our not only our fighter fleet but many of our other
fleets, stepping back and taking a more strategic look at what
is the right basing based on the current environment, or what
we project the environment to be vis-a-vis the threat here in
the future. And that will actually drive us into, as the
Secretary described, being a little bit more creative than the
way we have done things historically going forward for basing
for fighters and other, other capabilities as well.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, both of you, for that.
And, again, Mr. Secretary, I am grateful to work with
Congressman Jim Clyburn who physically represents the McEntire
Joint National Guard Base and which is so advantageous for
long-term F-35 readiness.
It is a U.S. Air Force owned and operated autonomous
Federal installation that maintains an F-35 compatible
infrastructure, provides exceptional clear airspace, and
welcome to the community, too. They like the sound of freedom.
Has appropriated funding for F-35 compatible simulator
facility, possesses organic ranges, hosts the best training
environment on the east coast, with the most clear, again,
without interfering with local communities, and retains
unlimited space for growth, and enjoys limited encroachment
concerns.
My question, will you work with Congressman Jim Clyburn and
myself in a bipartisan effort to evaluate a F-35 basing plan
for McEntire Joint National Guard Base which not only affords
the infrastructure for F-35 to thrive for decades, but also
yields a modernized F-16 Block 52s for capture and use by the
active Air Force institutional requirements as well as
recapitalization of the fighter wing inside the Air National
Guard?
Secretary Kendall. Yes, Congressman. I am happy to work
with you on that.
Mr. Wilson. And I hope you visit beautiful Eastover, South
Carolina, where Senator Clyburn is so lucky to represent such a
wonderful community. And just, again, the joint base does
great.
And then, finally, a question. In regard to upgrading F-
35s, what is the consideration of installations across the Air
National Guard for future F-35 basing, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Kendall. We will be upgrading F-35s from the ones
we bought in earlier configurations. I haven't had an
opportunity to look at a plan for exactly how we are going to
do that or what units would be affected.
Mission requirements would, I think, be the driving concern
in that, however. But I will take a look at that as part of the
overall F-35 scheme for future fielding.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Norcross is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. And welcome, gentlemen.
Obviously, some things have changed, as they do each and
every year. But when it comes to the tactical air it has
changed at a more rapid pace, certainly, from what we are
handed out today.
So, we heard earlier that back in 2010, 2012, the last F-22
was $130 million roughly. That is about 155 million today
dollars versus the F-35 as we see it today, around $80 million,
or the next block which could be $90 to $95 million, and the EX
and the prices.
We are all concerned about the price that we buy these
aircraft at. But we also know that two-thirds of the cost,
almost 70 percent, is in the sustainment.
So, I think having a discussion of how much we are buying
it versus how much it is costing us needs to be discussed
together because those are real dollars that are literally
making us make decisions today on aircraft that were produced
years ago, and putting us in a very difficult position, NGAD
being one of those, and the development costs for that sixth
generation.
Secretary, you talked about the F-22 being replaced by
NGAD. When we look at some of the original projections of when
that would be available, we are sliding to the right, further,
later.
In addition to coming in later, and there potentially is
that gap that could take place, (A) have you looked at closing
that risk, that gap?
And at what price do you expect a copy to come in of the
NGAD? The price per copy, how much for that?
And then we can talk about sustainment of it later on.
Secretary Kendall. This is a number that is going to get
your attention. But we are talking about prices that are
multiple hundreds of millions of dollars for NGAD on the usual
basis.
Mr. Norcross. That is with the pilot; correct?
Secretary Kendall. Yes.
Mr. Norcross. The copy.
Secretary Kendall. That is a piloted, manned aircraft. It
is going to be an expensive airplane. F-22 was an expensive
airplane. It was one of my aircraft in one of my earlier
positions. But it is also an incredibly effective aircraft. It
has been dominant in the air for decades now.
And we expect NGAD to be the same. But NGAD is going to
have to be accompanied by things that are not as expensive to
give it overall mission capability, which is the reason we are
going down the uncrewed combat aircraft route.
You mentioned cost control. That starts in development. It
starts with the design. Combination of the requirements, but
also for sustainment in particular, ensuring that you can do
upgrades and do maintenance very efficiently. So, it is worth
the time and the effort in the earlier phases of a program like
NGAD to get those things right because you are going to pay for
what you did much later in sustainment with much bigger
dollars.
And from what I have seen of the NGAD program so far, that
approach has been taken. We have taken a very good approach to
having modular designs and interfaces the government controls
so they can upgrade the program over time, keep it current
technically so it can stay in the force for a long time and
stay as advanced as possible, but also to introduce competition
to get cost down through competition as you go forward.
So, despite the fact that it is going to be an expensive
aircraft, there are a lot of things being done in that design
today to keep the costs under control as much as possible.
Mr. Norcross. And this is a discussion, Chairman Garamendi
in Readiness, he keeps telling me I'm throwing a cheap plane
that costs him more to sustain it.
But let's talk about the accompanying NGAD more affordable.
What are you looking at price per copy for some more of those
expendable, is probably not the right word, but----
Secretary Kendall. We don't have a final price per copy
yet. We don't have a hard estimate, I think, yet that we could
point to. You know, crude estimates are in the order of
magnitude that I talked about.
Mr. Norcross. All right. So, we talked about the cost.
How about the timeframe, which is sliding to the right?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry?
Mr. Norcross. The timeframe, it is coming in much--or
predicted to come in much later than we originally had
expected.
Secretary Kendall. I am not aware----
Mr. Norcross. When you start talking about the F-22 holding
out that long, there appears to be----
Secretary Kendall. We are looking at fielding capability in
the early thirties right now. So, I, I can get you a schedule
we have. It is a classified program, so I am not sure how many
details----
Mr. Norcross. I understand.
Secretary Kendall [continuing]. We're even making public.
But, you know, it's in the early stages of development. But
it's far enough along in terms of concept.
It is actually built, the NGAD platform is built on a
technology demonstration program that I started when I was
Under Secretary for Acquisition. It is called the Aerospace
Innovation Initiative. And it was to build X-planes that
demonstrated key technologies for the next generation of
tactical air warfare.
And that program has been pretty successful. We have built
some prototypes that have matured the key technologies. But now
we have to go to the design we are going to use for production,
which is not going to be----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scott is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary and Generals, thank you for being here.
I do want to make sure that as we work towards that final
number, and we are looking at the list of unfunded priorities,
that we are keeping in mind the civilian workforce and the
uniform workforce and what inflation has done to them. And they
are the most important asset that we have in the military.
And as someone who represents Robins Air Force Base and
Moody Air Force Base, I want to just make sure that that
workforce is taken into account with what inflation has done to
them.
With that said, General Brown, your predecessor General
Goldfein and I had a lot of discussions about JSTARS [Joint
Surveillance Target Attack Radar System] and ABMS [Advanced
Battle Management System]. I will pick on the Army since they
are not here. I did, I did see their request this week for a
manned aircraft for ground-moving target indicator that looked
very similar to what the JSTARS recap [recapitalization] looked
like.
I know the Air Force is committed to ABMS. And I appreciate
your commitment to that and Robins Air Force Base. Is there any
discussion with the Army potentially about transferring the
GMTI mission that currently exists to them since they are now
requesting a manned GMTI platform?
General Brown. We have not had that conversation. We talked
to them about--at least my intel [inaudible] talked to them
about the platform and letting them know that the Space Forces
are going to really help us with ground moving target
indication based on some of the capabilities they are pursuing.
And that is, that is the approach we are taking
[inaudible]. We do have the Global Hawk Block 40 that can do
some of that as well. So, I think there are ways we can solve
this from a joint perspective using the Space Force
capabilities.
I question why, why we are going down the path of pursuing
something that we're trying to move away from, and if you go
back to we are not going to be in permissive environments where
we can actually operate like we have in the past.
Mr. Scott. So, you understand my concerns with the
difference of messaging today versus a few years ago with
actually a manned ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance] [system] that is not survivable versus China
and Russia.
Any concerns about as the JSTARS drawdown becomes, becomes
faster, the loss of ISR for our combatant commanders? Or are
you convinced that we can fill the capability gap with JSTARS
coming down?
General Brown. I believe we can, we can fill the gap. But I
also, as I said earlier, there will be some risk here. But I
also think about how we can do our ISR today. It is not always
from an airborne platform. With the amount of information
that's available, amount of capability we have in space,
whether it is provided by the military, provided by the
intelligence community, or things we are able to provide--look
at commercially, there are so many different ways to get the
information on ISR.
And we are in some cases infatuated with some of the
airborne platforms. But we have capacity and capability, and we
have proven that time and time again of how we will be able to
get the information to our combatant commanders. Doesn't
necessarily always come from an airborne platform.
Mr. Scott. General Raymond, I do have a question I want you
to answer, too.
But it was announced earlier this week that we would no
longer, the United States would no longer test ground-based
systems to destroy satellites.
Do you believe that the Chinese and the Russians would
agree to no longer do that? Or is this going to be an area
where the United States is going to simply stand alone, and our
adversaries are going to continue to test the ability to use
ground-based missiles to destroy satellites?
Secretary Kendall. We are hoping that the initiative that
we have taken, the administration has taken, will encourage
others to join us. We are not giving anything up because we
weren't going to do that kind of a test anyway. We can get the
testing that we need done without a destructive, debris-
creating test.
We just saw Russia recently do such a test. China has done
them in the past. And we want to put as much pressure on them
to not do that kind of test as possible. And this is part of
the effort to do that.
General Raymond. If you look at the numbers of objects that
we were talking about earlier, the number of objects that are
going to be launched into space, we have got to keep the space
domain free of debris. It is going to become increasingly,
increasingly congested.
And as the Secretary said, this, this was about destructive
tests. There's other means of doing those tests. We would not
do an irresponsible behavior like China or Russia has done in
the past.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, gentlemen.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Moulton is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, gentlemen, thank
you very much for being here.
General Brown, in a 2021 op-ed with General Berger coming
out of the Marine Corps you explained that a fundamental change
is needed to occur to address the 2018 National Defense
Strategy funding priorities was the definition of readiness.
How do you define ``readiness''? And how does this budget
address the changes to that definition?
General Brown. I look at readiness as not just based on
ability, the capability or the amount of resources, but it is
the aspect of our ability to have airmen who are trained to
meet the demands to use that equipment in the scenarios that we
expect from, that we expect to see in the future.
In this particular budget the areas we put into readiness
and into our readiness accounts are our flying-hour program,
for our weapons system sustainment, but it is also [inaudible]
to our operational test and training infrastructure and to our
ranges. And two of the key ranges that we are focused on is the
Nellis Test and Training Range, and the Joint Pacific Alaska
Range up in, up at Alaska JPARC [Joint Pacific Alaskan Range
Complex].
Those are a couple of key areas. But the other aspect that
I will also tell you that is maybe not so much in the budget
but it is really our processes of how we do this and balance
this. There is ongoing conversation within the Air Force, but I
will also say with the Marine Corps and the joint force how we
do this a bit better.
Matter of fact, conversations this last week of each of the
services define readiness a little bit differently. We need to
get closer to the same page, and not only just look at
availability, but the capability and the trimlines associated
with readiness as we make decisions for force management in the
future.
Mr. Moulton. If you have a bunch of aircraft that are ready
to go, that can be flown tomorrow, but they are combat
ineffective against the adversaries that we are going to face,
then that doesn't count as readiness. I think that is the key
point.
As this discussion goes on with the other services, please
let us know if there is anything we can do to accelerate it.
Because I think this is a place where we clearly need to make a
change to deal with the fast-evolving threat.
Have you been able to make any of these changes with your
subordinate command in terms of just how they report readiness
up to you?
General Brown. I have been able to. And part of this is us,
you know, being disciplined about the approaches we take. And,
you know, our airmen want to serve. And therein lies part of
the challenge; when things happen, they want to, they want to
lean forward. But we have to balance that over time. And this
is why we went to our Air Force Force Gen [Generation] model to
lay out in--really it's a four-bin model to ensure that we can
commit, be ready to commit, prepare, and then reset after we
have been committed from a force standpoint.
And that is a process we are going through internal to the
Air Force to help reshape ourselves and ensure that we report
readiness much better, but we don't burn all our readiness up
front and then leave a hole when there is a crisis that comes
in the future.
Mr. Moulton. General Raymond, can you comment on this as
well for the Space Force?
General Raymond. I would be happy to.
Historically, we have had the luxury of measuring our
readiness in space against a peaceful, benign domain without a
threat. And so, that is not the domain that we find ourself in
today. So, we have really done a restructure of how we do
readiness as well.
Part of that is the reporting to me to make sure that we
are looking at it in a lens through a contested domain.
The other thing that is different, we are largely employed
in place. Most of our readiness models bias the deployed
capabilities that deploy in the theater. And so, we have had to
reconstruct our readiness models to best capture readiness from
an employed-in-place 24/7 type force.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Secretary, we have obviously been very
focused on Ukraine lately. Can you give us two examples of
lessons that we have learned from the conflict in Ukraine and
how they are reflected in your budget?
Secretary Kendall. We watched the buildup as it was
occurring. And were aware that there was a pretty significant
probability that Russia would invade Ukraine.
There are some considerations perhaps from that in our
budget. Generally speaking, the type of threat we are seeing
there is not a surprise to us. And China being the pacing
challenge from a technical point of view and an operational
point of view, that was what really motivated us more than
anything else.
We are all watching Ukraine right now. And it is a bit
early to draw a lot of judgments from it. I will leave the
political, other judgments to others. But from the point of
view of military operations, you know, I think the Chiefs could
talk on this, too, the failure of Russia to achieve air
superiority early and to control the air decisively I think has
been a major impediment to their attempt in the invasion.
The other thing on the other side of the equation is that
the effectiveness of the air defenses, particularly weapons
like Stinger and SA-10, and anti-armor munitions for that as
well; some of those weapons were very important in keeping the
Russians out of the air and extracting losses from them.
Part of that is because of the tactics that the Ukrainians
used. They were very--they used what they had well, and they
were able to keep those systems alive despite the threat and
use them effectively.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time----
Secretary Kendall. And we can learn a lot from that.
The Chairman [continuing]. Has expired.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Dr. DesJarlais is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you.
Secretary Kendall, the unfunded priorities list that you
submitted to Congress included $197 million for hypersonic
testing. And I would like to get a better idea of where that
money is going.
So, first, how do you assess the current hypersonic test
capability within the Air Force Test Center?
And second, what impact will the requested funding have in
shoring up the existing gaps in that capability?
Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Congressman.
Just to be clear, I did not submit an unfunded requirements
list. Chiefs Brown and Chief Raymond did.
Dr. DesJarlais. All right.
Secretary Kendall. We did put money mostly through the
Secretary of Defense's office, the Under Secretary for Research
and Engineering, into advancing our hypersonic test
capabilities. And I will let General Brown talk about the
explicit impact of the addition that he would increase.
But I believe it would simply accelerate what we were
already planning to do to get us more capability sooner.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. General Brown.
General Brown. Sure. You know, part of the reason why we
wanted to put this not only in unfunded priority list, but as
we looked through our budget all the services are pursuing
hypersonic capability. Our hypersonic test facilities are not
where they need to be, not only in capability but also in
capacity.
And what I wanted to do with this unfunded priority was
actually put more focus, we already put some investment into it
but we continue to put more investment into those facilities.
And we work very closely with OSD [Office of the Secretary of
Defense] because they have most of the oversight for this. But
we have to work together with the other services to ensure we
can do the testing and ensure we can provide that capability
here in the future.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I am curious to know whether you
would like to see Congress consider increasing thresholds for
minor construction authorities like the lab revitalization
development program in light of the inflation that we are
seeing impacting this money?
General Brown. I would say that would give us a bit more
flexibility for minor construction. I think this is something
we probably need to review periodically as costs increase,
whether it is inflation or just general costs, and how we
define that. We do that in other areas as well. I think it
would be worth considering.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Back to you, Secretary Kendall.
In recent months you have made some interesting comments on
your vision for hypersonic weapons and the purpose they should
play in the U.S. arsenal. Last month at a panel for the
Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies you questioned, or you
had the question of whether you can do the job with
conventional missiles at less cost just as effectively. And
then went on to say that hypersonics are a way of penetrating
defenses but they are not the only way.
And I just wanted you to elaborate a little bit on those
thoughts.
Secretary Kendall. There are a combination of things we can
do which includes stealth, you know, decoy penetration aids of
various types, jamming
So, there are other things we can do to penetrate defenses.
Hypersonics do have a role, and we do need hypersonics. I don't
think that they are a panacea, and they are not always the most
cost-effective solution. They are important capabilities that
we do want to get into the inventory.
Dr. DesJarlais. And we have all been kind of concerned at
some of the ARRW's [Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon's]
failures over the past year. And we have poured significant
investment into those in the fiscal year 2022 budget. Can you
provide us with an update on the Air Force plans and goals to
develop the field of hypersonic weapons?
And then in the fiscal year 2023 budget request it looks
like we may be shifting focus away from the ARRW towards the
hypersonic attack cruise missiles; and would you say that is
fair?
Secretary Kendall. We have funded the research and
development on ARRW. We haven't funded the production yet. And
the reason for that is primarily that they have had a number of
test failures. We want to see some success before we commit
production money.
We are interested in both of those concepts. And I think I
could get--I would have to get into some classified information
to talk about the exact applications of both.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay.
General Raymond, as the conflict in Ukraine drags on, we
continue to see China and Russia inch closer together
diplomatically and militarily. And this extends into the space
domain as well. As we see Sino-Russian ties produce agreements
for cooperation on lunar missions and proposed joint
international lunar research station, how are you assessing the
threat environment in the space domain currently?
And are you concerned by these closer ties between Russia
and China?
General Raymond. Space is clearly a warfighting domain, as
I mentioned. There is a significant threat today, and that
threat is growing, everything from reversible jamming to
kinetic destruction.
It is concerning to see Russia and China work together in
areas that would not be in our best interest. But I will tell
you, we have the best partnerships and allies in the world. And
it is one of our great strengths. We have worked really hard
over the last past couple years to really strengthen these.
Not only--it used to be that our international partnerships
were one-way kind of data sharing arrangements. Now we are
operating together, training together, developing norms of
behavior together, funding capabilities together. So, I would
put the strength of our partnerships well ahead of anything
that China might do.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gallego is represented for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
General Raymond, thank you for your testimony. I was
pleased to see in your written testimony you address how the
Space Force can help confront challenges in the gray zone. As
you know well, Russia and China are saturating the globe with
state-backed propaganda. And we don't have to look further than
Russia's blatant lies about its invasion of and the ongoing war
in Ukraine to see this trend.
Within the broader context of gray zone activities, how do
you think Space Force can strengthen and amplify joint force
initiatives to confront this challenge?
General Raymond. I think we have seen in the conflict, the
Russian-Ukraine conflict where space----
Mr. Gallego. I am sorry, General. Can you just wait one
second? I can't hear.
Okay, proceed.
General Raymond. I think you, you have seen very clearly in
the Russian-Ukraine conflict where space, including commercial
space, has provided a great advantage to Ukraine, especially in
the gray zone. Commercial space has allowed us to share
information much more broadly. It has allowed us to see the AOR
[area of responsibility] in much greater, in much greater
clarity. And so, I think space has been really instrumental in
helping shape this, this gray zone competition, especially
leading up to the conflict.
Mr. Gallego. Mr. Kendall, or Secretary Kendall, the Solomon
Islands recently signed a security agreement with China which
would allow Beijing to deploy troops to the Solomons and could
even result in the first Chinese military base in the Pacific.
This altering the status quo requires the United States to
further strain our regional alliances and partnerships.
What is your perspective on expanding the Five Eyes
intelligence partnership to close allies in the region such as
Japan or South Korea? Japan's ISR network, for example, has
robust capabilities, including the RQ-4s, E-2s and P-1s, all of
which would be critical additions to the theater situational
awareness in any Taiwan scenario. Is the Air Force considering
anything along those lines or contributing to any discussions
on potential expansion of Five Eyes?
Secretary Kendall. That would not be something the Air
Force would do on its own. That would be something that would
be done at least at the DOD [Department of Defense] level, I'd
think.
We do work very closely with Japan and South Korea. This
has come, the idea of Japan becoming part of the Five Eyes, or
Korea becoming potentially part of this has come up before. But
that is not something the Air Force is working directly.
Mr. Gallego. And so there is no discussion at all from what
you know of from the other services speaking to the DOD about
the possibility of something like that?
Secretary Kendall. I am not aware of that. I am aware of
conversations about increasing cooperation with our close
partners, but not specifically expanding the Five Eyes
construct.
I can take that for the record and get you, get you an
answer.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mr. Gallego. General Brown, thank you again for your
testimony. And I appreciate your warning of accelerate change
or lose, and your vision for a more flexible and capable force.
In your written testimony, it has been a hard decision the
service must make in coordination with Congress on how to
modernize the force and develop and field new capabilities,
while selectively divesting older platforms.
Regarding the A-10, for example, the Air Force itself is
planning to divest 21 A-10s from the Indiana Air National Guard
in fiscal year 2023.
What is the modernization plan for the remaining A-10s?
Will the airframes that have been selected for re-winging be
added to that maintenance schedule?
General Brown. The plan for the long range is we have
bought the ATTACK [Advanced-Wing Continuation Kit] kits. And
the ATTACK kits will re-wing the remaining A-10s. If I have the
numbers correct, it is about 218 that we will actually have set
to re-wing.
But the 21 that are going to retire will not be re-winged.
And those will get transitioned out. And that Guard unit will
actually transition to F-16s.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
Secretary Kendall, in the simplest terms possible, could
you describe what Agile Combat Employment is and how it might
be implemented in a Taiwan scenario specifically?
Secretary Kendall. The idea behind Agile Combat
Employment--and I should let Chief Brown talk about this, too,
because I think he is one of the founding fathers of it--is
that we compound the targeting problem for our adversaries by
using more than the bases that we normally operate from.
There is a hub and spoke concept, if you will, where
alternative locations are used to conduct operations. So, an
adversary would have to target all of those potential locations
in order to effectively target our force.
The Air Force has been training people and it has been
doing exercises to demonstrate some of that capability. And the
Chief can talk about that a bit more perhaps.
What we are doing on the operational imperatives is trying
to look at the full mix of investments we would need to make
that truly a cost-effective approach. There are limited numbers
of bases that we can conceivably use because of the size of
runways, infrastructure that we need. And so, they are
targetable. We would need to deny targeting capability. But
even without it, those fixed sites can still be attacked.
So, you need to look at a mix of defenses, and hardening,
and other measures that we would want to invest in to make sure
that was a robust capability, and really preserved our ability
to put missions in the air.
You know, the tactical air assets that we have deployed
forward aren't of much value if they can't get in the air
because their runways are taken out, basically, or they can be
potentially destroyed themselves on the ground, as well as the
infrastructure that supports them.
So, we have got to protect against that.
Mr. Gallagher. In a Taiwan scenario, to fully realize the
vision of Agile Combat Employment, would that require new
basing agreements, specifically in the Philippines and in
Japan?
Secretary Kendall. It would require a combination of
factors. One would be host countries or alternate sites that
were under our possession, you know, that were prepared to
accept the aircraft and use them.
We have been practicing Agile Combat Employment in Europe
right now as part of the preparations we have made over there.
So, the concept is sound. It is the right idea. It is the right
thing to do. But we have to think through all the things that
are required to make it a reality in a wartime situation. And
we haven't done all that work yet. There is more to be done
there.
Mr. Gallagher. Putting on my MILPERS [Military Personnel
Subcommittee] hat, I took the Air Force PFT [Physical Fitness
Test] yesterday, it was fun, at Bolling. And you had two airmen
that were conscripted into doing it with me, so they deserve an
``attaboy'' for doing that.
So, my understanding is if you get a first class score you
only have to take it once a year, but if you don't meet the
height and weight standards you have to do it twice a year. Is
that correct?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, I want to compliment you on
your performance on that test.
Mr. Gallagher. Oh.
Secretary Kendall. I heard about it. It was pretty
impressive.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I got old man points [inaudible].
Secretary Kendall. I will let the Chief talk about the----
General Brown. It is not the height and the weight, it is
the score. And if your score is, if I recall, is below 75 then
you do it twice a year versus once a year. So, if you get a
high score you have proven that you are staying pretty fit, and
we don't make you do it twice a year.
Mr. Gallagher. So, there was a story this week, I don't
think it is a new policy per se, but if you are an airman
undergoing transgender reassignment surgery, you don't have to
take it for the year while the surgery is happening. Is that
correct?
General Brown. That is correct.
Mr. Gallagher. So, then after you transition, let's say you
are a biological male and you undergo gender reassignment
surgery to become a female, do you then, are you then held to
the female standards in the test versus the male standards?
General Brown. The way we do that is based on what you--
what the member identifies as for their gender is what drives
what test, and other support we provide to those particular
members.
Mr. Gallagher. Okay. So, if you [inaudible], if you
identify as a female or underwent surgery to become a female,
you would then go from having to run to get a max score of 9
minutes and 12 seconds for 1.5 miles to 10 minutes and 23
seconds for 1.5 miles. Correct?
General Brown. Not having the charts in front of me, I know
they are different. That is probably correct.
Mr. Gallagher. So, that is a difference of a minute and 11
seconds, depending on what gender you identify for the run.
For pushups the change is from 67 pushups in 1 minute to 47
pushups in 1 minute. This is for the youngest ages, 25 and
younger. I am 38, so I got, I got a more generous scale
yesterday.
That is a difference of 20 pushups, right, going from male
to female for the strength portion?
General Brown. Without the charts in front of me, it is
probably close.
Mr. Gallagher. And then sit-up goes from 58 to 54. So, that
is small, that is four.
And then my understanding is you now have the option for
all, for every domain, well, the run you have an option, the
strength portion you have an option of sit-up, plank, and then
something else that confused me yesterday.
General Brown. We are in the process of implementing those
changes to provide additional options for our members based on,
you know, how they, how they exercise.
Mr. Gallagher. So, is the idea to retain the optionality or
to coalesce around one for each domain?
General Brown. Optionality. Well, optionality based on each
domain, whether it is aerobic or whether it is strength.
The Chairman. I apologize. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Ms. Escobar is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank our panelists for their service and for their leadership
and for being with us today.
I have the incredible honor and privilege of representing
El Paso, Texas, which is home to Fort Bliss, America's second
largest military installation, and largest joint mobilization
force generation installation in the Army. I would like to take
this opportunity, though, to coming on the heels of Mr.
Gallagher's comments or questions rather, I want to thank you
all for your recent announcement to expand basic human rights
protections to service members and their families.
I have to tell you, this is especially important in States
like mine, States that have moved to ban gender-affirming care
for minors, restrict teaching about sexual orientation in
public--and gender identity in public schools, and prohibit
trans athletes from playing on girls' sports teams.
I have spoken with many, many families who feel targeted
and who have to shift their worry about other things to worry
about care for their kids. And so, your leadership and your
response to these really, these really targeted, discriminatory
laws against families in States like mine I think, I hope, it
will influence other branches of service to provide similar
protections.
My question to any one of our panelists who would like to
answer this is, you know, as I mentioned, you know, I have
heard from constituents, we need our service members focused on
their mission, not on their kids' health care or limits to
accessing that care. Families should be supported in all ways
possible to ensure readiness of our service members.
And I understand that through the Exceptional Family Member
Program service members are allowed to be reassigned to
different States with safer environments for their families.
And so, that makes me wonder if you have seen personnel
impacted or take advantage of that?
And, also, how the service will account for or think about
basing deployment decisions based on this type of quality of
life question, especially around discrimination in States like
Texas, Florida, and other States?
And, really, for anyone who would like to answer that for
me.
Secretary Kendall. Thanks for the question.
What we have been doing, and what I think you are alluding
to, is making sure that our service airmen and guardians are
aware of some of the services that they can, they can use
because of some of the recent changes in State law.
The other services have very similar programs. They have
legal assistance, and they have the Exceptional Family Member
Program as well.
We don't take any position on, on these laws one way or the
other, except we recognize the fact that they do affect our
people. The Exceptional Family Member Program in particular
helps people who have unique medical conditions that may not be
treatable in a certain location. Usually, it is because of lack
of care because somebody has a condition where the environment,
in the case of asthma, would affect them, or because there
simply isn't any care in the region where they would be
assigned that is appropriate for their specialized condition.
Transgender medical condition or gender dysphoria is one
that could be affected for some of our people. I am not aware
of any cases where this has happened yet, but I expect it will
at some point. This is not a--this is a condition that often
occurs among adolescents and our dependents will probably be
affected by it at some point. So, we have made them aware that
the EFMP [Exceptional Family Member Program] program in
particular was available to them if that, if they were impacted
that way.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Kendall.
I am going to move on very quickly to my next question,
shifting gears because I have only got about a minute left.
General Raymond, as the Space Force has continued to grow,
I have been really encouraged by its efforts to reach out to
universities for research and prepare the next generation of
potential guardians. One of those initiatives is at the
University Partnership Program, which included the university
in my district, the University of Texas at El Paso. Can you
give me a quick update on the initiative and what lies ahead?
I have got 30 seconds, so you may have to respond in
writing.
General Raymond. I will be happy to respond in writing.
But it is an initiative that we are proud of. It builds
partnerships with universities in twofold: one, to help develop
and attract talent; and two, to help do some critical research
for our critical space needs. We are very pleased to have UTEP
as part of that. We have 11 different universities as part of
it. And we are seeing benefits of that already.
And I will be happy to respond in more detail in writing.
Thank you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 98.]
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, General Raymond.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Gaetz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Secretary Kendall, are you saying that if a
service member has a transsexual family member or a family
member who might one day want to become a transsexual person,
that the Air Force might not send that service member to a
State like Florida or a State like Texas based on our laws?
Secretary Kendall. What we do, and we have been doing this
for a very long time, is whenever anybody comes up for
assignment they go through a questionnaire about their family
and their medical needs, and special education, things like
that. And based on that questionnaire we examine whether in the
region they might be assigned to there might be some issue with
providing them with what they need. And then if that is the
case, we don't assign them there. We find something else,
someplace else for them to go.
There are about 35,000 service men that are under that
program right now, and about 55,000 people that are affected by
it. So, it has a lot of broad applicability.
Mr. Gaetz. But usually we would think about this
Exceptional Family Member Program like if the service member
had a child with a specific heart disease----
Secretary Kendall. Yes.
Mr. Gaetz [continuing]. And they could only get treatment
at Johns Hopkins, you might not send them to a place where they
wouldn't be able to access that treatment.
What I think is new is that you are now applying that to
transsexuals and people who might want to be transsexuals.
So, again, I want to ask the question very directly. Is it
the position of the Air Force that if someone has a transsexual
family member and they don't want to go to a State like Florida
or Texas, that you will accommodate their request to not go to
Florida or Texas based on the gender issues of a family member?
Secretary Kendall. If a service member is under treatment
for a recognized medical condition, such as gender dysphoria,
and they cannot get that treatment in the State to which they
might be assigned, then they could be assigned to another
State.
Mr. Gaetz. And it is not just----
Secretary Kendall. But it has to be an actual medical----
Mr. Gaetz. And it is not just that they are under
treatment. Captain [inaudible] Downsworth told the Washington
Post, family members receiving gender-affirming treatment or
likely to receive such treatment.
So, isn't it true, did Captain Downsworth misstate that?
Does someone have to be receiving treatment?
Secretary Kendall. I would have to check the exact wording
of how the program is set up. There has to be a identified
actual need for medical treatment, not just the potential for
one. It has to be more than that. That is my understanding.
I will get back to you on the record for that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mr. Gaetz. And a family member choosing to change their
gender would qualify, is what you are saying?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry?
Mr. Gaetz. So, a family member choosing to change their
gender would quali--would alter the options you have for where
you could put that service member?
Secretary Kendall. I think more would be required. There
would have to be a medical need to be met. Just that decision
by itself probably wouldn't be enough. But I don't know.
We haven't had an actual----
Mr. Gaetz. I am concerned that----
Secretary Kendall. We haven't had an actual case of this
come up yet.
Mr. Gaetz [continuing]. It is going beyond medical needs
[inaudible] some of the statements of some of the folks who
work for you.
I am now quoting from Under Secretary Gina Ortiz who said,
``We are closely tracking State laws and legislation to ensure
we are prepared to mitigate effects to our airmen, guardsmen,
and families.'' And, again, this is dealing with the
transsexual issue with the Exceptional Family Member Program.
So, which State laws and local laws are you particularly
concerned about?
Secretary Kendall. We are, we have people in our major
installations who track local conditions, including State laws,
all the time.
Mr. Gaetz. Which ones?
Secretary Kendall. That is what they do.
All of them. If there is a change in divorce laws just
occurred in one of the States, it could affect our members. So,
our people have to be aware of that so they can provide
counseling to people if they need it.
So, there is no change in----
Mr. Gaetz. I am going to move on, Mr. Secretary. I have
another topic to cover. And while that seems deeply frivolous,
this is quite serious.
I want to go to hypersonics.
In what areas is the United States outpacing China in
hypersonics? Maybe let me----
Secretary Kendall. I think we are outpacing China in air-
breathing hypersonics.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay.
Secretary Kendall. Cruise missile type applications.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, those are, cruise missiles, are cruise
missiles hypersonic?
Secretary Kendall. A specific type of hypersonic, with a
scram jet engine. It gets to, it gets above Mach 5.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, let me ask this question.
Secretary Kendall. Normal cruise missiles do not.
Mr. Gaetz. General VanHerck said, China is significantly
outpacing us with their capabilities.
Was General VanHerck wrong?
Secretary Kendall. No. China has moved to deploy hypersonic
weapons more aggressively than the United States has--
definitely.
Mr. Gaetz. And so, when General VanHerck says China is
aggressively pursuing hypersonic capability tenfold to what we
have done, is that a ratio that is incorrect or correct?
Secretary Kendall. I don't know how he would make that
measurement. They have fielded more capability than we have.
And they have fairly aggressive development programs in a
number of areas. I wouldn't put a number on it.
Mr. Gaetz. More aggressive than ours. So, they are
developing----
Secretary Kendall. Yes.
Mr. Gaetz [continuing]. Faster than us. I mean, General
Brown just said that we are not where we need to be on
hypersonic testing, which I think is a helpful admission
because we should actually work together to solve that.
But what you are saying is they are testing and developing
more, they are fielding more, and they are more capable, right?
That is the essence of this thing?
Secretary Kendall. They have invested more, and they are
more capable.
But you have to be very careful about these comparisons.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you. That is just, like, exactly the
opposite of what Secretary Lloyd Austin said, and particularly
noteworthy.
I am afraid I am out of time.
The Chairman. Mr. Horsford is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will get back to
the hearing at hand, which is on the budget.
Secretary Kendall, contract adversary air [ADAIR] has
proven itself to be a cost-effective training enabler for the
Air Force Weapons School and during major exercises like Red
Flag. In May 2021, the commander of Air Combat Command, General
Mark Kelly, wrote, and I quote, ``Currently there is a high
opportunity cost to self-generated ADAIR, which is the norm for
fifth-gen squadrons. A pilot flying Red Air is using precious
flight hours on the most expensive aircraft, and yet not
realizing any significant training or readiness value.''
So, your department told us repeatedly, told me, this
committee, and industry, that there would be a consistent
future need for these services. However, it has been clear for
years that the Air Force was looking to improve the capability
of these contract aircraft to better reflect the high-end
fight.
In response to this clear demand signal, this year industry
went to two allied European air forces and acquired two dozen
F-16s, the same aircraft flown by the current organic
aggressors at Nellis Air Force Base. Last month, I was pleased
to learn that the Air Force had also decided to permanently
base nine F-35s at Nellis as part of the 65th Aggressor
Squadron at a future unspecified date.
In response to a question about this basing decision, the
Air Force informed Congress on April 8th that changes to the
organic aggressor fleet would not cause a decrease in the
number of contracted adversary air pilots, and that there were
no projected train--changes for any contract adversary air
company.
However, I was surprised to recently learn that at this
point the Air Force had already notified the Nellis adversary
air contractor that their contract would not be renewed, and
that they would have to vacate Nellis by June 4th.
The Air Force then told my staff on April 20th, 12 days
after informing Congress that no changes to adversary air were
planned, that they did not intend to recompete the Nellis
contract, and that they would transition entirely to organic
adversary air beginning on June 4th.
Yesterday, in our meeting, General Brown, you highlighted
the importance of future virtual constructive training at
Nellis. And while I fully support efforts to field these
capabilities, I have been told that we are still years away
from the infrastructure and the software required to take full
advantage of these systems.
So, I think you can understand my skepticism regarding
simulators when problems with the F-35 virtual environment have
delayed a full-rate production decision for the program by over
a decade. And I am confused how the Air Force plans to replace
the 44,000 flying hours, representing 63 percent of adversary
air requirements, that the contractor currently flies at Nellis
without the existing organic F-16 fleet, especially when no
date has been given for the arrival of F-35s or additional
aircraft.
So, I think it is important to note that the organic
aggressors at Nellis have two missions: to both fly as
aggressors and to support the test and evaluation unit.
What happens when test and evaluation requirements compete
with training? So, I am deeply concerned that the apparent lack
of cohesive adversary air plan will not only continue to lead
to uncertainty for my constituents, but also hurt the readiness
of our pilots while they wait until an uncertain date for this
future virtual environment to be fielded, or for F-35s to be
delivered.
So, Secretary Kendall, with no additional aircraft on the
ramp and a full capability simulation environment still years
away, how does the Air Force intend to bridge the capability
gap for adversary air at Nellis? What is the specific strategy
for adversary air across Air Combat Command?
Secretary Kendall. Let me start by saying that we do need
adversary air. It is an important part of our training regimen.
The problem we have right now is that we need fifth-
generation adversary air. And the current capability we have
under contract doesn't provide that. It is the reason the F-35s
are being brought in.
That gap exists today, and it can't be healed by extending
the contract that is in place. So, that is the problem we are
trying to solve. We also are working----
Mr. Horsford. So that is the only need that we have?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry, Congressman?
Mr. Horsford. Is that the only need that we have is to
prepare for fifth-generation? Don't we have other threats that
we also have to continue to prepare for?
Secretary Kendall. It is not----
The Chairman. The rest of this conversation will have to be
on the record.
Secretary Kendall. General Brown----
The Chairman. I am sorry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Secretary, I apologize. So, if the question goes on that
long, runs out of time, so you have to submit it for the
record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
The Chairman. Mr. Bacon is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And appreciate all
three of you being here today. And thank you for your
leadership.
A couple statements before I get to a question.
First, I would just like to address the President's budget.
It calls for 4.5 percent increase or 4 percent increase in
spending for the military, and a 12 percent increase for
domestic spending non-military. A pretty good disparity there.
We know inflation is at 8.5 percent, though. So,
effectively, the President's budget is calling for about a 4.5
percent cut to the military. I don't think that is appropriate
in a time of Ukraine and a rising China. So, I hope that this
committee and Congress increases that spending to at least even
with inflation, hopefully more than inflation, to deal with
these rising threats.
But because of this budget we are seeing that, like the Air
Force has to grapple with the nuclear recapitalization whether
it's the B-21s, the ICBMs [intercontinental ballistic
missiles]. But because of the 4.5 percent cut to the spending,
you are having to reduce your F-35 buy and we end up with less
aircraft this year than when we started.
Same thing with the Navy, less ships by the time we are
done.
I just think our country is not being served with this kind
of reduction in spending.
Then tied to that is the Air Force budget. I don't think
appropriate that the DOD doesn't account for the pass-through
money that the Air Force gets. They are showing a $234 billion
budget, roughly a third, a third third amongst the services.
But, yet, we know $40 billion that is supposedly the Air Force
never enters the hands of the Air Force. It is pass-through to
other agencies that have nothing to do with the Air Force.
Seventeen percent of the budget from the OSD that shows it
is going to the Air Force never goes to the Air Force. And it
makes it hard for Congress, I believe, to deal with this
appropriately when we are trying to figure out what is the
appropriate budget for the Air Force when you are doing B-21s,
new ICBMs, the F-35, and so forth.
So, I think--I know the Air Force is counting this right.
They are showing a $194 billion budget. And I appreciate your
transparency. I think we need that here, too.
My first question deals with the electronic warfare part of
the budget with the Air Force. I am grateful the Air Force is
showing four EC-37s on the unfunded list. I think if we don't
fund these this year, we will have 2 years without a production
line. And I worry about losing that expertise.
So, we are going to try hard to get at least some of those,
if not all of them, funded through the unfunded list.
My question would be to the Chief, what more can we be
doing in Congress for the electronic warfare program? Are we
adequately giving you what you need?
General Brown. Well, I think it is one of these areas we
have to continue to work on. And I think you have heard me say
in public before, electronic warfare is an aspect that we have
not been as focused on partly because of the threats we were up
against over the course of the past 20 to 30 years.
The world has changed, and we have got to put, not only
internal to the Air Force, but as we work our budgets, to put
more emphasis on electronic warfare and the capability, whether
it is done by cyber, how we use AI [artificial intelligence]-
machine learning aspects of this, and the platforms that we
operate as well. They will all play a factor in this, not only
for us on the offensive, but to also be prepared to operate in
that type of environment as well with our platforms and our
people.
Mr. Bacon. I think your statements have been very helpful
on the electronic warfare program that we needed to turn around
and get pointed the right way.
A lot of folks assume the EC-37 is not a near-peer capable
aircraft, but it is. Without going into classified material, it
has some of the latest technology, and I am excited about what
it will bring.
To our Space Chief, how does our investment in space
capabilities compare with China's? I mean, is it comparable, or
they're putting more in, or we're putting more in?
General Raymond. Sir, it is really hard to tell what China
is putting in because they are not transparent in their budgets
and there is a blurry line between what is government and what
is commercial. So, I couldn't tell you.
What I can tell you, in this budget the Department has
invested pretty significantly in space to make sure that we
have got the capabilities.
Mr. Bacon. It is a pretty good increase in space funding.
And, hopefully, it meets the needs.
My last question is back to General Brown.
We hear reports of airmen, NCOs [non-commissioned
officers], having to go on SNAP program [Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program], needing nutrition help. Should we not look
at revising the enlisted pay, especially at the junior ranks?
Should we be focusing on this? I guess this is also a question
for General Raymond. Should we, should Congress be looking at
this more about increasing enlisted pay?
General Brown. I think across the board we--I mean, this is
something we [inaudible] continue to take a look at based on
the environment. You started out with a conversation on
inflation. As we look at our pay and benefits, it is not just
the pay, but it is also the benefits that support our family
members.
And that, that is an aspect when you think about our, our
airmen, it is not just the pay, but it is the other things that
happen in support of them, their families, the communities they
live in. And so, looking at pay and benefits together I think
would be, would be appropriate.
Mr. Bacon. It seems egregious that we have young enlisted
folks on Stamp and other nutrition programs. That is
unacceptable.
But thank you with that. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Luria is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And I want to start with you, Secretary Kendall. I have
been, you know, reading into the details of the Air Force
defense budget request. And did you task the service to
consider canceling the F-15EX in this budget?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry, I didn't get the question.
Mrs. Luria. Did you task the Air Force to consider
canceling the F-15EX during this budget?
Secretary Kendall. As we went through the budget build
process, we looked at a lot of options. And I really don't want
to go into the details of what any of those were. We ended up
where we ended up after a long process.
The numbers we started out initially at were very different
than the numbers we ended up at for a variety of reasons. So, I
really can't go into our internal processes very well on what
we did in that.
Mrs. Luria. Just to summarize. So, instead of canceling the
program, which was a recommendation you wanted to look into,
you are actually doubling the buy from last year. Can you
explain that?
Secretary Kendall. We are accelerating the buy to buy it
out. We are actually--we are actually reducing the total
quantity substantially. I think it was a hundred and--C.Q.,
help me with this--144 and we went down to 80 as the total buy.
But we are trying to buy that out as quickly as possible.
We made some other adjustments in order to do that. It is a
more efficient way to buy the capability.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I mean, I would be interested more in,
you know, that decision-making process, you know, from our side
to understand it.
But there is an article that I read, it was published on
April 19th in Breaking Defense. I am not sure if you have seen
this, but it has the cost comparison between the F-15EX and the
F-35A.
The article compares the flyaway cost of the two different
aircraft. And it says that the flyaway cost for the F-15EX is
39 percent higher than the flyaway cost for the F-35A. And that
the cost to operate the F-15EX is 10 percent higher than the F-
35.
Do you agree with that assessment as outlined in this
article?
Secretary Kendall. We haven't had a chance to analyze that.
The cost of those two aircraft are roughly comparable. Part of
the problem is we are buying a 15EX in----
Mrs. Luria. You haven't analyzed it? Thirty-nine percent
seems like a pretty big delta to me.
Secretary Kendall. Yeah, we are buying the F-15EX for the
unique capabilities that it provides. You know, as General
Brown mentioned earlier, this is a weapons truck basically. It
carries more munitions than the F-35 can.
So, for certain, certain missions, like cruise missile
defense of the United States, or defensive counterair missions,
it is a superior platform, despite the lack of some of the full
fifth-generation capabilities. It does have a number of fifth-
generation components on it to give it more capability than a
baseline F-15 would have.
Mrs. Luria. And for comparison sake--and if, General Brown,
you wanted to jump in on this as well--which airframe is more
lethal as far as a China-Taiwan scenario is concerned? Which
would be more useful for that scenario?
General Brown. You know, I don't look at just one
particular platform. It is the mix of platforms and the aspect
of the stealth of the F-35 and its capability. But I'd also
take a look at the F-15EX and its ability--it is going to be
the first aircraft to carry HACM, a hypersonic air-launched
cruise missile that can be carried on a fighter.
So, it is a combination of capabilities where you can
penetrate but also do stand-off capabilities. So, the two of
them complement each other in addition to the other
capabilities that we have on the fighter, in our fighter fleet.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you. And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Banks is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Brown, in 2018, then-Air Force Secretary Heather
Wilson announced the ``Air Force We Need'' proposal. That
proposal stated that the Air Force needs to grow from 312
operational squadrons to 386 operational squadrons by 2030.
This also included growing the number of fighter squadrons in
the total force from 55 today to 62 fighter squadrons in the
future.
In light of the latest 2022 National Defense Strategy, does
the Air Force still need 62 fighter squadrons in order to
compete and deter against the threat that China poses today?
General Brown. The way I have been thinking about this is
the equivalent capability of 62 fighter squadrons. And what I
think about is when you look at the operational imperatives and
the aspect of fighter squadrons the way we do today with manned
aircraft versus what the Secretary and we are working through
on the operational imperatives, the combination of crewed and
uncrewed platforms.
We are doing it with the--on NGAD. We are looking at it
with B-21. But I think it has applicability across our force.
And part of the conversation we are talking about today is what
does a future fighter squadron look like? How many manned
platforms versus unmanned platforms you will have. And with the
number of unmanned platforms it will make it much easier for us
to expand that fighter capability. And it is not just the
capability but the capacity as well.
Mr. Banks. Can you talk about how you would posture those
fighter squadrons between the Air Force Active and Reserve
Components?
General Brown. One of the areas that we are looking at is
we are doing a bit of a global posture review. And one of the
things I have got to take a look at is to ensure that we have
both the right overseas and CONUS [continental United States]
mix so we can have the rotational out of the United States for
our airmen and families, at the same time, the right mix
between the Active and Reserve Component.
And that is ongoing work we are doing right now. And I have
got all three components--Active, Guard, and Reserve--in the
conversation to ensure that we get the right mix; put a marker
out in front of us, and then make sure we are moving in that
direction.
Mr. Banks. Secretary Kendall, could you more specifically
describe the Air Force's plan for the A-10 fleet?
Secretary Kendall. I am sorry, Congressman, I couldn't
hear.
Mr. Banks. I am over here, Secretary.
Can you more specifically describe for us the plan for the
A-10 fleet?
Secretary Kendall. Well, the plan for the fiscal year 2023
budget is to take 21 A-10s out in Indiana and replace them with
F-16. In future years, we are looking at divesting over time
the A-10 fleet. That has been something we have been trying to
do for some time.
Mr. Banks. Can you put a timeline on the when you would
divest of the entire fleet versus the changes that you want to
make in this budget?
Secretary Kendall. If we were free to do so, we would
divest the entire fleet by the end of the next 5-year plan.
Mr. Banks. But that is not what this--not specifically what
would happen with this year's budget fiscal year 2023?
Secretary Kendall. This year divest 21 in Indiana and
replace them with F-16. It is a very specific and, I think,
modest request at this point.
Mr. Banks. How long have you wanted to make this change?
Secretary Kendall. I think that one has been, that specific
one has been in the works for some time. We were not allowed in
the last year to retire the A-10s that we wanted to retire. We
were not successful in that endeavor. But they are not what we
need for the force for the future. And we would still like to
make that move as soon as we can.
Mr. Banks. Can you talk about, Secretary Kendall, what
aircraft replaces the capabilities of the A-10, if we do divest
[inaudible]?
Secretary Kendall. The fighter mix that General Brown has
talked about. It is not a one-for-one swap-out of one aircraft
for another, it is about the fighter mix that we are trying to
get to over time.
Mr. Banks. And then for the A-10s that will not be divested
of in fiscal year 2023, are you looking at wing modernization
programs or any other plans that we should be aware of?
Secretary Kendall. I think we are completing some modest
modernization plans that have been in place for a while, sir.
General Brown. Very modest. Things that we have already
invested in. You know, with the sunset role, we [inaudible]
don't try to put a lot of capability. But we have to make sure
we balance that risk as we go forward so we don't have a big
gap in capability.
Mr. Banks. General, can you, as well, describe or defend
the plan, at least just for fiscal year 2023, to make this
change and then the divesting of the entire fleet down the
road? Explain why it's important.
General Brown. It's because of the threat. The A-10's a
great airplane in a permissive environment. I don't expect will
be in very many permissive environments in the future. And I've
got to have a mix of capability that can do a bit of all
things. The A-10 cannot do that, particularly in a high-threat
environment, and that's why we're making that shift.
Mr. Banks. Can you more specifically talk about the second-
or third-order effect of moving forward with this plan? What
does it allow you to do?
General Brown. What it allows me to do is there's a
manpower piece associated with this because you have airmen
that are actually, you know, operating and maintaining A-10s
that we'd actually put into F-35s and F-15EXs and, eventually,
NGAD. Those airmen, you know, a 15-year maintainer doesn't come
off the bench if you build those, and we had to make that
transition. So that's an important aspect of this----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Kahele
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Secretary Kendall, General Brown, and
General Raymond, for being here today and for your leadership
of our United States Air Force.
Secretary Kendall, you approved the legislative proposal
that was sent to Congress this month to combine Active Duty and
Reserve Components into a U.S. Space Force with full-time and
part-time members, effectively canceling any plans for an Air
National Guard Component of the Space Force. Is that correct?
Secretary Kendall. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Kahele. Mr. Secretary, this is particularly concerning
to me. Dismantling Air National Guard space units would
immediately degrade operational readiness that will take about
7 years to regrow and cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of
dollars. In fact, in Hawaii, this decision would displace
approximately 50 airmen currently assigned to the Hawaii space
unit and a total planned force structure of 88 members of the
293rd Space Control Squadron located at the Pacific Missile
Range facility on Kauai.
How much would it cost the Department of Defense and the
Space Force to establish this new Active Duty capability as
outlined in this legislative proposal?
Secretary Kendall. The proposal does not do away with any
existing force structure. It changes the way we manage the
Reserve and the Active Component of the Space Force.
The guardsmen, the Air Guard people, who are supporting the
Space Force now will continue to do so. They are very valuable
assets, and we do not want to lose them. They're critical to
the space mission. What we're discussing is how they're labeled
and what kind of an organizational construct they fit into.
The concern the administration has is that the overhead
cost of creating a new independent Space Guard as an entity
would be significant, and that's the reason that the
administration has opposed the creation of a Space Guard writ
large.
There are a number of ways I think we can solve this
problem. But, at the end of the day, what we need is to keep
those people in uniform and to keep them doing what they are
doing, whether they're called Air Guard or Space Guard or
something else. That's the end state we want, and we're happy
to work with the Congress as we try to find a way forward to
make that happen.
I'd like to give General Raymond a chance----
Mr. Kahele. Well, I believe a Space National Guard would
provide a seamless surge capacity for the Space Force while
capturing the training and talent of Active Duty Space Force
personnel who move to the private sector and want to continue
their service in a National Guard.
So, General Raymond, using your best military advice, do
you think we should or should not have a Space National Guard?
General Raymond. We've been operating with the Guard for 25
years. They provide critical capability and provide great
personnel. As our Secretary said, there's multiple ways you can
do this. You can have a separate Space National Guard, you can
utilize the Air National Guard to continue doing what we're
doing today, or you can take those capabilities out of the
Guard and put them into this Active Duty/Reserve combined.
There's multiple ways you can do it, but the key is, as the
Secretary said, is the guards men and women that are in the
space business and the capabilities they operate we rely on
today and we're going to rely on them in the future.
Mr. Kahele. You know, Congress has made--excuse me, not
Congress. CBO [Congressional Budget Office] has made incorrect
assumptions regarding the size and scope of a Space National
Guard, and its cost estimates would yielded a cost estimate of
$100 million in annual operation and support costs and a one-
time construction cost of $20 million. It's why Congressman
Crow and I sent a letter to CBO asking them to re-score the
cost of establishing a Space National Guard because the cost
should be minimal. Those same personnel that, General Raymond,
you just talked about will continue to execute their missions
within the Space National Guard at the same duty station, so no
new construction is needed.
From a cost perspective, why should we go forward with this
policy when we already have the talent within the Air National
Guard to train, deploy, and provide critical space capability
for the Space Force using existing infrastructure? General
Raymond.
General Raymond. Today, there's 839 guardsmen in the Air
National Guard that support the Space Force; 839 in 8 States
and 1 territory. Again, they provide critical capability for
us. And, again, there's multiple ways you can do this, and
there's different costs associated with each one of those ways.
But there's multiple ways you can do it. The critical piece of
this, though, is that we rely on them today and we're going to
have to rely on them in the future.
Mr. Kahele. Secretary Kendall, Congress has requested
multiple reports on the value and feasibility of establishing a
Space National Guard. Any idea why the Congress hasn't received
these reports submitted to the Congress on the value and
feasibility of establishing a Space National Guard?
Secretary Kendall. The short answer is I don't know. We
should be able to provide you with information. I'm not sure
why that hasn't happened. I know you know what the
administration's position is, obviously, on this, and its a,
you know, fairly firm position; but it is based on concerns
about overhead and cost. And, again, we'd be happy to have a
dialogue with you and try to find a solution that was mutually
acceptable that would get us what we all want, which is to keep
these people in uniform and serving their country.
Mr. Kahele. Thank you for your answers. Mahalo, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back the remaining balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, my
district is Barksdale Air Force Base, and I had a great meeting
a couple of weeks ago with Acting Assistant Secretary Oshiba
there at the Pentagon to discuss our new entrance road and gate
complex that's been in the works for some time at Barksdale.
Just last week, my office was informed that the Air Force
plans to award the contract for that project by the end of next
month, May. Can you confirm that timeline for the contract
award?
Secretary Kendall. That's my understanding also.
Mr. Johnson. Very good. Shifting gears quickly to the F-35
program, it's my understanding that over 10 years ago the
Department and Congress determined that a second engine for the
F-35 was costly and unnecessary, but this year's budget, of
course, requests nearly $300 million to recreate a second
engine program at the expense of F-35 quantities, funds to
modernize the current engine and NGAP [Next Generation Adaptive
Propulsion] propulsion.
So what changes are driving that push for this second F-35
engine?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, it's not a second F-35
engine. It's a completely new and much improved F-35 engine
potentially. It's a technology that was in very early stages of
development when I first saw it in 2010 that has matured fairly
well. Offers [inaudible] opportunity for on the order of 20, 25
percent cost savings for mission range improvement. So, it's a
substantial improvement and would be a replacement for the
current engine, not a second one.
There's a over $6 billion, I think, development cost
associated with getting that engine completely developed and
into production. So, we're looking at that. We're funding the
development this year, the next increment; but it's going to
have to compete in our budget for those resources going
forward. But it would be a substantial improvement over the
current capability.
Mr. Johnson. And what would be the timeline to develop and
test and integrate and field that?
Secretary Kendall. We're a few years away from having a
fully developed engine. There are substantial development
program [inaudible].
Mr. Johnson. I guess the question we have is wouldn't it
make more sense to focus investment on the Next Generation Air
Dominance program, rather than drastically modify a fighter
program that's already plagued by delays?
Secretary Kendall. Well, the AETP [Adaptive Engine
Technology Program] engine would offer increased power, which
we're going to need as we continue to modernize the F-35. The
F-35 is going to be the cornerstone of our fleet. We're going
to have a very large inventory of F-35s, so the fuel savings
that we could accomplish through that engine would be a
significant payoff.
So, again, it's a cost-benefit analysis. There's some good
operational reasons to do it. There are also some good reasons
from a point of view of climate change to do it, and just from
operational efficiency, energy efficiency, to do it. But,
again, it's going to have to compete with other things in our
budget going forward.
Mr. Johnson. So in addition to the lower F-35 procurement,
this year's budget proposes ending the F-15EX procurement at 80
aircraft. There's been some discussion about that today.
As a result, it seems likely that some units around the
country and overseas that operate under the older F-15C and D
models are just not going to get replacement aircraft. Is that
an accurate assessment; and, if so, what's the plan for all
those airmen?
Secretary Kendall. We were talking about the fighter mix
earlier, and we're also talking about other missions that are
coming into existence, cyber missions, for example, information
warfare missions. So, it's not correct to think about this as a
one-for-one replacement that it has to happen.
The older F-15Cs are going to have to come out of the
inventory at some point. We need to think about it much more
broadly than just fighters for fighters; it's a bigger equation
than that.
Mr. Johnson. But the commitment is or, I guess, the focus
would be not to have idle airmen, right? They will have
something to do, right?
Secretary Kendall. That's our intention, yes.
Mr. Johnson. Got it. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Carbajal is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to all
the witnesses for being here today.
A brief question to start to General Raymond in light of
the upcoming NDAA so and I others can better prepare, I wanted
to ask what is the status of the range of the future report
required in section 1610 of fiscal year 2022 NDAA? I believe
this is due at the end of this month. I just wanted to ask you.
General Raymond. I've reviewed it, and I think we'll meet
our timelines. It's been drafted.
Mr. Carbajal. Do you have any sense when it might come out?
General Raymond. It will meet the timelines.
Mr. Carbajal. It will? Great. Thank you so much.
I think my colleague, Representative Kahele, has already
touched on the establishing or standing up of a separate Space
National Guard Component. I just want to associate myself with
his comments, Secretary, so you're aware of my personal
sentiments, as well.
Secretary Kendall, last week, I had the privilege of
welcoming Vice President Harris and General Raymond to my
district for their visit to Vandenberg Space Force Base. Vice
President Harris announced during her visit that the United
States commits not to conduct destructive direct-ascent anti-
satellite, ASAT, missile testing and that the United States
seeks to establish this as a new international norm for
responsible behavior in space. The Vice President also called
on other nations to make similar commitments and to work
together to establishing this as a norm.
With this announcement and commitment, what are our next
steps to make this an internationally adhered norm and how are
we engaging China and Russia on this issue?
Secretary Kendall. That would not be a responsibility of
the Department of the Air Force, although we'd support it. It
would be a State Department-led, I would assume, initiative
with Defense in support again. I'm not aware of that we can get
for the record perhaps any existing plans. The National Space
Council is very interested in this, too, that the Vice
President chairs.
So, I think there will be an effort to move this forward
and try to get other nations to sign up, but I'm not intimately
aware of what the exact plans are.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Continuing on, Secretary Kendall,
in February, the Army published its climate strategy outlining
how the service intends to mitigate and adapt to climate
change. Is the Air Force working on a similar strategy; and, if
so, when can we expect to see it published?
Secretary Kendall. We have been working on a similar
strategy, and there are elements of it which we are executing
now. We're monitoring the Arctic carefully. We're working with
our partners in that region. We're concerned about deterrents
in that area, and we're concerned about our capabilities in
that area.
The initial draft of that strategy, I looked it and I
wasn't satisfied with it, quite frankly. And so, we're trying
to do something which is more forceful and more action-oriented
than the original draft was. I can't give you a date at this
point in time, but I hope to have something published in the
near future.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. And, General Raymond, I just want
to thank you for always being so responsive and attentive to
the issues, concerns, needs, and challenges at Vandenberg Space
Force Base. Thank you very much.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Green is recognized for 5
minutes.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member for
holding a hearing. Of course, thanks to our witnesses, thanks
for your life of service to the country.
The DOD and the Department of the Air Force are rightfully
pivoting to the global war on terror--from the global war on
terror to the current threat posed by Russia and China.
However, I have some significant concerns about the
vulnerabilities for divesting platforms, I'm sure you've heard
it already today, that provide significant combat capability
before the sustainable replacement is ready and fielded. And as
I told General Milley during our recent defense-wide budget
hearing, I'm specifically concerned about the loss of JSTARS
and AWACS. The Biden administration seems to be removing
critical instruments from our toolkit. The plan is to stop
funding these critical capabilities now and simply hope for new
and more lethal and cost-effective replacements to roll out
seamlessly.
This budget diverts already scarce defense dollars into
searching for replacement systems, leaving an extensive
capabilities gap, while land war rages in Europe. The
divestiture of these critical systems is occurring, I think,
far too rapidly, and it's time for Congress to adequately fund
the transition from legacy systems to their replacements.
And I think there's also a mechanism out there. I've met
with Representative Wittman who sits a little further up on the
dais than I, and he advised me about a formerly created and
still-authorized naval strategic deterrence fund. It could be a
mechanism where we can put extra dollars there to cover the
legacy systems and our ramp-up of new systems so that the DOD
budget top line can work for those members of both the
administration and the Congress who want to see that the main
budget stays flat line, much like we did the OCO [overseas
contingency operations] over the years of the war on terror.
Does that make sense? Am I making sense on that, how we would
use those funds?
We've already talked about inflation and things like that;
I won't go into that. What I really want to ask today is if we
put a working group together and got some Democrats on board
with this, would you guys be interested in working with that
group for how we might be able to use this naval strategic
deterrence fund that, again, has already been authorized by
Congress, to address the potential of the legacy systems coming
out too soon? Would you all be interested in putting people to
help us with this working group?
Secretary Kendall. I think what you're referring to is a
fund that, essentially, separately funded the strategic
deterrence, so that it didn't have the effect that it has on
our budget. In our case, we have fully funded in our budget
request and will continue to do so the strategic deterrent. I
think that's a position the administration has taken. We
don't----
Dr. Green. Well, there's apparently a fund separate from
DOD's budget. This is a fund that's separate of DOD budget,
very much similar to the OCO. You'll recall we kind of abused
that a little bit and stuck some stuff in the OCO in order to
keep the budget flat line, the DOD budget flat line, and that
helps people on both sides, you know, particularly other parts
of the country where being able to say we didn't, you know,
necessarily raise DOD's budget.
There's the potential that we could keep legacy systems
around a little longer, fund it through this. Your top-line
budget stays the same; and, yet, those systems stick around a
little longer until the other systems are fully funded. And I'm
just wondering if you all are interested in that dialogue and
if you could loan us somebody with some ideas on that.
Secretary Kendall. I'm going to have to decline for now,
and the reason is that these ideas basically create a different
way to count the money, but it's still the money and we still
have to spend what we have to spend on national security. You
know, it's a fact of history that we made a big investment in
the strategic deterrent decades ago, and then we lived off of
that capital for a long time and now we're having to
recapitalize----
Dr. Green. Sure. So I understand that comment, but what I
want to be able to make sure and what you all will be held very
much accountable to is the capability of our force. And as
those legacy systems come down, that capabilities gap can't be
there. And that's what I'm asking for you to work with members
of both sides of the aisle to kind of think through what we can
do in terms of making sure that those legacy systems are around
long enough until the new stuff replacing that capability gets
in the field.
Secretary Kendall. We're open to new ideas always, but I
think our budget request does accommodate a reasonable balance
of current and future capabilities and fund the strategic
deterrent. So I think we're asking for the money we need to do
what we think is necessary.
Dr. Green. You're asking for everything you need? There's
nothing else you would need?
Secretary Kendall. We have a balanced and, I think, a
reasonable request that will implement the national defense----
Dr. Green. Okay. Fair enough. We're going to continue to
dialogue about it here, but we may have questions then in
future testimony about it. Thank you both and thanks for your
service to our great country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. McClain is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for being here; I appreciate it.
I'm proud to note that Selfridge Air National Guard Base in
my district is home to 21 A-10s aircraft on the 127th Fighter
Wing. These uniquely capable aircraft have proven themselves
time after time in every major conflict in the U.S. has engaged
in since the first Gulf War, saving countless lives while
delivering battlefield-altering close air support. In part due
to their high utilization, A-10 aircraft have not had their
wings replaced previously and are rapidly beginning to time-out
on their original wings. We've talked about that.
Wing replacement for this aircraft is essential. Indeed,
about half of the aircraft on Selfridge right now requires new
wings. I'm highly concerned that the President's FY23 [fiscal
year 2023] budget request does not provide the funding for
additional wing sets, as notes that the Air Force has procured
enough wings for only a fleet of 218.
So, it looks like in the budget, FY22's budget was for 280
wing replacements, and then this year's budget--say that three
times fast--then in this year's budget, it talks about
replacing 260. There's enough for 260; yet it's only going to
replace 218.
So, I guess what is the true A-10 divestment target for
2023? Is it 260, or is it 218?
General Brown. It's 260. In previous budget, we funded 218
of the wing kits already, and we're on a path to fund more.
It's a balance between where we are today and where we're
headed. But 218 is what we had in last year's budget for the
wing kits, and then we're going down from 281 to 260 in this
budget.
Mrs. McClain. But we're only, of those 260 that we want to
maintain--I just want to make sure I'm understanding this right
because the math isn't working in my brain. We want to keep 260
active, right?
General Brown. In this fiscal year.
Mrs. McClain. In this fiscal year.
General Brown. In FY23. Excuse me.
Mrs. McClain. Correct. Yet, we only have money to keep 218
active. Am I reading that right?
General Brown. We funded 218 wing kits that will be put on
218 A-10.
Mrs. McClain. But we have--do we only have 218 that need
replaced?
General Brown. It depends on how many A-10s we keep over
the FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]. I mean, this is a
balance, coming down from 281 to a lower number. What we don't
want to do is buy more wing kits than we're going to need if
we're going to start retiring A-10s.
Mrs. McClain. So, we really only have 218 A-10s that are
available to fly, or is it 260?
Secretary Kendall. We'll have 260 because they will,
they'll fly with their existing wings. They won't have the
wings replaced.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. So, the difference is okay? They don't
need the wing----
Secretary Kendall. Yes, they still have life left on them.
Mrs. McClain. They still have life left on them. Okay. My
final question is what does the Air Force plan to do with the
retired aircraft when it gets retired?
General Brown. Typically, what we do with the aircraft is
we take them out to our boneyard at Davis-Monthan and we store
them there, and we can use them for parts or, in some cases,
we'll bring them back into the fleet for certain airplanes,
so--potentially.
Mrs. McClain. Do we ever foresee selling them to recoup
some, maybe to our allies? Is that an option as well----
General Brown. In some cases, we do that based on the
airplane and based on the request of our allies and partners.
Mrs. McClain. Okay, very good. Thank you, gentlemen. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Carl is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Kendall, thank
you for stopping by yesterday and chit-chatting with me. I
appreciate your time. I know how valuable it truly is, so thank
you.
But I do want to talk about the possibility of the KC-Y
[refueling tanker] not being brought up in a competitive
situation coming up. You and I had this conversation. I
promised you I wouldn't throw you under the bus, and I won't,
but it is really a sore point.
I'd like to point out a couple of things before I get you
to do that. You know, competition, we both agreed, is a good
thing. It truly is. But when you get a competition and someone
wins a low bid, I think they should deliver that product at
that price on that timeframe. And on this plane, it is not
there. We are behind schedule. I think now, according to my
notes, we're told that these planes will be 100 percent ready
by 2024. And I'm not holding you to that; I'm just reading my
notes here. So, 2024, but right now we're flying with a plane
that can only refuel 78 percent of our fleet. Yet, we are
refueling them behind the LMXT [tanker] and the Europeans and
the Europe countries at 100 percent.
Now, I'm arguing the point, obviously, that we should open
up the bid for the LMXT so they can be bid against this KC-Y
aircraft. And I can't understand why the Air Force, I mean, the
Air Force has already started the propaganda, they've started
throwing the little stories out, letting us know that they're
not going to bid it out, they're not going to bid it out. But I
go back to my same old country roots. Would you really buy a
car knowing you could only drive it 78 percent of the time?
Secretary Kendall. Thanks, Congressman. And I enjoyed the
conversation also. Thank you for that yesterday.
General Brown may want to help me with this, but the
current situation is that the KC-46 can service about 85
percent of the types of aircraft that it has to service. The
only things that we don't have that I'm aware of are the A-10
and I think C-130s. There may be others, as well. But the vast
majority of our tankers, fighters, and bombers it can provide
fuel to. And we've moved far from where we were a year ago or
so when we could only do the F-18, so we're getting to where we
need to be on the KC-46.
That said, if competition is the right thing to do, and I
love competition. I'm all for it. It's the best tool we have to
reduce cost. But we actually have to have a demand for the
other aircraft that's being offered in this case, a requirement
for it. And the Air Mobility Command is working on its
requirements for the aircraft that would follow the current,
you know, contracted buy, basically, of KC-46. And I'm trying
to be as transparent and honest about this as I can be. It is
not as certain as it was a year ago, let's say, that we were
going to do a competition. And I don't want people to have a
misimpression about that. We have not made a final decision
yet.
I've had Lockheed in and talked to them; I'm aware of their
design. I'm going to be asking a lot of questions before we
make a final decision about this. So, it's not done yet, but
I'm just letting people know that the probability of it being a
competition is diminished from what it was a year ago.
Mr. Carl. Well, it disturbs me when you see an aircraft
company, quote-unquote, win at lowest bid and they don't
deliver it on time. Now, I'm reading an article that's on
Twitter now that Boeing has come out and said that they wish
they would never bid Air Force One because they are $660
million in the hole. That's not the taxpayers' responsibility.
We paid for a product, and we want it delivered. I don't care--
I do care that companies lose money; don't get me wrong. I
think the process itself is where the real problem is at. The
lowest bidder, you know, gets it, make them deliver it. And
that's what I'm talking about here. We've got an aircraft that
we can refuel from 100 percent of the time. This may say 2024,
but what's it going to--when we get to 2024, is it going to
move to 2026? Is it going to move to 2028? We have no way of
knowing because this plane should have been delivered 100
percent when? In 2018, 2017?
Secretary Kendall. The original production aircraft should
have met our requirements, and they did not.
Mr. Carl. Okay. So that's 5 or 6 years behind----
Secretary Kendall. Boeing is operating on a fixed-price
contract. They've lost $5 or $6 billion already.
Mr. Carl. They've lost money. We label that as upgrades,
but truth is it's the design issues that they're losing money
on. It was designed wrong. They don't have night vision. They
couldn't refuel with the stick that they had. Pardon my
terminology. And I'm about to run out of time.
Real quickly, I'd like to make sure you understand also the
selection of Huntsville as the site for the Space Force I think
was right then, and I think it's right now. And I really would
appreciate you all looking very strongly and keeping that.
With that said, Mr. Speaker, thanks for your time.
The Chairman. Mr. Franklin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Secretary
Kendall, I apologize in advance if you've touched on this
because I think I heard you engaging with Mr. Banks as I was
coming in the room about divestment. I have more questions
about the divestment.
As you're aware, in last year's NDAA the Senate blocked the
divestment of 42 A-10 aircraft. It's my understanding, and
that's what I want to get your thoughts on, the inability to
divest of those A-10s would potentially prohibit the beddown of
F-35 squadrons at Tyndall. I don't know if those decisions were
linked or not but a couple of questions regarding the A-10s.
Did the inability to divest those A-10s last year have
implications on the Air Force's fifth-generation fighter
capability?
Secretary Kendall. It has, and we're still trying to figure
out how to react to that. The maintainers who are doing the A-
10s that we had planned to retire were going to be retrained
and go to the F-35s. And now, because they still have to do A-
10, we're not able to do that. There are several hundred people
that are affected by this, so we're trying to find another
solution to that problem.
Mr. Franklin. Okay. What is the status currently of the
beddown of the F-35 squadrons at Tyndall?
Secretary Kendall. I think it's on hold until we can
resolve this problem. C.Q., do you have any----
General Brown. Yeah. We're going to have to delay a little
bit because it's about--if I have my numbers correct--it's
about 950 maintainers that was in the plan from last year to
make that transition. So we are, as the Secretary described,
looking at some other options on how we harvest the 950
maintainers that would actually get this back on track.
Mr. Franklin. And as was mentioned earlier, that's not an
instant flip of the switch. Will those be A-10-trained
personnel that will be switching over to the new platform?
General Brown. It's a combination. It's a matter of, you
know, as our airmen PCS [permanent change of station] and move,
we'll have experience levels and we'll be able to move some of
those airmen. Some of them will come from where they work on A-
10; they may come from other airplanes. But it's being able to
move those airmen around; but having the flexibility is the key
part to be able to have them available to transition from one
aircraft to another.
Mr. Franklin. Thanks. Secretary Kendall, continuing on this
divestment theme, this year's proposed budget calls for the
divestment of 33 F-22s, which, as I think my math is right,
about a sixth of the total F-22 fleet. We all know how
important fifth-gen fighters are to our great power competition
that we're trying to reequip for coming out of 20 years in the
Gulf, but can you expand on the potential implications of this
divestment of fifth-gen aircraft, which we don't have enough of
already?
Secretary Kendall. That's essentially an efficiency move
for us. We're taking out the Block 20, the oldest F-22s.
They're less combat capable and would not probably be employed
against a high-end threat. It would cost prohibitively to
upgrade them, about $50 million per aircraft. And they're used
for training now.
What we can do is we can substitute fully combat-capable
aircraft and use them for training with the ability to deploy
those aircraft if we needed to. So, it's going to be an
efficiency saving that will not significantly impact our combat
capability.
Mr. Franklin. And yet--but we're still re-winging Vietnam-
era aircraft that clearly aren't going to play a role in a war
against some of these potential adversaries. Okay. So that
answered that question.
Are there any other legacy aircraft divestments that could
allow us to continue funding and flying these? And you're
saying it's cost prohibitive; it's really not. If you had the
money, you'd invest it somewhere else besides these aircraft.
So, there's nothing you can do software-wise or anything; the
airframes themselves are just too far gone to make it
worthwhile, even in a training capacity----
Secretary Kendall. I'm supporting the budget that we
requested. Quite frankly, though, if I had more money to spend
in the Department of the Air Force, it might not go to
airplanes at all. It might go to things like munitions,
electronic warfare, and information security.
Mr. Franklin. It's been an age-old problem of trying to
fight like you train, train like you fight. It's hard, as a
fifth-generation fighter, to go out and train. We don't want to
use these frontline assets to train against one another and
expend them in that sense.
What role do you see, or do you see a greater role for
using virtual and augmented reality on training ranges to try
to avoid putting hours on these airframes that are so critical?
Secretary Kendall. Well, we want to train our F-22 pilots
on the same aircraft they actually would use in combat, so this
will improve their training in that regard. But we do try to do
a mix of simulators, as well as live training, to get the
optimal mix from a cost-effectiveness point of view.
Mr. Franklin. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mrs. Bice is recognized.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
gentlemen, for being here this afternoon. We're now at
afternoon.
First of all, Secretary Kendall, I want to say thank you
for the inclusion of the $30 million in the Air Force budget to
acquire the needed real estate at Tinker Air Force Base for the
forthcoming B-21 depot maintenance campus. That's incredibly
important to my district and, certainly, critical to national
security. So, I appreciate you including that.
My question, as maybe expected, has to do with the E-3, and
divestiture seems to be a hot topic in this hearing today. I
want to talk about the proposed divestiture of the 15 E-3
Sentry aircraft in the budget proposal. I was incredibly
pleased to see that the official announcement that the E-7s
would be the replacement aircraft for the E-3. However, there
is a concern that I have as relates to divesting those 15
aircraft before we ever even have a contract signed to move
forward on the E-7.
So, my question is, Secretary Kendall or General Brown,
what is the estimated cost savings associated with the
divestiture of the E-3s on a per-year and a per-aircraft basis?
Secretary Kendall. If I have the numbers correctly, I
think, by the end of the FYDP, we save a billion dollars a
year.
Mrs. Bice. A billion?
Secretary Kendall. Yes. It increments as you go out and you
accumulate more savings over time. But I think it gets to that.
I'd like to confirm that for the record, but I believe that's
about right. A little bit less than a billion.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mrs. Bice. Great. Can you tell me if the savings associated
with the divestiture will be applied to the procurement of the
E-7s? Will the savings from the E-3s be applied to the
acquisition of the E-7s?
Secretary Kendall. It isn't a direct one-for-one
correlation, but you can look at it that way if you choose to.
In effect, the money that's saved goes into--we don't do a one-
for-one swap of money that way.
Mrs. Bice. But if I'm saving you a billion bucks----
Secretary Kendall. We look for the net savings and we try
to make the investments that we need to do.
Mrs. Bice. Okay. What can Congress do to move up the
delivery of the E-7s? Currently, it is my understanding that
we're looking at, if we were to sign a contract, we're looking
at an FY27 delivery date. And if you're looking at divesting
those 15 of the 31 aircraft, we don't have capabilities for
quite some time. So what can we do to speed that up?
Secretary Kendall. I would like to accelerate that
delivery, if possible. I'm not sure at this point it's
possible. We have about $225 million, if I remember correctly,
in the budget for R&D in 2023 for the E-7. We're going to have
to make some changes to the aircraft to meet our requirements.
I am exploring options to try to accelerate those
deliveries. I'd like to do that if we can. I'm just not sure
it's possible right now.
Mrs. Bice. Can you elaborate on why you think that's not
possible?
Secretary Kendall. The modifications that might have to be
made and the time it takes to do the engineering and implement
those, and then where we are in the production line in terms of
being able to get aircraft. I think we start production, if I
remember correctly, in 2025 and get delivery in 2027. And so,
to accelerate that, there are some things that would have to
happen to make that possible, and I'm not sure they can be done
right now.
Mrs. Bice. I want to quickly just say I had a great meeting
with Colonel Coyle last week at Tinker Air Force Base to
discuss the divestiture and maybe walk through some of the
details of that, and I want to say that I appreciated his
perspective and insight into what he's looking at and the
challenges that he sees currently with the Sentry and why this
E-7 procurement is important.
But I am 100 percent for your deal. We need to speed it up.
And whatever I can do to make that happen, I'm happy to work
with the Air Force in making that a reality.
I want to pivot quickly to the Retain Skilled Veterans Act,
which my colleague, Blake Moore, has filed. I've been working
closely with him, and this legislation would make permanent the
ability for retiring service members to pursue positions at the
GS-13 level or below without having to comply with the 180-day
cooling-off period. With significant workforce challenges that
we're seeing across the Nation today, I think the urgency of
securing the permanence of this policy is very evident.
Secretary Kendall and General Brown, could you discuss the
current waiver of the 180-day rule and how it benefits the
Department of Defense's workforce needs?
Secretary Kendall. I'm not familiar with that issue, but
I'm sympathetic to anything that increases our flexibility.
We're finding difficulties in hiring, the length of time it
takes and so on. We're not as competitive as we should be with
the commercial world, with the outside market. So, anything
that relaxes some of those constraints would be of interest to
me.
A lot of these constraints are put in place to prevent
abuse. I think abuses tend to be very rare, but the constraints
are always present. And so I think we need to look at these
much more carefully and I'd be happy to have a conversation
about that with you.
Mrs. Bice. General, do you have any comments on that?
General Brown. I'm not familiar with the specific
legislation, but I agree with the Secretary. The faster we can
get talent onboard, the better. Because otherwise, we might
lose it if they have to wait too long.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. My time is expired. I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kahele [presiding]. Thank you. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Moore for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chair. And thank you to the
gentlelady from Oklahoma, Mrs. Bice, for asking my questions
for me. Thank you.
General Brown and Secretary Kendall, I want to continue to
talk about the 180-day rule. I'm a little concerned you're not
familiar enough with the legislation. We will make sure that we
communicate that directly to you. But many in your ranks are
very familiar with it and very supportive of it, broad support
across the entire Air Force.
So, again, I hail from the First District of Utah where
we're an Air Force district, the second-largest--Hill Air Force
Base, second largest installation; 388th [Fighter Wing], first
operational wing of the F-35; and the newly named, which we're
very excited about the new name, the Sentinel program, the
Ground Based Strategic Deterrent. Because of this, we're so
focused on our depot work and we want to be able to have the
flexibility.
Again, the 180-day rule is crucial to be able to make sure
that we have the workforce needs that we--as GS-13 and below in
particular, that will reduce any potential issues or abuses
that would ever come from something like this, and it helps us
immediately hire and keep our workforce going.
As you mentioned, you're not necessarily familiar with the
legislation. Any other comments, now we have a little bit more
time, to just talk about the need for this? I'll throw it to
General Brown first. Making sure that, you know, we want to
have full support for this particular piece, are you okay if we
provide your office with detailed updates on this particular
issue?
Secretary Kendall. I'd be very interested in that. You're
bringing back memories. In 1982, I was a captain in the Army,
and over a weekend I came back to work as a GS-13. And I didn't
have to wait 180 days, and I think it would have been a great
discouragement to me if I had to do that. So, I'd be very
interested in looking at this legislation.
Mr. Moore. Well, we provided--there's a waiver that's been
in existence for a while, and we've had long enough to look at
the data and say, you know, this should be the status quo,
we've got to get, remove this bureaucratic piece and make this
and change this. We keep making incremental inches forward
every time we have an NDAA cycle, and we need to address that
this year. We need to be data-driven individuals from our side,
on the Congress side, from the DOD, and say let's embrace this,
let's [inaudible] that the unions are great with this, the
workers want this, our defense depots desperately need this
type of workforce. We know there's a shortage across our entire
economy but particularly with this.
Let me jump over to the Depot Caucus. So, I chair the Depot
Caucus, and we recently held an event with the Army to provide
them the opportunity to brief members on the Army, the OIB
[organic industrial base] modernization plan. Many of my
colleagues, particularly those of us with air logistic
complexes, ALCs, are waiting for the Air Force's 5-year
optimization plan [that] was supposed to be submitted alongside
the budget.
Can we expect, Secretary Kendall, can we expect to see this
soon? Could you preview specific goals that are associated with
FY23?
Secretary Kendall. Overall, the fighter plan is what's
reflected in our 5-year development plan. I think we're working
on a 20-year organic industrial base plan, as well. I don't
have the specifics in my head, but I'd be happy to get with you
and talk to you about that.
Mr. Moore. Yeah. We've seen a lot of work on the Army side.
This is a win/win. This is a win we have. We have bipartisan
members on the Depot Caucus from various districts with Army,
Navy, Air Force bases, and we are really anxious, from the Air
Force side, to be able to get the plan, so we can get working
on this and make sure that we can implement it.
Lastly, General Brown, from my understanding, the JASSM
[Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile] and LRASM [Long Range
Anti-Ship Missile] and the Stand-in Attack Weapon can help the
F-35 reach its full potential as a fifth-generation fighter.
Can you please provide an update on the implementation of
advanced weaponry for the F-35 with battle management
capabilities needed to address increasing adversarial threats?
General Brown. Sure. Particularly on JASSM and LRASM that
are basically built from the same body, we're maxing out
production in this particular budget, and that's an important
aspect of the capability, not just the airplane, as I've said
earlier, on the weapons, as well. And then we're also putting
money into RDT&E for Stand-in Attack Weapon to provide that
capability for the F-35, as well. So those are two key.
I'd also highlight JATM, the Joint Air Tactical Missile, is
another aspect that we want to continue to develop to give us
the air range, as well.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Thank you both, and we'll follow up
on the 180-day legislation and make sure you have clear copies
of it.
Mr. Kahele. The chair now recognizes Mr. Fallon for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate it.
General Brown, how are you? Thank you all for coming. I
wanted to start real quickly on, I don't want to spend a lot of
time on it, but just, General, on a personal level, as an Air
Force veteran myself, very proud. I love all four branches of
the service; I just love the Air Force a little bit more.
I was dismayed last year when I believed it was politically
driven that some were alleging that there was a major problem
with extremism in the military. I mean, you're always going to
have some bad apples, but I took that as an affront because
there's something, there's a difference between truth and then
deliberate fiction.
And that's why, you know, I just remember my experience.
And the first thing they did when we got to on station was this
is a meritocracy, we don't put up and we have zero tolerance
for any kind of bigotry, any kind of discrimination, and we
love that. That's America. And the Air Force and the military
have been on the cutting edge, I think, in advance and further
than our society had gotten, I think had been leading.
That was 30 years ago. I suspect, I don't know, but I
suspect it's getting even better. So, one of the questions that
we asked each branch was--because what I want to deal with
truth and data--how many folks have been separated in the last
fiscal year due to extremist activities? And some of the other
branches got us an answer. The Air Force hee-and-hawed and they
didn't give us an answer, but they finally said, well, we don't
track that.
So, I was just wondering if you track it now. And if you
don't, I would respectfully ask if you should because I just
want to deal with truth so, if somebody says that again, I can
say what are you talking about? Of the 330,000 active, it was 4
or 5. And it's an issue, one is too many; but it's not a
serious issue.
So, I just wanted you to comment on that real quickly.
Thank you.
General Brown. I appreciate you asking the question. We'll
have to get back to you. I know of a couple, personally, I know
of that have been removed from the service based on extremism
or extremist activities. But what I will tell you, a good
majority of our airmen all live up to our core values. And
that's exactly what it's all about, and it's the aspect we
don't want any one of our airmen or guardians for that matter
or any other service member to feel like they're being either
harassed, discriminated, or live in an environment they can't
reach their full potential.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 98.]
Mr. Fallon. That's not unit cohesion, and we want them out.
We want the bad apples out. I remember an instance, it was more
sexism, but they kicked his butt out within a few weeks after
he graduated, basically while he was in tech training.
But just tracking it, then we can, if some yo-yos here, you
know, waste your time with something like that, you know, we
can have a ready answer. And if it is an issue, then we'll
address it. I just want to move forward.
So, General, with recruiting and retention, our office
asked on the 13th of April of this month what the Air Force
recruiting was for basic training graduates and, you know, Air
Force officers commissioned. And we haven't got an answer yet,
so I'd love to have that answer at some point. It's been 2
weeks.
But I did notice that FY22 we had 329,000 end strength, and
in FY23 you're planning on 323. So, it's a reduction of almost
2 percent. And when you think about nuclearized Iran, of course
the largest land invasion we've seen in Europe in 70 years, and
a resurgent China, what's the rationale and the reasoning
behind the reduction?
General Brown. That end strength reduction is tied to force
structure. And so, one of the things we're doing is actually
making sure we're aligning what we're doing from a force
structure standpoint with our end strength, so those are tied
together.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. Secretary Kendall, with the pilots,
I think we have, it's 12,451, and our strength is 14--we want
14,101; so there's a delta there. What are our plans to remedy
that?
Secretary Kendall. We're looking at things that increase
the efficiency of the pipeline to produce pilots, and we're
trying to recruit more and bring them in. You know, we don't
have an operational shortage of pilots in flying units. What we
have is a shortage of rated people in staff jobs generally. So,
it's not really affecting readiness that much.
But we are making incremental progress. I think the pilot
shortfall fell by about 300 this past year, so we're making
some progress on that and we're doing a number of things to
address that problem.
Mr. Fallon. Yes. Because I remember my PAS [professor of
aerospace studies] when I was in ROTC telling me in the 1970s,
after Vietnam, they let a bunch of pilots go and then a couple
of years later they had a shortage. And then we were seeing
that in the early 1990s where they were [inaudible] pilots and
letting folks go, and then what happened, and he predicted it,
too, he said you're going to have a shortage, and we did. I
just don't want to see that----
Secretary Kendall. We're having some difficulties with
recruiting in general, not just pilots right now.
Mr. Fallon. Yes, and that's why I asked for those. I'm
worried about that because I'm hearing that from people at
Lackland, I'm hearing that from people in some of the bases
with the Army, as well.
General, the RC-135 Rivet joint platform, we make that in
Greenville, Texas. It's in the district that I currently
represent but won't come January. But I just want to--I know
that we're in an unclassified setting, but I was wondering if
you could comment on the contributions to our efforts to
support Ukraine or our NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization] allies vis-a-vis this platform.
General Brown. Well, it's not just the RC-135. It's all the
other ISR platforms that come together and help provide
information, not only to ourselves to have a good sense of
what's going on but to support Ukraine in their operations, as
well. So, the RC-135, having been an air component commander a
couple of times, and having to operate, personally, for me and
the things I have to do as an air component commander, provide
some pretty great capability to give us a good sense of what's
going on within whatever environment we're monitoring.
Mr. Kahele. Member's time has expired.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, thank you.
Mr. Kahele. The chair recognizes Mr. Waltz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
sticking with us today. I certainly think the American people
deserve our close attention here.
I'm struggling--and, Mr. Kendall, thank you for the call.
Thank you all for the engagement. I'm still struggling to
figure out how this budget builds and maintains an Air Force
that can meet the National Defense Strategy. Mr. Kendall, we've
received some briefings from you; thank you. We've received the
overmatch brief. Essentially, if we buy into the notion that
the Chinese Communist Party believes it has match or overmatch
in the next 5 years, coupled with still deterring Russia,
coupled with Iran, North Korea, and keeping a lid of global
terrorism, how this budget gets us there.
I mean, I'll be candid. I think we need to raise the DOD
top line. We're going backwards with inflation. The comptroller
used a 4 percent figure and we're sitting at 8. And, therefore,
raise the Air Force top line to be able to both accelerate
modernization and enable legacy retirement recapitalization by
reprogramming recapitalization that preserves the combat
capability because we don't know if and when the next Ukraine
is going to happen or the next Taiwan or what have you. And
I'm, as you've heard from many members, very concerned about
this dip that we constantly seem to be in as we divest to
invest.
Secretary Kendall, I'm particularly concerned about
readiness. We talked about it briefly. The Air Force's budget
continues to take risk, particularly in weapon systems
sustainment accounts. It's funded at 83 percent of the
requirement. If you add in your unfunded priority list requests
at about half a billion, that raises it to 87 percent, but
we're still trading near-term readiness for long-term
modernization. We're still in that dip, and I can't figure out
why you aren't coming to us and saying this is what I truly
need and here's the risks that we're taking. But, yesterday,
when we spoke, you thought it was adequate. You thought it gets
the job done.
And I think we have a teachable moment right now in Ukraine
on how you can have the shiniest, newest, most modern toys,
but, if they're not ready, if they're not sustained, then, you
know, at least Russia right now is feeling that pain, and I
don't ever want to see us feel it.
So, talk to me about readiness, particularly when our
premier fighter, the Joint Strike Fighter, set aside the
weapons readiness, isn't even sitting at 75 percent, and I
don't see a path to get there.
Secretary Kendall. General Brown and Commandant Berger
wrote a great article on readiness, pointing out that you have
to think about readiness much more broadly than we do
traditionally. I have a card here with all the current
availability rates for our aircraft, which aren't where I'd
like them to be. But the real question is ready for what and
when? And the threats are getting worse over time; there's no
question about that.
We do believe we have adequate ready forces today to deal
with anything the National Defense Strategy would ask us to do
today, support combatant commanders----
Mr. Waltz. Do you believe we have it 5 years from now
against an increasingly lethal, as we've been repeatedly
briefed----
Secretary Kendall. When I said in my opening statement we
would have to make tough choices, this is partly what I was
talking about. We're going to have to transition from the force
we have to one that is going to be adequate to deal with the
future threat, and the pacing threat is China. And it's not
China everywhere in the world; it's China in the----
Mr. Waltz. But I don't want to pace. I want to outmatch.
Secretary Kendall. I agree with you completely----
Mr. Waltz. And I don't see that. I just don't see us
getting there in that budget, so I look forward to--I'll have
some follow-on questions for the record of how we get there.
And if we were to give you more to invest, I mean, we're out of
time. What we're investing in today, if you believe that we may
potentially be in a conflict 5 years from now, this is it, I
mean, I believe. But I look forward to working with you----
Secretary Kendall. Again, we have to be concerned not just
with now, not just in 5 years, but 10 and 15 years. So, we've
got to worry about all these timeframes.
Mr. Waltz. I feel like we're in 1936 seeing what's coming
in terms of a potential conflict. And I agree with you we have
to think past it, but we have to win the next potential
conflict----
Secretary Kendall. My opening quote was from 1940, another
timeframe of interest.
Mr. Waltz. In the time I have remaining, General Raymond,
thank you for our conversations about a potential space reserve
fleet to match the civil air fleet construct. I want you to
have those capabilities in a time of war, to grab those
civilian capabilities. I look forward to working with you on
that.
And then, finally, General Brown, when will we get--the GAO
has been making recommendations for 8 years on F-35. And most
recently, they asked for a report on the reports. When will we
get that report on F-35 sustainment? Because I just think it's,
frankly, it's broken in many ways. And we need to be open-eyed
and honest about it, particularly as we head into NGAD. But
when will get that?
General Brown. I'll have to get you an update on where we
are. But to your point, though, we want to make sure that we're
actually responding to those and taking the recommendations
from the GAO seriously, which we are. But----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mr. Waltz. They've had some sitting on the table for 8
years.
Mr. Kahele. The member's time has expired.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Kahele. No more members with questions today. So,
Secretary Kendall, General Brown, General Raymond, this
committee thanks you for appearing before us today and for your
leadership of the over half a million Air Force Active Duty,
Air Force Reserve, and Air National Guard members and their
families who each and every day dedicate their lives in service
to this Nation and the greatest Air Force in the history of the
world.
And with that, the Committee on Armed Services is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:56 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 27, 2022

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 27, 2022

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 27, 2022

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 27, 2022

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLEGO

Secretary Kendall. Expansion of Five Eyes-only activities would
require coordination with the U.S. Intelligence Community, Interagency,
Department of Defense, and all Five Eye nations. The Department of the
Air Force, through its elements in the U.S. Intelligence Community,
maintains unique and enduring bilateral intelligence relationships with
Japan and South Korea. These arrangements provide valuable national
security benefits to both the United States and the partner.
Japan and South Korea are already included in several multilateral
activities involving the Five Eyes nations. We are always amenable to
considering the expansion of our multilateral forums or activities when
doing so enhances the security and capability of the United States and
our existing partners.   [See page 31.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ
Secretary Kendall. Eligible families can use the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP) to meet their medical needs. Airmen and Guardians
who qualify for the EFMP are able to request reassignment or deferment
of an assignment to a location that lacks appropriate support for their
family for various reasons. Enrollment in the EFMP requires identifying
all family members requiring long-term general medical, special
educational, early intervention and related services, or modified
housing.   [See page 36.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Secretary Kendall and General Brown. Our operational units do not
have a training deficit against the legacy aircraft represented by
contract ADAIR. Our training deficit is against advanced adversary
systems. Test and training at Nellis is focused on defeating an
advanced adversary, therefore our requirement at Nellis is to replicate
those advanced systems. Contract ADAIR remains valuable at our FTUs
where pilots are learning basic skills and not preparing for a high-end
fight.   [See page 39.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. BICE
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force's proposed divestment of 15 E-3
aircraft in Fiscal Year 2023, plus the divestment of an additional 5
aircraft in Fiscal Year 2027 garners total savings of $2.93B across the
Future Years Defense Program. The detailed per-year, per-aircraft
savings information can be provided directly to your office.   [See
page 55.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
General Brown. The only current Air Force sustainment reporting
requirement is from the FY22 NDAA Section 141. IMPLEMENTATION OF
AFFORDABILITY, OPERATIONAL, AND SUSTAINMENT COST; the first requirement
is the establishment of an F-35 sustainment affordability cost target
no later than 1 Oct 2025 followed by implementation of F-35 sustainment
cost constraints beginning 1 Oct 2028.
OSD and the F-35 JPO are currently in discussions with the GAO F-35
Sustainment audit team to clarify the closure criteria for a number of
the open recommendations. Once these discussions are completed, the
results will be incorporated into the report that will be delivered to
the committees.   [See page 62.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
General Brown. The DAF separated three service members in the past
fiscal year due to their association with extremist groups or because
of acts of extremism. It is important to note that there is no specific
basis for discharge linked to extremist behavior, nor are there
separation codes associated with discharges for this reason. Members in
violation of DODI 1325.06, Handling Protest, Extremist, and Criminal
Gang Activities Among Members of the Armed Forces, are subject to
disciplinary action--to include administrative separation, based upon
their specific conduct.   [See page 59.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. ESCOBAR
General Raymond. The University Partnership Program (UPP)
facilitates the education and recruitment of a diverse pool of military
and civilian Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
talent into the Guardian workforce. UPP provides a consistent pipeline
of required talent through scholarship, internship, and mentorship
opportunities, and is comprised of 14 nationally-renowned universities.
Currently, the USSF is supporting two (2) Guardians who will earn
advanced academic degrees (AADs) at the University of Texas at El Paso
in critical STEM disciplines. This initial effort contributes to Space
Force's goal to support Guardians through degree programs that directly
advance the USSF mission.   [See page 35.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 27, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. The Air Force's FY23 budget proposes reducing F-35
annual procurement below last year's appropriated level, while
purchasing additional 4th generation fighters that have not been
produced at rates for the Air Force in roughly 20-plus years. As the
Air Force tries to mitigate a fighter shortfall, how does this revised
acquisition plan not add additional risk? How does the Air Force plan
to mitigate this risk?
General Brown. The Air Force continuously evaluates the threat and
operational environment and prioritizes available resources to ensure
operational needs are met. In the Fiscal Year 2023 budget cycle, the
Air Force balanced the need for our future corner-stone fighter, the F-
35, with the need for a modern, high delivery capacity fighter, the F-
15EX. The decision to focus on F-15EX procurement will allow us to
recap current F-15C/D locations--most notably Kadena--sooner than we
would be able to had we not.
Mr. Turner. I understand the Air National Guard has started to
circulate a briefing titled ``Fund the Air Force the Nation Needs,'' in
which they outline the insufficient level of resources for the Air
Force, and the Air Guard in particular, needed to remain viable to meet
the threats from China, Russia and other rogue states. I understand
that your budget request was constrained, as it always is, and that the
Air Guard must go through you to get major items like aircraft on the
Unfunded Priority Lists (UPL). How many F-35s and C-130s did Lt General
Loh ask you to include in your UPL for the Air Guard in order to help
it retain relevancy?
General Brown. The briefing titled ``Fund the Air Force the Nation
Needs, is a state produced product not in circulation at the Department
of the Air Force Headquarters.
ANG Federal UPL submitted to the Air Force $8,297.2M; requirements
aligned with winning the nation's wars and homeland defense. ANG
validated equities included in AF UPL $131M (including $51M for FSRM
not requested by ANG in its submission to the AF UPL).
The list included:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANG Federal UPL Request                                       Submitted in AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$5,300.0M 40 F35 A/C                                          Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$1,500.0M 12 F15EX A/C                                        Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$128M 24 F-15EX Conformal Fuel Tank                           Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$384M Weapon Sustainment System                               $63M Included AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$110M 14,000 Flying Hrs                                       Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$68M IT & JWICS                                               Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$191M MILCON                                                  $17M Included AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$14M Cyber Wing Conversion                                    Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$194M C130H Propulsion                                        Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$60M MAF Data Link                                            Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$316M Home Land Defense Munitions                             Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$5M ANG Fed TA                                                Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$7.5M 5 Analysis of Alternatives                              Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$1.7M Cyber Range                                             Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$12M Drug Demand Reduction Contract                           Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$6M Artic Clothing                                            Not In AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0.0M FSRM                                                    $51M Included AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$8,297.2M Total Requested                                     $131M Total (ANG Equities) Validated & Included in
the AF UPL
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Secretary Kendall: Over the FYDP, the Army has 7 CDC
[Child Development Center] projects and the Navy has 17 CDC projects,
while the Air Force only has 3 planned. Additionally, the Air Force was
the only service that did not request MILCON [military construction]
money for a CDC in the FY23 President's Budget.
--Why is the Air Force not prioritizing child care MILCON in its
budget requests?
--What is the Air Force's plan to reduce wait lists for child care?
--Specifically, at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, since the Air
Force is the lead service for that installation, does the Air Force
consider the Army children on the waitlist as well in its planning for
MILCON and child care staffing? I visited JBER, and military spouses
told me that they are waiting more than 1 year for child care. What
will the Air Force do to expand child care capacity at JBER and reduce
waiting times for child care?
Secretary Kendall. The Department is pursuing multiple lines of
effort to meet the child care needs of our Air Force and Space Force
families. We are addressing the availability and delivery of Child
Development Programs with a strategic approach to maximize child care
options, expand child care capacity, and leverage customer feedback in
determining emerging and ongoing needs. To address critical staffing
shortages, we deployed a robust Nonappropriated Fund (NAF) Child and
Youth Program (CYP) Recruitment, Retention and Special Employee Program
in FY22 at all our installations. We have also developed and
implemented targeted recruitment and retention incentives for Family
Child Care providers to increase child care capacity and offer options
that meet the different child care needs of families.
CDC construction is part of the overall DAF [Department of the Air
Force] childcare effort. The current status of CDC planning is as
follows. One CDC (1) was included in the FY22 President's Budget (PB)
and four (4) in the Chief of Staff of the Air Force's (CSAF) FY22
Unfunded Priority List (UPL), with all projects being authorized and
appropriated in FY22. After all the FY22 UPL projects were funded, we
did not have additional CDCs sufficiently designed for inclusion in the
FY23 PB.
The CSAF included two CDCs in the FY23 UPL (JBSA Randolph and
Wright-Patterson AFB), and postured two in FY24 (Hanscom AFB and Scott
AFB).
The DAF continues with the planning and design of an additional 11
CDCs with provided FY20 and FY22 CDC Planning & Design funds. Projects
will be included in future PB or potentially UPL submissions as designs
are sufficiently matured. I recently visited Joint Base Elmendorf-
Richardson (JBER) and looked into the childcare situation there. All
U.S. military members assigned to JBER, and other Department of the Air
Force led Joint Base installations, are eligible for child care and
included on our wait lists managed through the DoD wait list management
system, MilitaryChildCare.com. Availability of affordable and quality
child care options for all military families at the installation drive
actions to pursue infrastructure and staffing solutions to address the
imbalance between demand and capacity. JBER's greatest challenge to
improving access to care is staffing in all of their child development
programs. With an inventory of 65 rooms, JBER recently reported 29 CDC
classrooms closed temporarily due to staffing shortages, resulting in a
total of 393 vacant child care spaces. To address that staffing
shortfall, recruitment, retention, and special incentives are being
offered to include bonuses for sign-on, employee referrals, longevity,
and achieving training/educational milestones. In addition, wages were
increased for direct care staff and reduced child care fees for child
and youth employees are offered to improve staffing levels. Efforts are
also underway to recruit additional Family Child Care providers to
expand childcare capacity and offer options that meet the different
child care needs of families. Subsidy rates will increase in June 2022
for Family Child Care providers willing to offer full-time care for
children under two years of age. The weekly subsidy rate for standard
providers will increase from $209 to $305 per week and $250 to $346 per
week for accredited providers. As we address the staffing challenges to
improve access to care, in FY23 JBER will execute a $2.4M CDC
renovation project for the closed CDC to better address child care
demand and maximize facility utilization.
Ms. Speier. Secretary Kendall, please provide an update on the
diversity and inclusion projects the Air Force is currently working on,
including any changes to minimize disparate treatment in military
justice.
Secretary Kendall. The DAF is taking an integrative approach to
recruit diverse talent representative of the eligible United States
population, to retain talent we already have, and to routinely review
policies, practices, procedures, or conditions that may negatively
affect one group over another. In addition to standing up the Secretary
of the Air Force Office of Diversity and Inclusion, we also have seven
DAF Barrier Analysis Working Group Teams that identify barriers for
underrepresented groups. Over time, we updated a number of policies to
ensure they are inclusive of all members, without compromise to mission
and readiness. We also conduct surveys, hold listening sessions, and
focus groups to allow members an opportunity to inform us where
potential barriers may exist, and to better understand why personnel
choose to continue to serve, or conversely, to end their service. From
a recruiting standpoint, we implemented recruiting strategies to
broaden our reach, with the goal of increasing accessions of diverse
military and civilian talent. This includes engagement with industry
and other organizations, asking our General Officers to support
community and event engagement through the `GO Inspire' initiative, and
partnerships with industry and external organizations to reach diverse
STEM-minded personnel. The Department is also focusing our efforts on
the K-12 youth programs with the intent to inspire youth in
underrepresented groups to pursue STEM and aviation careers. The DAF is
making bias literacy a foundational competency for all leaders. We
recently developed a policy mandating bias awareness training for
hiring managers and piloted an in-person bias awareness workshop for
command selection board members. The goal is to build bias literate
Leaders and Practitioners and to mitigate the influence of personal
biases when making talent management decisions. With regard to
disciplinary outcomes highlighted within the Racial Disparity Review
and DAF Disparity Review, the DAF is taking a holistic approach by
looking at all of our pre and post accession factors, policies, and
practices to see what effect they have upon disciplinary outcomes. We
have also implemented the following efforts to improve data collection
which will lead to improved evidence-based decision-making to address
racial disparity issues: In May 2020, the DAF amended AFI 36-2907 which
now requires commanders to collect demographic data on all service
members who issue and receive written administrative disciplinary
actions. In March 2021, the Air Force partnered with the RAND
Corporation to fuse two separate but interrelated databases together
with the goal of discovering causal connections to racial disparity in
the Air Force military justice statistics.
To better measure the scope of the disparity throughout the
discipline system, the Air Force JAG Corps signed a Tri-Signature
Memorandum to optimize collaboration among OSI, Security Forces and JA.
Additionally, JA members actively participate in all of the DAF Barrier
Analysis Working Groups to analyze our policies, procedures and
practices which may have a negative impact on the military justice
system. In early January 2022, the Air Force updated AFI 51-202 to
include a ``preponderance of the evidence'' standard of proof for
nonjudicial punishment to provide transparency, greater guidance for
commanders, and increase trust in the process.
Finally, the JA community is enhancing its bias training for JAG
Corps members as well as commanders and senior enlisted leaders at all
levels through courses at the Air Force JAG School, conferences, and
local base efforts to increase awareness and understanding regarding
how unconscious bias negatively impacts the military justice system.
The JAG Corps has always placed an intentional emphasis on its own
diversity recruitment efforts. Inclusive recruitment efforts have
resulted in a Corps with greater diversity when compared to the
national average of all law firms with over 700 lawyers.
Ms. Speier. General Brown, what are the manning implications if the
Air Force is unable to divest the A-10? If the Air Force is able to
divest, what is the manning plan for those pilots and maintainers?
Would there be improvement on undermanning in other areas?
General Brown. As new weapon systems are delivered, the Air Force
plans to transition A-10 personnel to the new platforms. Continuing to
keep A-10s directly impacts the transition of experienced maintenance
personnel to more relevant weapons systems where their experience and
expertise are critically needed.
Ms. Speier. General Brown, the Army recently implemented the
Command Assessment Program, which includes a behavioral interview and a
360-degree review (including feedback from peers and subordinates about
leadership qualities) of officers prior to them becoming eligible for
command. Does the Air Force have a similar plan to improve the
selection of officers for command. If so, what is the plan and
timeline? If not, why not?
General Brown. Yes. One of our major commands (Air Force Special
Operations Command) implemented a limited assessment pilot of commander
candidates in the Special Operations functional specialties, centered
on providing specific leadership feedback along with the development
tools (and time) necessary to grow from the experience. The pilot
assessment consisted of peer/subordinate feedback, cognitive and non-
cognitive assessments, and a personal interview by a specifically
trained operational psychologist.
Additionally, we beta tested a process that added additional
assessments at the USAF Command Screening Board for wing and group
commanders (O-6s) in May 2022. Within the beta test, a 360-type
assessment was included as a confidential collection of feedback on
leadership qualities by peers and subordinates. We also included an
assessment that measures areas known as ``derailers'' that emerge in
times of increased strain that, if left unchecked, may disrupt
relationships, damage reputations, and derail people's chances of
success in leadership.
Double blind behavioral interviews, psychological testing,
cognitive testing, writing samples, and physical fitness tests will not
be conducted in CSB 23, but are under consideration for future CSB
iterations as we build and scale up our leadership assessment program.
Finally we are researching and developing the way forward on
assessments for all commanders and senior enlisted leaders.
Ms. Speier. General Brown, does the Air Force plan on implementing
the talent marketplace for enlisted airmen?
General Brown. The Air Force has already implemented the use of
Talent Marketplace tools for Enlisted Airmen and plans to continue
expanding these capabilities. In April 2022, the Air Force's Personnel
Center (AFPC) fully transitioned approximately 31,000 Special Duty
Assignments from our legacy Assignment Management System (AMS) platform
to Talent Marketplace. The move provides Airmen with a modern feel and
interactive features making it much easier for the billet owners to
advertise, Airmen to volunteer, and the AFPC assignment teams to match
the best-qualified and eligible Airman for these unique positions.
Our next objective is to transition the bulk of Enlisted
assignments to and from overseas locations using the Enlisted Quarterly
Assignment List (EQUAL) to Talent Marketplace. This Talent Marketplace
capability is projected for development late in calendar year 2022.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
Mr. Kelly. The FY20 NDAA (Sec. 322) prohibits the use of
fluorinated, or PFAS-based AFFF use on any military installation after
October 1, 2024. I would appreciate if you could apprise the Committee
on where the Air Force stands on meeting this aggressive schedule? As a
follow-up, I understand that the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Energy, Installations, and Environment published a Memo dated 16
November 2021 directing the Department of the Air Force to designate
all aircraft hangers as either Tier 1 and Tier 2 Fire Protection
Facilities by 16 February 2022. These Tier 1 facilities will have
important, PFAS-free fire protection installed while the Tier 2
facilities will not. Has this Tier 1 versus Tier 2 designation process
been completed and, if so, would you please provide the Committee with
a listing of these facilities and their subsequent designations? If
not, when do you anticipate this designation process will be completed?
Could you please share with the Committee the systems that the DAF is
currently using and/or intends to use in Tier 1 facilities to prevent
future fuel fires? Why isn't the Air Force designating all hangars with
strategically and economically valuable aircraft as Tier 1 and then
letting the bases or the major commands decide which hangars need to
opt out of the Tier 1 designation?
Secretary Kendall. I would appreciate if you could apprise the
Committee on where the Air Force stands on meeting this aggressive
schedule?
A. The Department is committed to end the use of fluorinated AFFF
foam by October 1, 2024 pursuant to Section 322. In order to provide an
orderly implementation of that congressional mandate, the DAF is
working with OSD and the services on building a foam replacement
schedule while minimizing risk to the mission. The biggest challenge
facing the DAF is getting an approved replacement foam.
As a follow-up, I understand that the Assistant Secretary of the
Air Force for Energy, Installations, and Environment published a Memo
dated 16 November 2021 directing the Department of the Air Force to
designate all aircraft hangers as either Tier 1 and Tier 2 Fire
Protection Facilities by 16 February 2022. These Tier 1 facilities will
have important, PFAS-free fire protection installed while the Tier 2
facilities will not. Has this Tier 1 versus Tier 2 designation process
been completed and, if so, would you please provide the Committee with
a listing of these facilities and their subsequent designations? If
not, when do you anticipate this designation process will be completed?
A. The Tier 1 and Tier 2 designation is complete. All DAF hangars
and similar facilities equipped with a foam based Fire Suppression
System are categorized as Tier 2 Fire Protection Facilities. Facilities
with approved exception, are categorized as Tier 1 Fire Protection
Facilities. Exceptions for Tier 1 consideration are requested by the
Air Force Major Command/Space Force Field Command based on their
mission requirements. Currently, the DAF has received and approved 4
Tier 1 facilities requests. Those facilities reside at Joint Base
Anacostia-Bolling and Joint Base Andrews and provide support for
Presidential activities.
Could you please share with the Committee the systems that the DAF
is currently using and/or intends to use in Tier 1 facilities to
prevent future fuel fires?
A. Tier 1 facilities shall utilize one of the following specialized
systems: Ignitable Liquid Drainage Floor Assembly (ILDFA), Low
Expansion Foam System containing an approved Fluorine Free Foam (FFF),
or High Expansion Foam System (HEFS). The ILDFA is the primary option
for Tier 1 facilities.
Why isn't the Air Force designating all hangars with strategically
and economically valuable aircraft as Tier 1 and then letting the bases
or the major commands decide which hangars need to opt out of the Tier
1 designation?
A. The DAF used that exact approach but in reverse. All hangars
were designated as Tier 2 facilities and the Major Commands/Field
Commands have the ability to request Tier 1 designation. The DAF took
this approach because research indicated that the risk to the aircraft
and the mission due to a fuel based fire was very low but the foam fire
suppression systems were frequently damaging aircraft and were an
environmental hazard.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Secretary, over 10 years ago, the Department and the
Congress determined that a second engine for the F-35 was costly and
unnecessary. Yet your budget includes almost $300 million to re-create
the second engine program at the expense of F-35 aircraft quantities,
funds for F135 modernization, and NGAD propulsion. You have been
publicly quoted saying that you prioritized integrating a second engine
onto the F-35 at the expense of those existing programs.
What has changed? Why are you prioritizing investment in a costly
second engine for which you have no defined requirement, at the expense
of existing F-35 program of record or NGAD propulsion?
Secretary Kendall. The F135 engine will be challenged to provide
the required combat capability as we continue to modernize the F-35A
with new capabilities needed to address the advancing threat. We are
working with the Joint Program Office to investigate all available
options to increase the F-35A's range, power, and support for advanced
weapons systems. While we evaluate those options, we continue to fund
the AETP prototyping program in the FY23 PB as one of the possible
solutions. Both AETP adaptive engine prototypes--GE Aviation's XA100
and Pratt & Whitney's XA101--are under consideration for the F-35A
Propulsion Modernization effort. Next Generation Adaptive Propulsion
(NGAP) is leveraging AETP tech maturation and risk reduction to provide
propulsion options for Next Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) Family of
Systems (FoS) capabilities. Both the AETP and NGAP program are key
investments by the Air Force to maintain US superiority in fighter
engine technology and enable our warfighters to fly, fight, and win.
Mr. Kelly. The Air Force's plans for a second engine only work for
a small subset of the F-35--the F-35A fleet of the USAF--and is
estimated to cost as much as $40 billion over the program's life cycle.
Conversely, modernizing the existing F135 engine would save as much as
$40 billion in life cycle sustainment costs across the F-35 fleet,
benefitting all Services and our allied partners.
Why aren't you investing in F135 engine enhancements to field
modernized capabilities across the entire F-35 fleet?
Is the USAF willing to pay the $40 billion dollar bill for an
alternate engine?
Even if you did use a second engine on a small subset of the F-35
fleet, won't DOD [Department of Defense] still need to modernize the
F135 engine for the rest of the fleet?
How can DOD afford to stand up a second separate depot maintenance
infrastructure and supply chain, when it struggled for years to
adequately fund its existing depot maintenance infrastructure?
Secretary Kendall. The F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) is currently
working with the Services to on a business case analysis (BCA) for F-35
propulsion modernization. The JPO BCA includes analysis of candidate
engine options including the adaptive engine transition program (AETP),
and upgrades to current F135 engine. The DAF is conducting an
operational benefits analysis that is complementary to and leverages
results of the JPO BCA. Both analyses are expected to finish before the
end of Fiscal Year 2022. An engine upgrade or replacement is still
several years away. We are working with the JPO to investigate all
available options for increasing the F-35A's range and power beyond
what the F135 can provide and what costs would be associated with those
options. The current engine, the F135, will be challenged as we
continue to modernize the F-35A with new capabilities needed to address
the looming threat. The adaptive engine transition program (AETP)
options currently under evaluation will be available for the AF F-35A
and USN F-35C fleets which represent over 2,100 or 86% of the US F-35
Fleet. If the AETP is approved for export it will be available for over
2,700 F-35A and F-35C aircraft which represent over 83% of the current
programmed world-wide F-35 enterprise. Additionally, the F-35 JPO, in
cooperation with the Adaptive Engine Transition Program Office, is
contracting both General Electric Aviation and Pratt & Whitney to
perform feasibility assessments for developing a tri-variant solution
of their respective AETP engines. Expected completion of these studies
is in the second half of Fiscal Year 2022. We are working with the JPO
to investigate all available options for engine enhancements and
associated supporting requirements those options may entail.
Mr. Kelly. Secretary Kendall, you have previously acknowledged that
a second engine for the F-35 would be a costly and technically
challenging endeavor and may not be affordable.
What is the current estimated cost and timeline to develop,
integrate and field to the warfighter an F-35A equipped with the AETP
engine?
The AETP program was originally intended for 6th Generation
aircraft development. Why isn't the AETP engine being considered for
the Air Force's NGAD program?
Secretary Kendall. The AETP program is a technology development
program to develop advanced engine technologies for features such as
greater fuel efficiency and better thermal management. We are currently
working with the F-35 Joint Program Office, Navy, and USMC to conduct a
business case analysis (BCA) to explore engine solutions to help solve
the F-35's propulsion related issues. The BCA will be complemented by
an Air Force analysis of the operational implications of the different
solutions. While the AETP program is one of the possibilities under
consideration, a decision on what the solution is pending the outcomes
of those analyses.
The Adaptive Engine Transition Program (AETP) prototypes are
flight-weight, F-35 sized, engines. Propulsion options for Next
Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) capabilities are supported under the
Next Generation Adaptive Propulsion (NGAP) program. The NGAP program
builds upon the prototyping and technology maturation accomplished
under the AETP to deliver advanced adaptive cycle engine options
tailored for NGAD capabilities.
Mr. Kelly. Secretary Kendall, are you aware of former Acting
Secretary of the Air Force John Roth signing a report in March 2021
titled ``The United States Space Force Components Plan''? Was the
report ever delivered to Congress as directed in the National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Section 931? If not, why? Did
the report approved in March 2021 titled ``The United States Space
Force Components Plan'' conclude that ``the Department of the Air
Force's recommendation to the Office of the Deputy Secretary of Defense
is a two component USSF: a new full and part-time Space Component
(single component) and a separate Space national Guard''? Giving your
best military advice, do you believe that creating a Space National
Guard is in the best interest of U.S. national defense? Why or why not?
Secretary Kendall. I am aware of this report and that it was never
approved by the Secretary of Defense.
The Department relies every day on the critical missions our
Reserve Component Airmen perform in space and highly value the people
who perform those missions. Under any circumstance we want to retain
those people and their contribution to the Space Force. When looking
specifically at the Air National Guard space units, the Department has
three options regarding these missions: Retain the current structure in
the Air National Guard; absorb the missions currently performed by the
Air National Guard space units into the USSF; or create a Space
National Guard. The Administration strongly opposes establishing a
separate Space National Guard (as stated in the Statement of
Administration Policy for H.R. 4350--National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2022) and recommends enactment of the legislative
proposal with the Congress for consideration now that will merge
existing regular Space and Air Force Reserve space professionals into a
new component providing the Space Force with a new talent management
system with options for full and part-time service.
Mr. Kelly. The FY20 NDAA (Sec. 322) prohibits the use of
fluorinated, or PFAS-based AFFF use on any military installation after
October 1, 2024. I would appreciate if you could apprise the Committee
on where the Air Force stands on meeting this aggressive schedule? As a
follow-up, I understand that the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Energy, Installations, and Environment published a Memo dated 16
November 2021 directing the Department of the Air Force to designate
all aircraft hangers as either Tier 1 and Tier 2 Fire Protection
Facilities by 16 February 2022. These Tier 1 facilities will have
important, PFAS-free fire protection installed while the Tier 2
facilities will not. Has this Tier 1 versus Tier 2 designation process
been completed and, if so, would you please provide the Committee with
a listing of these facilities and their subsequent designations? If
not, when do you anticipate this designation process will be completed?
Could you please share with the Committee the systems that the DAF is
currently using and/or intends to use in Tier 1 facilities to prevent
future fuel fires? Why isn't the Air Force designating all hangars with
strategically and economically valuable aircraft as Tier 1 and then
letting the bases or the major commands decide which hangars need to
opt out of the Tier 1 designation?
General Brown. A. The Department is committed to end the use of
fluorinated AFFF foam by October 1, 2024 pursuant to Section 322. In
order to provide an orderly implementation of that congressional
mandate, the DAF is working with OSD and the services on building a
foam replacement schedule while minimizing risk to the mission. The
biggest challenge facing the DAF is getting an approved replacement
foam.
B. The Tier 1 and Tier 2 designation is complete. All DAF hangars
and similar facilities equipped with a foam based Fire Suppression
System are categorized as Tier 2 Fire Protection Facilities. Facilities
with approved exception, are categorized as Tier 1 Fire Protection
Facilities. Exceptions for Tier 1 consideration are requested by the
Air Force Major Command/Space Force Field Command based on their
mission requirements. Currently, the DAF has received and approved 4
Tier 1 facilities requests. Those facilities reside at Joint Base
Anacostia-Bolling and Joint Base Andrews and provide support for
Presidential activities.
C. Tier 1 facilities shall utilize one of the following specialized
systems: Ignitable Liquid Drainage Floor Assembly (ILDFA), Low
Expansion Foam System containing an approved Fluorine Free Foam (FFF),
or High Expansion Foam System (HEFS). The ILDFA is the primary option
for Tier 1 facilities.
D. Instead of a Tier 1 opt-out approach, the DAF used an opt-in
approach. All hangars were designated as Tier 2 facilities and the
Major Commands/Field Commands have the ability to request Tier 1
designation. The DAF took this approach because research indicated that
the risk to the aircraft and the mission due to a fuel based fire was
very low but the foam fire suppression systems were frequently damaging
aircraft and were an environmental hazard.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. It appears the Air Force is taking a strong stand on
divesting 4th Gen aircraft at a faster rate than planned from just last
year. In 2021, Gen Brown discussed the 4+1 fighter set and seemed
content on that thru 2030-2035, allowing the Air Force time to build
the future force while minimizing risk to current combat capability.
Has that changed, and if so, why has it changed in the face of a more
aggressive China and Russia in 2022?
Secretary Kendall. Balancing risk across time is required to
achieve the fighter force structure that wins in the future. Our most
dangerous adversaries are rapidly fielding advanced military
capabilities and becoming more confrontational as their modernized
systems join the strategic environment. To remain competitive in the
future fight, the Future Fighter Force structure plan is predicated on
reshaping the Air Force from seven fighter fleets down to four by FY28.
That narrative has not changed and the reshaping from seven fighter
fleets down to four is centered on continuing the development of the
Next Generation Air Dominance Family of Systems, continuing procurement
of F-35s and F-15EXs, reducing the F-16 fleet from 900+ to 600+ post-
block models, and completely divesting the aging and single-role F-15C
and A-10 fleets.
Mr. Waltz. The Air Force has made it very clear that there is
deliberate intent to divest legacy aircraft in an effort to `Accelerate
Change or . . . Lose'. What is the Air Force plan for mission
replacement for the aircraft that are identified for divestment in the
current FYDP? More specifically, what if the Air Force plan to
recapitalize legacy aircraft in the Air National Guard like the A-10 to
preserve invaluable experience and highly trained Airmen for future
missions? Is there a recapitalization plan for divestments impacting
the Air National Guard?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force is currently executing a Global
Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure all fighter
basing decisions are best aligned to the 2022 National Defense Strategy
and fit within the existing USAF budget. Once this review is complete,
the outcomes will be used to inform the strategic basing process which
will then determine force posture laydown and impacts to individual
units and bases.
Mr. Waltz. As I understand it, the Air National Guard and Air Force
support drawing the A-10 fleet down to 218 in the near term. What is
the specific recapitalization plan for the Air National Guard bases
affected?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force is currently executing a Global
Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure all fighter
basing decisions are best aligned to the 2022 National Defense Strategy
and fit within the existing USAF budget. Once this review is complete,
the outcomes will be used to inform the strategic basing process which
will then determine force posture laydown and impacts to individual
units and bases.
Mr. Waltz. If the Senate/Congress authorized 72 Fighters per year,
(F-35, F-22/NGAD, F-15EX, F-16NEXT) would that support the Air Force
our Nation Needs for the 2022 NDS? If not, then why?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force is committed to maximizing the
procurement of new fighters within given resources. Out fighter
portfolio investment has increased over $1B from FY22 to FY23. Our
investment in the future fleets must also take into account needed
resources into advanced capabilities.
Mr. Waltz. How can you justify rapid divestment of 4th gen fighters
when it takes decades to field new capability, such as NGAD? Aren't we
taking too big a risk on our current capability?
Secretary Kendall. The Next Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) Family
of Systems (FoS) is foundational to Air Force air superiority
capability in the future fighter force structure. Replacing the F-22,
NGAD FoS will be the Air Force's primary air superiority capability in
the highly contested environment and will have the ability to engage
air and surface based threats and targets.
Investments in FY23 range across the spectrum of capability. In the
FY23 President's Budget, we increased our investment in the Air Force
fighter portfolio by over $1B from FY22 to FY23. Investments in NGAD
FoS, F-22 modernization, F-35 Block 4, F-15EX and other 4th generation
aircraft modifications are all needed to meet a potential peer threat.
Mr. Waltz. Given the unprecedented cost of Nuclear modernization,
are you funded appropriately to modernize both the nuclear enterprise
AND your aging fleets?
Secretary Kendall. Our budget fully funds our key nuclear
modernization programs, makes targeted investments to best position the
Nation for peer competition, while accepting risk in legacy
capabilities not optimized for the future fight we envision.
Mr. Waltz. To Air Force Magazine on April 13 2022, Lt Gen Nahom
stated that the USAF needs to buy 72 new fighters a year in order to
recapitalize your current USAF fighter force in order to fight and win
against a peer threat, such as China. With only 33 F-35s and 24 F-15
EXs requested to be purchased in FY 2023, would you purchase more
fighter aircraft if appropriated the funds to do so? How would these
aircraft benefit our National Defense Strategy? How many years do we
have to continue to purchase new fighters in order to properly posture
our future USAF?
General Brown. The Air Force is committed to maximizing the
procurement of new fighters within given resources. Our fighter
portfolio investment has increased over $1B from FY22 to FY23 to
provide for both fighter aircraft and supporting capabilities like
advanced weapons. Ensuring a proper fighter portfolio posture is a
continuous process as we continually assess capacity and capability as
the threat, operational and technical environments evolve.
Mr. Waltz. In 2018, then USAF Secretary Heather Wilson announced
the AF We Need proposal at the annual Air Force Association's Air,
Space and Cyber Conference. That proposal stated that the USAF need to
grow from 312 operational squadrons to 386 operational squadrons by
2030. This also included growing the number of fighter squadrons in the
Total Force from 55 today to 62 fighter squadrons in the future. In
light of the latest 2022 NDS, does the USAF still need 62 fighter
squadrons in order to compete and deter against the threat that China
poses today? How would you posture those fighter squadrons between the
USAF Active and Reserve components?
General Brown. Since release of the 2018 NDS, USAF has not been
able to achieve the across-the-board increases in operational squadrons
the 2018 NDS called for. Since the initial 386 squadron analysis, we
have done extensive additional wargaming, and analysis, primarily
focused on the PRC as the pacing challenge, and we have found new ways
of fighting could get us to a more capable future force structure. We
may end up smaller in numbers, but with the help of Congress we will
meet the intent of the 2022 NDS through the combination of enhanced
capabilities and necessary divestment of costly and ineffective legacy
systems. Our Force Design work to meet the threat is informed by the
Total Force. I would be happy to discuss your question more fully in a
Classified Setting.
Mr. Waltz. The Air Force has made it very clear that there is
deliberate intent to divest legacy aircraft in an effort to `Accelerate
Change or . . . Lose'. What is the Air Force plan for mission
replacement for the aircraft that are identified for divestment in the
current FYDP? More specifically, what if the Air Force plan to
recapitalize legacy aircraft in the Air National Guard like the A-10 to
preserve invaluable experience and highly trained Airmen for future
missions? Is there a recapitalization plan for divestments impacting
the Air National Guard?
General Brown. We value the experience of the Air National Guard
and see it as a force multiplier. We expect recapitalization to be
balanced across the reserve and active component, but it is unlikely
all Air National Guard legacy fighter units will transition to newer
fighter fleets. Our team is in the process of completing a Global
Posture Review for fighters and rescue, intended to identify required
force structure changes, strategic basing recommendations, and
recapitalization plans for legacy aircraft. The DAF is committed to
finding suitable missions (which may include non-flying missions) for
these affected units to insure these highly skilled Airmen remain
valuable contributors to the total force.
Mr. Waltz. As I understand it, the Air National Guard and Air Force
support drawing the A-10 fleet down to 218 in the near term. What is
the specific recapitalization plan for the Air National Guard bases
affected?
General Brown. The Air Force is currently executing a Global
Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure all fighter
basing decisions are best aligned to the 2022 National Defense Strategy
and fit within the existing USAF budget. Once this review is complete,
the outcomes will be used to inform the strategic basing process which
will then determine force posture laydown and impacts to individual
units and bases.
Mr. Waltz. If the Senate/Congress authorized 72 Fighters per year,
(F-35, F-22/NGAD, F-15EX, F-16NEXT) would that support the Air Force
our Nation Needs for the 2022 NDS? If not, then why?
General Brown. The Air Force is committed to maximizing the
procurement of new fighters within given resources. Our fighter
portfolio investment has increased over $1B from FY22 to FY23. Ensuring
a proper fighter portfolio posture is a continuous process as we assess
capacity and capability against the evolving threat, operational and
technical environments. Continued investment in the future fighter
fleets will be supportive of the 2022 NDS objectives.
Mr. Waltz. How many fighter squadrons do you need to meet the 2022
NDS? What is the number?
General Brown. The Air Force is continually looking at the
Combatant Command authority requirements on our fighter squadrons and
the capability needed for advanced threats. Our FY23 PB submission
carefully balances the capacity of the fighter force with modernization
of the weapons systems.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MORELLE
Mr. Morelle. Thank you and Total Force Airmen and Guardians for
relentless dedication to the nation and our Allies and partners.
Question: The Fiscal Year 2021 Defense Appropriations Act reduced the
Air Force's funding request by about half due to ``unjustified growth
and forward financing.'' From my perspective, you appear to be both a
skeptic and an advocate for the Air Battle Management System and I am
curious of your thoughts of how the reduced funds in Fiscal Year 2021
impacted the development of the Air Battle Management System and what
can we look forward to if the Air Battle Management system is fully
funded in Fiscal Year 2023?
Secretary Kendall. Modernizing DAF C3BM is an operational
imperative for the DAF and one of my top priorities. ABMS is a critical
enabler to deliver decision superiority to our warfighters and to how
we will fight in the future. ABMS is also the Department of the Air
Force's primary contribution to Joint All Domain Command and Control
(JADC2), the larger Department of Defense effort to digitally connect
all elements of the U.S. military across all five warfighting domains:
air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace. My understanding is that
Congress provided reduced funding in Fiscal Year 2021 to refocus ABMS
acquisition efforts toward design, development, and delivery of
warfighting capability and away from a focus on experimentation. I
completely agree with this direction.
When I first took over as SecAF, I made it clear that ABMS should
be focused on delivering meaningful operational capability. As you are
aware, I started the Operational Imperative (OI) Initiatives in late
2021 and ABMS is being defined by Operational Imperative #2:
``Achieving Operationally-Optimized ABMS/Air Force JADC2''. The
Department of the Air Force has since applied acquisition rigor to the
ABMS portfolio and I believe we are moving in the right direction to
deliver operational capability to the warfighter. The Fiscal Year 2023
President's Budget request supports the ABMS portfolio and is an
integral year toward ABMS delivering operational capability. In Fiscal
Year 2023, every main ABMS effort, Digital Infrastructure, Capability
Release #1 (Airborne Edge Node), and the Cloud-Based C2 application
suite, will make strides toward initial implementation, pod builds and
test flights, and delivery of minimum viable capabilities,
respectively. In addition, we will tackle the complex integrated
programs management and system engineering that is foundational to
ABMS's future success.
Mr. Morelle. Secretary Kendall and General Brown. This year's
budget request really highlights your efforts in modernizing your part
of the nuclear triad--I am tracking $1.1 billion for the Sentinel and
$354 million for the B-21. Considering the PRC successfully
demonstrated their global strike capability last summer (vis-a-vis a
nuclear-capable, hypersonic Fractional Orbit Bombardment System) and
the Russian Federation continues their nuclear modernization cycle, do
you believe the U.S.' current investments in its ongoing nuclear
modernization programs provide sufficient capabilities for the U.S. to
remain a credible strategic deterrent to our enemies and for our
Allies?
Secretary Kendall. Yes, the planned investments in our ongoing
nuclear and NC3 modernization programs provide the needed capabilities
to maintain an effective strategic deterrent for our nation and our
allies. Our budget fully funds our key nuclear modernization programs.
Stable and consistent funding remains vital to the success of Triad
modernization programs.
Mr. Morelle. General Brown, thank you for taking the time to join
us today. I know you and your team worked hard to prepare and we
appreciate the work. Question: The interconnectedness of our strategic
competitors, their aggressive pursuit of anti-access/area denial weapon
systems and strategy, and their demonstrated ability of global strike
is deeply concerning. These threats present our nation with an
increased risk of engaging in a large-scale, all-domain, multi-theater
conflict, whereby interoperability across our combatant commands,
Allies, and coalition partners become essential parts of our national
security. How will the Air Battle Management System contribute to
interoperability across our combatant commands, Allies, and coalition
partners and how will Allies and partners be folded into doctrinal
concepts?
General Brown. The Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS) will
create information and decision advantage by delivering relevant data,
information, and capabilities to warfighters and operators at all
echelons of decision. ABMS will ensure that operators providing battle
management have access to and can share the key information to solve
our most challenging operational problems, such as time critical
targeting. ABMS will: connect today's and tomorrow's sensors; develop
applications enabled by Artificial Intelligence (AI), sophisticated
algorithms, and multi-layered cyber protection to make sense of massive
amounts of trusted data; link space capabilities with weapon systems
and personnel across domains; and design pods, platforms, pathways,
procedures, and policies that deliver better, faster, and more
resilient connections and integration across the US and Allied
warfighting enterprise. ABMS will carry out the sophisticated systems
engineering required to successfully integrate these capabilities.
The DAF integrates Allies into our warfighting concepts and also
trains to those concepts with our Allies. Our Allies are an integral
part of the DAF's ability to counter rising threats from China and
Russia. ABMS will be a secure military digital network environment
built on proven commercial technologies, infrastructure, and
applications. ABMS will make meaningful data available for our ally and
partner warfighters through data discovery technologies and advanced
data sharing processes. ABMS is the portfolio offering from the DAF to
realize the JADC2 concept, but it is not a single machine, sensor,
aircraft, or spacecraft; it is an integrated approach to share,
process, and act on data in a way that translates to significantly
improve tactical and strategic outcomes.
Mr. Morelle. Air Force Doctrine Note 1-21, Agile Combat Employment,
describes tailorable force packages designed to provide greater
agility, lethality and power projection through scalability and multi-
capable Airmen. How will Agile Combat Employment affect the Air Force's
Force Structure and end strength, and what is the plan to incorporate
the contingency locations necessary to make Agile Combat Employment a
reality? Thank you.
General Brown. In accordance with the National Defense Strategy,
the Air Force has been in the process of adjusting the way we present
forces to the Joint Force Commanders. This Force Presentation
methodology will ensure critical reconstitution and training is
factored into decisions about our capacity to support Global Force
Management requirements. In the new Force Generation model, select
force packages will be organized, trained, and equipped to conduct
Agile Combat Employment; however, this represents reorganization and
retraining of existing combat and support capability, and not a change
in end strength requirements. The readiness state of contingency
locations to support agile operations varies greatly across the globe.
We are identifying locations within United States territory to
prioritize for future funding which will allow the incorporation of
these locations unto agile basing. The Air Force continues to engage
allies and partners to develop integrated operations which includes
developing potential basing sites to provide the support and
infrastructure that may be required for agile operations.
Mr. Morelle. Secretary Kendall and General Brown. This year's
budget request really highlights your efforts in modernizing your part
of the nuclear triad--I am tracking $1.1 billion for the Sentinel and
$354 million for the B-21. Considering the PRC successfully
demonstrated their global strike capability last summer (vis-a-vis a
nuclear-capable, hypersonic Fractional Orbit Bombardment System) and
the Russian Federation continues their nuclear modernization cycle, do
you believe the U.S.' current investments in its ongoing nuclear
modernization programs provide sufficient capabilities for the U.S. to
remain a credible strategic deterrent to our enemies and for our
Allies?
General Brown. Yes, the planned investments in our ongoing nuclear
and NC3 modernization programs provide the needed capabilities to
maintain an effective strategic deterrent for our nation and our
allies. Our budget fully funds our key nuclear modernization programs.
Stable and consistent funding remains vital to the success of Triad
modernization programs.
Mr. Morelle. General Raymond, thank you for taking the time to join
us today. I know you and your team prepared hard for testimony and we
greatly appreciate the work. Question: How do you envision working with
the commercial sector going forward in Space beyond what is being done
today? Further, what changes are you making to allow for companies that
do not traditionally do business with the Department of Defense to do
so?
General Raymond. Having a robust commercial sector is key to our
architecture resiliency and surge capacity. The Department is utilizing
commercial technologies to support DoD Satellite Communications
(SATCOM); Space Domain Awareness (SDA); Tactical Intelligence,
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR); Environmental Monitoring, and
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT). This support includes
commercial satellites, commercial data libraries, commercial ground-
based sensors, and commercial algorithms. To better embrace the
burgeoning commercial space market in a ``buy before build'' approach,
the USSF's Space Systems Command stood up the Commercial Services
Office to establish strong working relationships with the venture
capital community to inform strategic investments in commercial
solutions and emphasizing dual-use technologies. The DoD use of
commercial technologies in each of these capability areas has room for
substantial expansion.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. JACOBS
Ms. Jacobs. How are you taking into account quality of life factors
in basing decisions
Secretary Kendall. In accordance with FY 2021 NDAA Sections 483 and
2883, the DAF considers a range of quality of life criteria when
conducting its strategic basing process. This is accomplished through
community questionnaires during the site survey process that capture
information on factors including transportation, utilities, housing,
healthcare, and childcare.
Additionally, the DAF basing process uses the Support of Military
Family framework to assess education support for military children and
interstate portability of professional licensure for military spouses.
Candidate locations' performance in the preceding categories is
assessed during site surveys conducted to support the preferred
location decision for basing actions. The results are presented to
decision-makers alongside an assessment of the mission, capacity,
environmental and cost factors. SAME QUESTION FOR CSO and CSAF
Ms. Jacobs. With the Air Force expanding the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP) to protect the LGBQ+ community. How is the
department informing LGBQ+ service membered? How soon will the service
members expect to see a transfer ordered if needed?
Secretary Kendall. It is important to note that the Exceptional
Family Member Program (EFMP) has not changed. Members are eligible to
enroll in the EFMP if they have a family member who has a diagnosed
physical, intellectual, or emotional-psychological condition that
requires ongoing specialized medical or educational services. Self-
identification as LGBTQ does not, in and of itself, render a dependent
family member as eligible for enrollment in EFMP. A diagnosis of gender
dysphoria may make a dependent family member eligible for enrollment in
EFMP.
Airmen/Guardians who qualify for the EFMP are able to request
reassignment or deferment of an assignment to a location that lacks
appropriate support for their family for various reasons. The timeline
for generating EFMP assignments, depends on the complexity of the case,
the time required to gather supporting documentation, the type and
level of support/services required, and identifying an installation
with the necessary support services.
Ms. Jacobs. How are you taking into account quality of life factors
in basing decisions
General Brown. In accordance with FY 2021 NDAA Sections 483 and
2883, the DAF considers a range of quality of life criteria when
conducting its strategic basing process. This is accomplished through
community questionnaires during the site survey process that capture
information on factors including transportation, utilities, housing,
healthcare, and childcare.
Additionally, the DAF basing process uses the Support of Military
Family framework to assess education support for military children and
interstate portability of professional licensure for military spouses.
Candidate locations' performance in the preceding categories is
assessed during site surveys conducted to support the preferred
location decision for basing actions. The results are presented to
decision-makers alongside an assessment of the mission, capacity,
environmental and cost factors.
Ms. Jacobs. With the Air Force expanding the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP) to protect the LGBQ+ community. How is the
department informing LGBQ+ service membered? How soon will the service
members expect to see a transfer ordered if needed?
General Brown. It is important to note that the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP) has not changed. Members are eligible to enroll
in the EFMP if they have a family member who has a diagnosed physical,
intellectual, or emotional-psychological condition that requires
ongoing specialized medical or educational services. Self-
identification as LGBTQ does not, in and of itself, render a dependent
family member as eligible for enrollment in EFMP. A diagnosis of gender
dysphoria may make a dependent family member eligible for enrollment in
EFMP.
Airmen/Guardians who qualify for the EFMP are able to request
reassignment or deferment of an assignment to a location that lacks
appropriate support for their family for various reasons. The timeline
for generating EFMP assignments, depends on the complexity of the case,
the time required to gather supporting documentation, the type and
level of support/services required, and identifying an installation
with the necessary support services.
Ms. Jacobs. How are you taking into account quality of life factors
in basing decisions
General Raymond. In accordance with FY 2021 NDAA Sections 483 and
2883, the DAF considers a range of quality of life criteria when
conducting its strategic basing process. This is accomplished through
community questionnaires during the site survey process that capture
information on factors including transportation, utilities, housing,
healthcare, and childcare.
Additionally, the DAF basing process uses the Support of Military
Family framework to assess education support for military children and
interstate portability of professional licensure for military spouses.
Candidate locations' performance in the preceding categories is
assessed during site surveys conducted to support the preferred
location decision for basing actions. The results are presented to
decision-makers alongside an assessment of the mission, capacity,
environmental and cost factors.
Ms. Jacobs. With the Air Force expanding the Exceptional Family
Member Program (EFMP) to protect the LGBQ+ community. How is the
department informing LGBQ+ service membered? How soon will the service
members expect to see a transfer ordered if needed?
General Raymond. It is important to note that the Exceptional
Family Member Program (EFMP) has not changed. Members are eligible to
enroll in the EFMP if they have a family member who has a diagnosed
physical, intellectual, or emotional-psychological condition that
requires ongoing specialized medical or educational services. Self-
identification as LGBTQ does not, in and of itself, render a dependent
family member as eligible for enrollment in EFMP. A diagnosis of gender
dysphoria may make a dependent family member eligible for enrollment in
EFMP.
Airmen/Guardians who qualify for the EFMP are able to request
reassignment or deferment of an assignment to a location that lacks
appropriate support for their family for various reasons. The timeline
for generating EFMP assignments, depends on the complexity of the case,
the time required to gather supporting documentation, the type and
level of support/services required, and identifying an installation
with the necessary support services.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. JACKSON
Dr. Jackson. Secretary Kendall, I want to thank you for coming by
my office a few weeks ago to meet with me.
During the meeting we discussed some of the issues facing Sheppard
Air Force Base, such as the timeline for the arrival of the new T-7
advanced trainer aircraft.
You told me that you would be following up with my office on some
of the questions I had on the T-7, specifically the sequencing of new
aircraft.
Mr. Kendall, I just wanted to confirm that my office will be
receiving that information in the next few weeks?
Secretary Kendall. Under the current program of record, the T-7 is
purchased at a rate of 48 aircraft per year. Sheppard aircraft arrive
starting in the third quarter of FY32 with final aircraft delivery
projected for third quarter FY34. Any delays or reductions driven by
program acquisition or available funding would delay the dates provided
above. Under SECAF's basing decision, Sheppard AFB is the 5th base to
receive the T-7. The Air Force has not yet taken delivery of its first
T-7 from Boeing; there are many variables that could affect/delay
arrival dates at Sheppard AFB.
Dr. Jackson. This year we begin the procurement process for these
advanced trainers (T-7).
According to the FYDP, we start slowly this year and then ramp up
pretty aggressively in the out years.
Mr. Kendall or General Brown, if additional funds were to be
provided, would we be able to procure these aircraft sooner? Are there
additional investments that would need to be made, such as MILCON or
supply chain, that could help shift this to the left and get the
aircraft operational for our student pilots sooner?
Secretary Kendall. No. Additional funding will not allow the T-7
program to significantly accelerate the schedule or procure aircraft
sooner. The current timeline for the T-7 program is governed by
successful completion of the Engineering, Manufacturing, and
Development program and not by funding limitations.
Dr. Jackson. As you know, Sheppard Air Force Base hosts the Euro-
NATO Joint Jet Pilot Training program where many of our NATO partners
train their fighter pilots right alongside ours.
Many of these partner nations have expressed interest in investing
in the T-7, just like they have for some other programs.
Secretary Kendall, would the Air Force be opposed to allowing
partner nations like Germany or the UK to invest in the T-7 program to
potentially accelerate its fielding?
Secretary Kendall. The AF plans to field the T-7 at Sheppard in
FY32. An investment by our Partners and Allies would complicate a
complex fielding plan in that the AF would not be able to accelerate
its own fielding efforts. Additionally, a major change in aircraft
ownership would require the AF to renegotiate its fee for service
training process for one where we as the trainers for hire would not be
the requirement owners and therefore not responsible for their funding.
Dr. Jackson. General Brown, I still intend to take you up on your
offer to come and visit Sheppard with me.
When I was last down there, it was clear that we need the T-7 to be
operational as soon as possible.
One key issue that was raised to me is the engine shortage issue
that impacts the T-38.
As we look at a potential conflict with China, we can't afford to
jeopardize the training for our pilots because we didn't invest
appropriately in the next generation trainer.
General Brown, how would our readiness be impacted if sorties were
reduced at our pilot training bases because the T-38s aren't available
to fly?
General Brown. AETC is fully engaged on mitigating impact from lack
of J-85 production. AETC's primary engine supplier has had issues since
coming on contract, and while they are beginning to round the corner to
deliver what we need monthly, we are working out of a fairly deep
deficit. Left unabated this engine supply deficit could significantly
impact production. In response, we have prioritized Sheppard on the
latest tranche of engines and continue to aggressively assess the
entire enterprise to ensure it is best positioned beyond the immediate
logistics challenge. In addition to managing iron flow and engines
across the command to level resources, we are pursuing additional
production capacity from alternate repair sources. The lack of a
consistent delivery schedule from the primary contractor still has
potential to impact the T-38C enterprise, but with the aggressive fleet
management and tapping extra production we believe the impacts in the
short term can be minimized and set conditions to stave off long term
effects. If the prime doesn't hold to their requirement we will relook
longer term impacts and seek to extend the alternate levers. This has
the full attention of AETC and AFMC leadership.
Dr. Jackson. This year we begin the procurement process for these
advanced trainers (T-7).
According to the FYDP, we start slowly this year and then ramp up
pretty aggressively in the out years.
Mr. Kendall or General Brown, if additional funds were to be
provided, would we be able to procure these aircraft sooner? Are there
additional investments that would need to be made, such as MILCON or
supply chain, that could help shift this to the left and get the
aircraft operational for our student pilots sooner?
General Brown. No. Additional funding will not allow the T-7
program to significantly accelerate the schedule or procure aircraft
sooner. The current timeline for the T-7 program is governed by
successful completion of the Engineering, Manufacturing, and
Development (EMD) program and not by funding limitations.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Mr. Horsford. Last month, I was pleased to learn that the Air Force
had decided to permanently base 9 F-35s at Nellis as part of the 65th
Aggressor Squadron at a future unspecified date. In response to a
question about this basing decision, the Air Force informed Congress on
April 8th that changes to the organic Aggressor fleet would not cause a
decrease in the number of contracted adversary air pilots and that
there were no projected changes for any contract adversary air company.
However, I was surprised to recently learn that at this point the Air
Force had already notified the Nellis adversary air contractor that
their contract would not be renewed and that they would have to vacate
Nellis by June 4th. The Air Force then told my staff on April 20th, 12
days after informing Congress that no changes to adversary air were
planned, that they did not intend to re-compete the Nellis contract and
that they would transition entirely to organic adversary air beginning
on June 4th. I'm confused how the Air Force plans to replace the 4,000
flying hours, representing 63% of adversary air requirements, that the
contractor currently flies at Nellis with the existing organic F-16
fleet. Especially when no date has been given for the arrival of F-35s
or additional aircraft. I think it's important to note that the organic
Aggressors at Nellis have two missions, to both fly as Aggressors and
support the test and evaluation unit. What happens when test and
evaluation requirements compete with training? I'm deeply concerned
that the apparent lack of a cohesive adversary air plan will not only
continue to lead to uncertainty for my constituents--but also hurt the
readiness of our pilots while they wait until an uncertain date for
this future virtual environment to be fielded or F-35s to be delivered.
With no additional aircraft on the ramp and a fully capable
simulation environment still years away; how does the Air Force intend
to bridge the capability gap for adversary air at Nellis after losing
the aircraft and personnel responsible for 63% of aggressor flying
hours?
What is the specific strategy for adversary air across Air Combat
Command?
What month can we expect the first F-35 Aggressors to be delivered
to Nellis and when will delivery be complete?
Is the Air Force considering re-competing the adversary air
contract at Nellis or at other Major Test and Training Ranges?
Secretary Kendall. With no additional aircraft on the ramp and a
fully capable simulation environment still years away; how does the Air
Force intend to bridge the capability gap for adversary air at Nellis
after losing the aircraft and personnel responsible for 63% of
aggressor flying hours?
A. Historically, we have discussed our Adversary Air gap in terms
of the quantity of training available. With flying hours at historic
lows, we simply cannot generate the number of organic red air sorties
required. Over the last few years, we attempted to fill this quantity
deficit via the use of contract adversary air. While this approach has
proven valuable in certain circumstances such as at our FTUs, it has
also illuminated our quality deficit. Nellis is home to our most
advanced test and training, and it is the quality deficit that is most
concerning there. We have found that crews who train routinely against
lower quality ADAIR perform poorly when faced with 5th Gen adversaries
due to the negative habits instilled by the lower quality of adversary.
The Air Force is committed to closing the quality gap at Nellis by
standing up the 65th Aggressor Squadron with F-35s and by sending
additional 5th Gen crews TDY to support major exercises and training
events. Closing the quality gap is most important for advanced
training--such as that required at Nellis AFB. The company currently
providing contract adversary air at Nellis AFB operates 3rd generation
aircraft (A-4, L-159, Mirage F-1). This does not come close to
replicating the pacing challenge. ACC plans to shift these contracted
resources to locations where high-end, quality adversaries are a lesser
priority (i.e. FTUs). Going forward, our best method of live-fly
adversary replication may be to fly ``blue vs blue''--with one side
performing offensive counter-air missions and one side performing
defensive counter-air missions. This is akin to how a professional
football team practices.
This is the best way for us to approximate our pacing challenger
while allowing our aircrew to get the best possible training value out
of every flying hour.
What is the specific strategy for adversary air across Air Combat
Command?
A. The overall approach is to provide capability tailored to unit
requirements. For the FTUs, this means a continued reliance on T-38s
and contract ADAIR to provide a basic capability for new crews. For our
operational units, this means a shift in focus to 5th Gen capability to
provide realistic and relevant adversary air training, both live and in
the developing high-end synthetic environment. In the short term, the
Air Force will increase the quality of adversary air by standing up and
F-35 aggressor squadron at Nellis, sending 5th Gen crews TDY to Nellis
to support major exercises and potentially allowing additional Blue vs
Blue training for 5th Gen units. For the long term, the Air Force is
pursuing an unmanned adversary air platform which can be tailored to
replicate a 5th Gen adversary. Versions of this unmanned platform
promise to meet the quantity requirements currently met by T-38s and
contract ADAIR.
What month can we expect the first F-35 Aggressors to be delivered
to Nellis and when will delivery be complete?
A. The F-35 Aggressor Squadron stood up on 9 Jun 22 with two
aircraft, with plans to add an additional nine when funding and
maintenance conditions permit. The earliest delivery of the remaining
nine aircraft will be in FY24.
Is the Air Force considering re-competing the adversary air
contract at Nellis or at other Major Test and Training Ranges?
A. The Nellis Contract Air Support contract remains open and does
not have to be re-competed for one year. However, at this time, we have
elected not to exercise the remaining option year on the Nellis
Contract Air Support effort. The decision was based on the contractor
not being able to support high end threat replication which is
necessary for training at Nellis. The remaining funds for this option
year, which expire 4 June, were used at other operations and training
units throughout the Combat Air Force locations where Contract Air
Support threat replication remains sufficient.
Mr. Horsford. I'm deeply concerned that the Nevada delegation still
hasn't seen the Air Force' FY23 legislative proposal for changes to
joint use in the Nevada Test and Training Range. I'm worried that this
won't leave us enough time to engage with stakeholders and constituents
in time to reach an agreement.
What is the status of this proposal and when will the Nevada
delegation be consulted on the details of your request?
Secretary Kendall. The FY23 NTTR Legislative Proposal has been
deferred by the Office of Management and Budget and will not be
transmitted to Congress for FY23 consideration. The DAF looks forward
to continued dialogue between Dept of Interior, US Fish & Wildlife
Service, tribal governments, state/local governments, and members of
the public through the Intergovernmental Executive Committee meetings
to discuss the NTTR and stakeholder equities, including the Nevada
Congressional delegation, in order to reach an amenable solution.
Mr. Horsford. I'm concerned that this budget does not accelerate
procurement of long-range standoff weapons that will be critical in a
future high-end fight. While the Air Force has proposed procurement of
550 Joint Air to Surface Standoff Missiles, you have only requested 28
Long Range Anti-Ship Missiles
Given the rapid consumption of smaller precision munitions that
we've seen in our Ukraine, and the importance of these long-range
standoff weapons in a high-end fight, are you confident that these
procurement levels will meet the needs of the Air Force in a near-term
conflict?
Is there an issue with production line capacity or are low LRASM
procurement levels due to fiscal constraints?
Secretary Kendall. Given the rapid consumption of smaller precision
munitions that we've seen in our Ukraine, and the importance of these
long-range standoff weapons in a high-end fight, are you confident that
these procurement levels will meet the needs of the Air Force in a
near-term conflict?
A. There are significant risks involved in high intensity conflict
in the near term. Our current procurement levels for long range
munitions will reduce this risk slowly. This risk decreases in the out
years commensurate with our expected inventory. Until the inventory
increases, the Air Force is prepared to execute portions of our
campaigns from shorter ranges.
Is there an issue with production line capacity or are low LRASM
procurement levels due to fiscal constraints?
B. The production facilities for JASSM/LRASM will achieve a max
production capacity of 720 missiles per year in fourth quarter 2025,
comprised of 550 Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (JASSMs), 120
LRASMs, and 50 test and warranty missiles. Missile procurement is
shared between the Air Force, Navy, and Foreign Military Sales (FMS)
customers. The Air Force is programmed to maximize the production
facilities; however, the FY23 PB request has   28 LRASMs in available
production capacity between the Air Force and Navy. The Air Force would
benefit from an ability to increase our inventory faster; however, we
must balance risk against all of our mission areas. Munitions cover a
wide array of targets, and all of them require increased inventories to
meet the needs of our warfighters.
Mr. Horsford. 40% of the Fiscal Year 2023 national defense budget
request is within the Operation & Maintenance account. Yet,
unfortunately, this part of the defense budget has the least amount of
transparency. This is nothing new. We consistently lack the level of
detail necessary to answer the fundamental question--are we
sufficiently and efficiently investing in DoD's mission readiness
requirements in support of the National Defense Strategy?
As a first step in rectifying this problem, in the FY21 NDAA,
Congress codified a requirement in section 118 of title 10, U.S. Code,
for the services to submit readiness objectives and metrics for every
major weapon system along with the budget materials starting with the
FY23 request. This information is the first step to better understand
what DoD's mission readiness requirements truly are.
When can we expect the Air Force to comply with this requirement?
Secretary Kendall. The Department of the Air Force's Fiscal Year
2023 budget request was developed based on National Defense Strategy
guidance. Our budget fully funded recapitalization of the nuclear
enterprise and made great strides toward modernizing for a high-end
fight. Additionally, our budget covered costs related to readiness,
weapons system sustainment, flying hours, and pay for personnel all
helping to ensure we remain capable to fight tonight.
We continue to work diligently on the reporting of readiness for
the joint fight. In line with the Department of Defense and the other
services, we will provide the requested reports depicting both the
required force and the acceptable level of readiness for the required
force. We are in the process of preparing to address the Title 10
U.S.C., Sec. 118 required materiel readiness, mission readiness, and
operational readiness metrics, and will provide them to Congress as
soon as they are available.
Mr. Horsford. If the A-10 fleet is ultimately maintained above 218
aircraft does the Air Force agree that additional wing sets must be
procured to support that fleet size?
Secretary Kendall. If required to maintain a fleet above 218,
additional wings must be awarded on contract no later than April 2023
(FY21 estimate) to prevent a break in production on the existing wing
contract.
Mr. Horsford. It was initially my understanding that the FY23 Air
Force budget would transfer 100 MQ-9 Reaper aircraft from the Air Force
to another government agency. However, your written testimony indicates
that Air Force intends to ``remove'' 250 aircraft from the inventory by
2027, including some Block 5 aircraft. Your testimony states that the
remaining 140 aircraft will meet Combatant Commander requirements. I
find this hard to believe considering that Combatant Commanders have
testified their ISR needs are not being met at the current level of 390
aircraft.
What impact would this FY23 transfer of ownership have on
operational employment of the existing MQ-9 fleet? Would this transfer
affect availability of MQ-9s for use by the Air Force or any of the
geographic combatant commanders? Will we see a change in MQ-9 combat
lines operated by the Air Force in FY23? What will the impact be to
Creech AFB if the Air Force is allowed to divest 250 aircraft by FY27?
What capabilities are expected to be fielded by FY27 that will
replace the capacity and capabilities provided by the current MQ-9
fleet? Does the Air Force believe there will be no capability loss in
the 2027 timeframe if divestiture is allowed?
What capabilities would additional MQ-9s modified to the M2DO
configuration provide to Combatant Commanders?
What impact would this FY23 transfer of ownership have on
operational employment of the existing MQ-9 fleet? A. None
Would this transfer affect availability of MQ-9s for use by the Air
Force or any of the geographic combatant commanders? A. No.
Secretary Kendall. Will we see a change in MQ-9 combat lines
operated by the Air Force in FY23?
A. USAF MQ-9 combat line capacity remains the same between FY22 and
FY23 and is unaffected by the FY23 transfer. Despite the FY23 transfer,
operational changes to location, allocation and employment of USAF MQ-9
capacity are expected every FY in accordance with SecDef directed
Global Force Management process and procedures.
What will the impact be to Creech AFB if the Air Force is allowed
to divest 250 aircraft by FY27?
A. There will be no impacts to Creech AFB.
What capabilities are expected to be fielded by FY27 that will
replace the capacity and capabilities provided by the current MQ-9
fleet?
A. We are exploring several complementary capabilities within my 7
priority DAF Operational Imperatives (OIs)--the critical operational
capabilities and functions the DAF must invest in to protect the United
States' ability to deter conflict and project power against pacing
challenges. Multiple imperatives require operational analysis of un-
crewed aerial systems, especially in a systems-of-systems, or Family of
Systems context. This ongoing work will influence the Department's way
forward on medium altitude UAS Family of Systems. The capabilities
proposed within the OIs are projected to supplant the capacity and
capabilities provided by MQ-9s. The proposals are undergoing revision
and prioritization for inclusion in the FY24 POM and are designed to
account for the challenges of highly-contested environments and peace-
time competition alike.
Does the Air Force believe there will be no capability loss in the
2027 timeframe if divestiture is allowed?
A. Yes. The Air Force believes that greater domain awareness and
actionable information is needed than what is currently provided by the
MQ-9 fleet. The DAF Operational Imperatives, if prioritized within the
POM and funded will provide this advantage. MQ-9s are ineffective in a
highly contested environment against a peer adversary.
What capabilities would additional MQ-9s modified to the M2DO
configuration provide to Combatant Commanders?
A. MQ-9s modified with M2DO capabilities provide Power
Enhancements, Open Mission Systems, Anti-Jam GPS, Link 16, and Command
and Control (C2) Resiliency. Power Enhancements and Open Mission
Systems facilitate integration of new hardware and software to meet
emergent mission needs. An on-aircraft Link 16 radio allows MQ-9s to
participate in local tactical networks. C2 Resiliency upgrades will
help protect MQ-9 datalinks against interference. The FY23PB provided
appropriate funding for the Air Force to meet CCMD needs.
Mr. Horsford. Last month, I was pleased to learn that the Air Force
had decided to permanently base 9 F-35s at Nellis as part of the 65th
Aggressor Squadron at a future unspecified date. In response to a
question about this basing decision, the Air Force informed Congress on
April 8th that changes to the organic Aggressor fleet would not cause a
decrease in the number of contracted adversary air pilots and that
there were no projected changes for any contract adversary air company.
However, I was surprised to recently learn that at this point the Air
Force had already notified the Nellis adversary air contractor that
their contract would not be renewed and that they would have to vacate
Nellis by June 4th. The Air Force then told my staff on April 20th, 12
days after informing Congress that no changes to adversary air were
planned, that they did not intend to re-compete the Nellis contract and
that they would transition entirely to organic adversary air beginning
on June 4th. I'm confused how the Air Force plans to replace the 4,000
flying hours, representing 63% of adversary air requirements, that the
contractor currently flies at Nellis with the existing organic F-16
fleet. Especially when no date has been given for the arrival of F-35s
or additional aircraft. I think it's important to note that the organic
Aggressors at Nellis have two missions, to both fly as Aggressors and
support the test and evaluation unit. What happens when test and
evaluation requirements compete with training? I'm deeply concerned
that the apparent lack of a cohesive adversary air plan will not only
continue to lead to uncertainty for my constituents--but also hurt the
readiness of our pilots while they wait until an uncertain date for
this future virtual environment to be fielded or F-35s to be delivered.
With no additional aircraft on the ramp and a fully capable
simulation environment still years away; how does the Air Force intend
to bridge the capability gap for adversary air at Nellis after losing
the aircraft and personnel responsible for 63% of aggressor flying
hours?
What is the specific strategy for adversary air across Air Combat
Command?
What month can we expect the first F-35 Aggressors to be delivered
to Nellis and when will delivery be complete?
Is the Air Force considering re-competing the adversary air
contract at Nellis or at other Major Test and Training Ranges?
General Brown. A. Historically, we have discussed our Adversary Air
gap in terms of the quantity of training available. With flying hours
at historic lows, we simply cannot generate the number of organic red
air sorties required. Over the last few years, we attempted to fill
this quantity deficit via the use of contract adversary air. While this
approach has proven valuable in certain circumstances such as at our
Flying Training Units (FTU), it has also illuminated our quality
deficit. Nellis is home to our most advanced test and training, and it
is the quality deficit that is most concerning there. We have found
that crews who train routinely against lower quality ADAIR perform
poorly when faced with 5th Gen adversaries due to the negative habits
instilled by the lower quality of adversary. The Air Force is committed
to closing the quality gap at Nellis by standing up the 65th Aggressor
Squadron with F-35s and by sending addition 5th Gen crews TDY to
support major exercises and training events. Closing the quality gap is
most important for advanced training--such as that required at Nellis
AFB. The company currently providing contract adversary air at Nellis
AFB operates 3rd generation aircraft (A-4, L-159, Mirage F-1). This
does not come close to replicating the pacing challenge. ACC plans to
shift these contracted resources to locations where high-end, quality
adversaries are a lesser requirement (i.e. FTUs). Going forward, our
best method of live-fly adversary replication may be to fly ``blue vs
blue''--with one side performing offensive counter-air missions and one
side performing defensive counter-air missions. This is the best way
for us to approximate our pacing challenger while allowing our aircrew
to get the best possible training value out of every flying hour.
B. The overall approach is to provide capability tailored to unit
requirements. For the FTUs, this means a continued reliance on T-38s
and contract ADAIR to provide a basic capability for new crews. For our
operational units, this means a shift in focus to 5th Gen capability to
provide realistic and relevant adversary air training, both live and in
the developing high-end synthetic environment. In the short term, the
Air Force will increase the quality of adversary air by standing up and
F-35 aggressor squadron at Nellis, sending 5th Gen crews TDY to Nellis
to support major exercises and potentially allowing additional Blue vs
Blue training for 5th Gen units. For the long term, the Air Force is
pursuing an unmanned adversary air platform which can be tailored to
replicate a 5th Gen adversary. Versions of this unmanned platform
promise to meet the quantity requirements currently met by T-38s and
contract ADAIR.
C. The F-35 Aggressor Squadron stood up on 9 Jun 22 with two
aircraft, with plans to add an additional nine when funding and
maintenance conditions permit. The earliest delivery of the remaining
nine aircraft will be in FY 24.
D. The Nellis Contract Air Support contract remains open and does
not have to be re-competed for one year. However, at this time, we have
elected not to exercise the remaining option year on the Nellis
Contract Air Support effort. The decision was based on the contractor
not being able to support high end threat replication which is
necessary for training at Nellis. The remaining funds for this option
year, which expired 4 June, will be used at other operations and
training units throughout the Combat Air Force locations where Contract
Air Support threat replication remains sufficient.
Mr. Horsford. I'm deeply concerned that the Nevada delegation still
hasn't seen the Air Force' FY23 legislative proposal for changes to
joint use in the Nevada Test and Training Range. I'm worried that this
won't leave us enough time to engage with stakeholders and constituents
in time to reach an agreement.
What is the status of this proposal and when will the Nevada
delegation be consulted on the details of your request?
General Brown. The FY23 NTTR Legislative Proposal has been deferred
by the Office of Management and Budget and will not be transmitted to
Congress for FY23 consideration. The DAF looks forward to continued
dialogue between the Department of Interior, US Fish & Wildlife
Service, tribal governments, state/local governments, and members of
the public through the Intergovernmental Executive Committee meetings
to discuss the NTTR and stakeholder equities, including the Nevada
Congressional delegation, in order to reach an amenable solution.
Mr. Horsford. I'm concerned that this budget does not accelerate
procurement of long-range standoff weapons that will be critical in a
future high-end fight. While the Air Force has proposed procurement of
550 Joint Air to Surface Standoff Missiles, you have only requested 28
Long Range Anti-Ship Missiles
Given the rapid consumption of smaller precision munitions that
we've seen in our Ukraine, and the importance of these long-range
standoff weapons in a high-end fight, are you confident that these
procurement levels will meet the needs of the Air Force in a near-term
conflict?
Is there an issue with production line capacity or are low LRASM
procurement levels due to fiscal constraints?
General Brown. A. There are significant risks involved in high
intensity conflict in the near term. Our current procurement levels for
long range munitions will reduce this risk slowly. This risk decreases
in the out years commensurate with our expected inventory. Until the
inventory increases, the Air Force is prepared to execute portions of
our campaigns from shorter ranges.
B. The production facilities for JASSM/LRASM will achieve a max
production capacity of 720 missiles per year in fourth quarter 2025,
comprised of 550 Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (JASSMs), 120
LRASMs, and 50 test and warranty missiles. Missile procurement is
shared between the Air Force, Navy, and Foreign Military Sales (FMS)
customers. The Air Force is programmed to maximize the production
facilities; however, the FY23 PB request has   28 LRASMs in available
production capacity between the Air Force and Navy. The Air Force would
benefit from an ability to increase our inventory faster; however, we
must balance risk against all of our mission areas. Munitions cover a
wide array of targets, and all of them require increased inventories to
meet the needs of our warfighters.
Mr. Horsford. If the A-10 fleet is ultimately maintained above 218
aircraft does the Air Force agree that additional wing sets must be
procured to support that fleet size?
General Brown. If required to maintain a fleet above 218,
additional wings must be awarded on contract no later than April 2023
(FY21 estimate) to prevent a break in production on the existing wing
contract.
Mr. Horsford. It was initially my understanding that the FY23 Air
Force budget would transfer 100 MQ-9 Reaper aircraft from the Air Force
to another government agency. However, your written testimony indicates
that Air Force intends to ``remove'' 250 aircraft from the inventory by
2027, including some Block 5 aircraft. Your testimony states that the
remaining 140 aircraft will meet Combatant Commander requirements. I
find this hard to believe considering that Combatant Commanders have
testified their ISR needs are not being met at the current level of 390
aircraft.
What impact would this FY23 transfer of ownership have on
operational employment of the existing MQ-9 fleet? Would this transfer
affect availability of MQ-9s for use by the Air Force or any of the
geographic combatant commanders? Will we see a change in MQ-9 combat
lines operated by the Air Force in FY23? What will the impact be to
Creech AFB if the Air Force is allowed to divest 250 aircraft by FY27?
What capabilities are expected to be fielded by FY27 that will
replace the capacity and capabilities provided by the current MQ-9
fleet? Does the Air Force believe there will be no capability loss in
the 2027 timeframe if divestiture is allowed?
What capabilities would additional MQ-9s modified to the M2DO
configuration provide to Combatant Commanders?
What impact would this FY23 transfer of ownership have on
operational employment of the existing MQ-9 fleet? A. None
Would this transfer affect availability of MQ-9s for use by the Air
Force or any of the geographic combatant commanders? A. No.
General Brown. Will we see a change in MQ-9 combat lines operated
by the Air Force in FY23? A. USAF MQ-9 combat line capacity remains the
same between FY22 and FY23 and is unaffected by the FY23 transfer.
Despite the FY23 transfer, operational changes to location, allocation
and employment of USAF MQ-9 capacity are expected every FY in
accordance with SecDef directed Global Force Management process and
procedures.
What will the impact be to Creech AFB if the Air Force is allowed
to divest 250 aircraft by FY27?
A. There will be no impacts to Creech AFB.
What capabilities are expected to be fielded by FY27 that will
replace the capacity and capabilities provided by the current MQ-9
fleet?
A. We are exploring several complementary capabilities within the
SECAF's seven Priority DAF Operational Imperatives (OIs)--the critical
operational capabilities and functions the DAF must invest in to
protect the United States' ability to deter conflict and project power
against pacing challenges. Multiple imperatives require operational
analysis of un-crewed aerial systems, especially in a systems-of-
systems, or Family of Systems context. This ongoing work will influence
the Department's way forward on medium altitude UAS Family of Systems.
The capabilities proposed within the OIs are projected to supplant the
capacity and capabilities provided by MQ-9s. The proposals are
undergoing revision and prioritization for inclusion in the FY24 POM
and are designed to account for the challenges of highly-contested
environments and peace-time competition alike.
Does the Air Force believe there will be no capability loss in the
2027 timeframe if divestiture is allowed?
A. Yes. The Air Force believes that greater domain awareness and
actionable information is needed than what is currently provided by the
MQ-9 fleet. The SECAF's 7 Priority DAF Operational Imperatives (OIs),
if prioritized within the POM and funded will provide this advantage.
MQ-9s are ineffective in a highly contested environment against a peer
adversary.
What capabilities would additional MQ-9s modified to the M2DO
configuration provide to Combatant Commanders?
A. MQ-9s modified with M2DO capabilities provide Power
Enhancements, Open Mission Systems, Anti-Jam GPS, Link 16, and Command
and Control (C2) Resiliency. Power Enhancements and Open Mission
Systems facilitate integration of new hardware and software to meet
emergent mission needs. An on-aircraft Link 16 radio allows MQ-9s to
participate in local tactical networks. C2 Resiliency upgrades will
help protect MQ-9 datalinks against interference. The FY23PB provided
appropriate funding for the Air Force to meet CCMD needs.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. What must be done to ensure that the B-21 Raider will
not be a high demand, low density platform?
Secretary Kendall. Affordability and producibility are critical
elements to ensuring the B-21 Raider is not a High Demand/Low Density
asset. Since Day 1 of the program, the Air Force remains focused on
ensuring the B-21 Raider is an affordable bomber through the upfront
establishment of affordability as a Key Performance Parameter (KPP)
along with fixed-price aircraft lots for LRIP as part of contract
award. The B-21 Raider program is focused on ensuring the first flight
test aircraft is a high quality build using production processes,
production tooling, and the production workforce in order to drive
production maturity. Additionally, Congress's support in the form of
stable and consistent funding will support the B-21 program efforts to
continue to execute within cost, schedule and performance goals defined
in the government's Acquisition Program Baseline (APB). The B-21 will
form the backbone of America's future bomber force. Our current B-21
program of record is based on a minimum fleet of 100 aircraft; however,
the Air Force's current long-term bomber force structure plan is
targeting 220 or more bombers, comprised of 145 B-21s and 75 heavily
modified B-52s. The Air Force is also exploring the possibility of a B-
21 Family of Systems that could include an un-crewed combat aircraft.
Mr. Scott. What must be done to ensure that Next Generation Air
Dominance (NGAD) will not be a high demand, low density platform?
Secretary Kendall. The Next Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) Family
of Systems (FoS) is foundational to the Air Force's air superiority
capability in the future fighter force structure. Replacing the F-22,
NGAD FoS will be the Air Force's primary air superiority capability in
the highly contested environment and will have the ability to engage
air and surface based targets and threats. As long as the other
components of the future fighter force structure (F-35, F-15, and F-16
fleets) are funded as requested in the FY23 budget, then they will be
able to provide the necessary fighter force capabilities to the joint
force ensuring the NGAD FoS is available to provide air superiority in
the highly contested environment.
Mr. Scott. John Clagett, Jim Douglas, and Lang Sias wrote an
article entitled ``Next Generation Air Dominance Needs a New Flight
Path'' in the September 2021 issue of Proceedings. Do you agree or
disagree with the authors when they stated, ``Great power competition
requires much greater procurement efficiency and wider technology
participation than the current process enables. The current DoD
procurement process includes cost, time, and technology problems that
can no longer be accepted if the United States is to compete and win
against peer competitors.''
Secretary Kendall. Responding to the threats posed to the United
States by peer competitors as identified in the NDS requires us to
execute a wide range of acquisition programs that can deliver
operational capability in the next five years. My seven operational
imperatives are focused on exactly this problem, delivering these
critical capabilities as fast as possible. We will leverage the
acquisition flexibilities provided by Congress in this effort and will
alert Congress to additional authorities we identify as needed.
Mr. Scott. Will NGAD be an air-dominance fighter that is affordable
to procure and operate and much better than anything Communist China or
Russia can deploy against it?
Secretary Kendall. The current budget reflects the Air Force's
deliberate planning and enterprise approach to funding capabilities
across the threat spectrum. By investing in a flexible fighter force
mix the U.S. Air Force will create the opportunity for downward
pressure on future operation and sustainment costs. Investment in the
NGAD Family-of-Systems, or FoS, provides the capability, capacity, and
affordability required to meet a peer challenger. NGAD FoS delivers the
survivability, lethality, and persistence necessary to win over great
distances in highly contested environments.
Mr. Scott. What plans does the Air Force have to reduce the NGAD's
development time and the costs associated with a broken procurement
system?
Secretary Kendall. The NGAD Family-of-Systems is aggressively
leveraging Digital Engineering, Open System Architectures, and Agile
Software Development to drive down costs while providing the most
advanced fighter capabilities. The technology development and
maturation for the NGAD Family-of-Systems takes time and, while we can
buy down risk, the overall effort is best accelerated by ensuring
stable funding of the program authorities we identify as needed.
Procurement and sustainment activities will benefit directly from these
robust digital, open, and agile development practices. The NGAD Family-
of-Systems acquisition strategy expands the industrial base and ensures
the Air Force can leverage the latest innovation to sustain the
nation's air superiority in support of the Joint Force today and
throughout its lifecycle.
Mr. Scott. Lieutenant Commander John M. Leeds, U.S. Navy, wrote an
an article entitled ``Bring Back Patrol Bombing Squadrons'' in the
April 2020 edition of Proceedings. Do you agree or disagree with the
author conclusion that, ``The United States could expand its maritime
strike capability by reviving World War II's patrol bombing squadron
concept, pairing Navy P-8s with Air Force B-1s?''
Secretary Kendall. The ability to strike maritime targets in a
highly contested threat environment is a key component of our future
force design. The use of legacy platforms such as B-1's does not ensure
sufficient survivability for our aircrew in that environment. The DAF
has begun multiple efforts to rapidly fill the maritime strike gap with
advanced weapons guided by a variety of joint systems that will ensure
target destruction as well as platform survivability.
Mr. Scott. Commander Rob Brodie, U.S. Navy, wrote an article
entitled ``Make Mine Warfare a Team Sport'' in the April 2020 issue of
Proceedings. According to the author, ``The Air Force is happy to use
research-and-development money to explore sowing sea mines from stand-
off aircraft (Quickstrike) and removing shallow-water minefields with
the joint direct attack munition (JDAM) assault breaching system
(JABS), but it is unlikely to acquire or prioritize the resources to
accomplish these missions.'' Do you agree or disagree?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force remains committed to helping our
Navy partners in the sea mine mission. However, this mission
doctrinally belongs to the US Navy. The USAF helps with development and
delivery, in accordance with the desires of the US Navy. The USAF, as
always, remains open to all conversations with our sister services
about burden sharing all mission areas across the services.
Mr. Scott. Is the United States Air Force and the United States
Space Force prepared for large scale combat operations today?
Secretary Kendall. USAF: The Air Force organizes, trains, and
equips forces that are prepared to conduct large scale combat
operations anywhere on the globe.
USSF: The Space Force organizes, trains, and equips forces that are
prepared to conduct Large Scale Combat Operations that deliver
Spacepower effects to the joint force and will execute this through
service components embedded within each combatant command. We are
aggressively pursuing the necessary capabilities and skills to continue
to deliver these critical effects even if the combat operations extend
into the space domain.
Mr. Scott. Do you feel that every warfighter understands the logic,
capabilities, and limitations of the autonomous systems they employ?
General Brown. The Air Force Design for Great Power Competition
requires increased reliance on automation and autonomy to meet the
direct challenges posed by China as our pacing threat. To this end, the
Air Force is aggressively pursuing these capabilities. We extensively
train our warfighters to understand the logic, capabilities, and
limitations of the systems they employ. This applies to manned and
remotely-piloted aircraft. It also applies to all weapons, sensors, and
capabilities employed from our platforms.
Mr. Scott. What must be done to ensure that the B-21 Raider will
not be a high demand, low density platform?
General Brown. Affordability and producibility are critical
elements to ensuring the B-21 Raider is not a High Demand/Low Density
asset. Since Day 1 of the program, the Air Force remains focused on
ensuring the B-21 Raider is an affordable bomber through the upfront
establishment of affordability as a Key Performance Parameter (KPP)
along with fixed-price aircraft lots for LRIP as part of contract
award. The B-21 Raider program is focused on ensuring the first flight
test aircraft is a high quality build using production processes,
production tooling, and the production workforce in order to drive
production maturity. Additionally, Congress's support in the form of
stable and consistent funding will support the B-21 program efforts to
continue to execute within cost, schedule and performance goals defined
in the government's Acquisition Program Baseline (APB). The B-21 will
form the backbone of America's future bomber force. Our current B-21
program of record is based on a minimum fleet of 100 aircraft; however,
the Air Force's current long-term bomber force structure plan is
targeting 220 or more bombers, comprised of 145 B-21s and 75 heavily
modified B-52s. The Air Force is also exploring the possibility of a B-
21 Family of Systems that could include an un-crewed combat aircraft.
Mr. Scott. What must be done to ensure that Next Generation Air
Dominance (NGAD) will not be a high demand, low density platform?
General Brown. Because of the high expected unit cost of the NGAD
platform, there is a risk that needed numbers may not be affordable. As
a result, the Air Force is pursuing uncrewed combat aircraft that would
be controlled by an NGAD platform and provide an overall more
affordable air dominance capability. The Next Generation Air Dominance
(NGAD) Family of Systems (FoS) is foundational to the Air Force's air
superiority capability in the future fighter force structure. Replacing
the F-22, NGAD FoS will be the Air Force's primary air superiority
capability in the highly contested environment and will have the
ability to engage air and surface based targets and threats.
Mr. Scott. John Clagett, Jim Douglas, and Lang Sias wrote an
article entitled ``Next Generation Air Dominance Needs a New Flight
Path'' in the September 2021 issue of Proceedings. Do you agree or
disagree with the authors when they stated, ``Great power competition
requires much greater procurement efficiency and wider technology
participation than the current process enables. The current DoD
procurement process includes cost, time, and technology problems that
can no longer be accepted if the United States is to compete and win
against peer competitors.''
General Brown. Responding to the threats posed to the United States
by peer competitors as identified in the NDS requires us to execute a
wide range of acquisition programs that can deliver operational
capability in the coming years. The DAF's seven operational imperatives
and eleven management initiatives are focused on exactly this problem,
delivering these critical capabilities as fast as possible. We will
leverage the acquisition flexibilities provided by Congress in this
effort as well as advances in engineering practice. We will alert
Congress to additional authorities we identify as needed. No one should
expect ``acquisition magic'' from hypothetical approaches that have
been tried before or arm waving about changing the procurement process.
We have chased this illusion for decades, with disastrous results.
Mr. Scott. Will NGAD be an air-dominance fighter that is affordable
to procure and operate and much better than anything Communist China or
Russia can deploy against it?
General Brown. Because of the high expected unit cost of the NGAD
platform, there is a risk that needed numbers may not be affordable. As
a result, the Air Force is pursuing un-crewed combat aircraft that
would be controlled by an NGAD platform and provide an overall more
affordable air dominance capability.
Mr. Scott. What plans does the Air Force have to reduce the NGAD's
development time and the costs associated with a broken procurement
system?
General Brown. The procurement system isn't broken, but there is
ample room for improvement. The Next Generation Air Dominance (NGAD)
Family-of-Systems (FoS) is aggressively leveraging Digital Engineering,
Open System Architectures, and Agile Software Development to drive down
costs while providing the most advanced fighter capabilities. The
technology development and maturation for the NGAD FoS will take time
and, while we can buy down risk, the overall effort is best accelerated
by ensuring stable funding. Procurement and sustainment activities will
benefit directly from these robust digital, open, and agile development
practices. The NGAD FoS acquisition strategy expands the industrial
base and ensures the Air Force can leverage the latest innovation to
sustain the nation's air superiority in support of the Joint Force
today and throughout its lifecycle.
Mr. Scott. Lieutenant Commander John M. Leeds, U.S. Navy, wrote an
an article entitled ``Bring Back Patrol Bombing Squadrons'' in the
April 2020 edition of Proceedings. Do you agree or disagree with the
author conclusion that, ``The United States could expand its maritime
strike capability by reviving World War II's patrol bombing squadron
concept, pairing Navy P-8s with Air Force B-1s?''
General Brown. The ability to strike maritime targets in a highly
contested threat environment is a key component of our future force
design. The use of legacy platforms such as B-1's does not ensure
sufficient survivability for our aircrew in that environment. The DAF
has begun multiple efforts to rapidly fill the maritime strike gap with
advanced weapons guided by a variety of joint systems that will ensure
target destruction as well as platform survivability.
Mr. Scott. Does the U.S. joint force faces a serious gap in
maritime strike?
General Brown. The PRC has and continues to develop significant
nuclear, space, cyber, land, air, and maritime military capabilities,
and they are working every day to close the technology gap with the
United States and our allies. One of the DAF's biggest challenges is
the ability to timely and efficiently acquire maritime mobile targets.
Investments in ABMS and JADC2 are necessary to keep pace with the
evolving PRC tactics and technologies. One of the SECAF's Operational
Imperatives is focused on striking moving surface targets at scale. The
DAF also has several weapons programs under development to help ensure
maritime strike capability in the future. We would be happy to discuss
those in a classified forum.
Mr. Scott. Commander Rob Brodie, U.S. Navy, wrote an article
entitled ``Make Mine Warfare a Team Sport'' in the April 2020 issue of
Proceedings. According to the author, ``The Air Force is happy to use
research-and-development money to explore sowing sea mines from stand-
off aircraft (Quickstrike) and removing shallow-water minefields with
the joint direct attack munition (JDAM) assault breaching system
(JABS), but it is unlikely to acquire or prioritize the resources to
accomplish these missions.'' Do you agree or disagree?
General Brown. The Air Force remains committed to helping our Navy
partners in the sea mine mission. However, this mission doctrinally
belongs to the US Navy. The USAF helps with development and delivery,
in accordance with the desires of the US Navy. The USAF, as always,
remains open to all conversations with our sister services about burden
sharing all mission areas across the services.
Mr. Scott. Is the Air Force seeing an increase in UAS overflight of
its bases in the US and overseas?
General Brown. Yes. The commercial proliferation and availability
of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) created new risks for the Department
of the Air Force (DAF) and other Services. In 2021, there were 497 UAS
overflights at DAF locations (Air Force and Space Force bases) overseas
and in the homeland that impacted our missions in various ways such as
ceasing airfield operations and posing aircraft strike hazards. From 1
January to 17 May 2022, we've already experienced 129 UAS overflights.
Technology trends have dramatically transformed legitimate
applications of UAS while also making them increasingly dangerous
hazards and weapons in the hands of state and non-state actors,
criminals and negligent hobbyists. The AF and DoD must continue to
protect and defend our personnel, facilities and assets in all
environments where increasing numbers of UAS share skies with DoD
aircraft, operate in airspace over DoD installations, and are employed
by adversaries and negligent operators. The AF will continue to invest
in the latest kinetic, non-kinetic and directed energy solutions to
keep pace with threats and ensure our missions are not negatively
impacted.
Mr. Scott. What actions is the Air Force taking to defend against
UAS threats?
General Brown. After fielding various kinetic and non-kinetic
Counter-small Unmanned Aircraft System (C-sUAS) technologies to meet
urgent needs at locations in Europe, the Middle East and Asia, and to
safeguard missions supporting United States Strategic Command
(USSTRATCOM), we designated Air Force Materiel Command as the Lead
Command to support strategy and technology development. Our Security
Forces perform operator duties to integrate this important mission with
our air base ground defense skillsets. The USAF has programmed to spend
$269 million on C-sUAS research and development (R&D), fielding and
sustainment over the next five years (Fiscal Years 2023-2027).
Currently, 87 of 187 USAF locations have c-sUAS capability that allows
for response to incursions.
To keep pace with the threats, our strategy focuses on delivering a
government-owned, modular, open-system with automated Command and
Control architecture that enables a backbone for rapid integration with
the latest sensors and effectors developed by industry, academia or
labs.
The Secretary of Defense designated the Army as the Executive Agent
for C-sUAS Groups 1-3 in 2020 to unify Service efforts within the
Department. This led to the establishment of a Joint C-sUAS Office
(JCO) headed by the Army. We continue to work closely with the JCO, who
is responsible for coordinating joint requirements, minimizing
duplication and redundancy across the Services, integrating testing and
training efforts, and managing R&D funding for new, emerging
capabilities that will become joint solutions across the force.
Mr. Scott. Is the Air Force looking at utilizing directed energy,
to include lasers and high power microwave technology, for base
security and integration on Air Force aircraft?
General Brown. The Department of the Air Force continues to mature
and explore the military utility of Directed Energy (DE), including
lasers and high power microwaves to counter threats posed by small UAS.
The Air Force team is working closely with the Joint Capability Office
for counter small UAS to identify requirements and opportunities for
these technologies to mitigate threats to our bases. Additionally, the
Department of the Air Force continues research on increasing the power,
establishing required thermal management, and enhancing beam control
technologies, while reducing the size, weight, and cost of DE systems.
Increased power in smaller packaging is required for integration on
future Air Force aircraft.
Mr. Scott. Lt. Col. Kjetil Bjorkum, Royal Norwegian Air Force,
wrote in the Fall 2021 issue of Strategic Studies Quarterly an article
entitled ``Arctic Space Strategy: The U.S. and Norwegian Common
Interest and Strategic Effort.'' How will the United States Space Force
enhance it's relationship with Norway in the areas of space domain
awareness, communication capacity, ISR, launch capability, and
education, research, and technology development?
General Raymond. The US and Norway have a long-standing
relationship in space domain awareness (GLOBUS II radar site) and
satellite communications (WGS and MUOS). The USSF is actively engaging
with Norway on the Enhanced Polar Recapitalization (EPS-R), a hosted
payload onboard a Norwegian satellite to provide protected SATCOM
coverage in the North Polar Region, and is also exploring potential
areas of collaboration in ISR, launch capability, education, research,
and technology development.
Mr. Scott. Are you satisfied with the number of Space Force
personnel publishing papers in military and space journals? What can be
done to encourage more Guardians to read, write, and think Space Power?
General Raymond. A vital component of maturing the profession of
arms in the space domain is active and constructive engagements,
especially in peer reviewed journals. Success in this endeavor is
measured in terms of the quality of the debate and discussion such
engagements generate, not in the number of articles produced. Instead,
it must be a place where we can take our thinking to the next level. As
the first digital force, Space Force is charting new territory when it
comes to exchanging ideas. Our culture demands we consider traditional
methods such as journals and other types of publications but we must
also integrate new technology like podcasts and audiobooks.
We are engaging directly with Guardians on a number of fronts to
encourage participation in developing and exchanging ideas in new and
traditional ways. We are working with Guardians and members of other
Services assigned to encourage space contributions to multi-service
publications like Air Land Sea Application's (ALSA's) Battlespace
Journal. This drives collaboration with their peers in the academic
environment. Publications like the Battlespace Journal allow Guardians
to present space concepts and contributions to all-domain operations to
readers across the DoD increasing awareness about what space brings to
the fight. These types of journals require our members to write and
think in a way that those outside the space community can understand in
the context of their operations and within a multi-domain environment.
In addition to space and military journals, we encourage Guardians
to sit on panels and publish in journals that have broader national and
international audiences to demonstrate our thought leadership and
solicit views more diverse than we can find within our own Service.
Technology is advancing at an ever increasing pace so the only enduring
advantage is the ability to learn and adapt faster than our
adversaries. We must hone our critical thinking abilities in the
international arena if we hope to gain and maintain space superiority
at times and places of our choosing.
The Space Force is cultivating a fearless culture and
psychologically safe environment where we encourage public discussion
and debate. Team leaders and members at all levels actively encourage
one another to share their views and challenge conventional thinking.
In this way, iron sharpens iron, making us a more agile and lethal
force. In addition, we are strengthening our space-centric Professional
Military Education (PME) programs to build on the foundational
knowledge provided via initial training and education and solidified
through practice and experience. Through our space-centric PME, our
students and faculty continue to publish peer-reviewed and thought
provoking pieces in recognized publications. Furthermore, our
University Partnership Program (UPP) contributes to this effort by
providing opportunities to write and potentially publish works on Space
Power, with diverse highly technical partner academic institutions.
Mr. Scott. What Space Force Chairs are still needed at our War
Colleges and in the private sector?
General Raymond. There are currently two Space Force Chairs, one at
the National Defense University (NDU) and one at Air University (AU).
Both of these positions are essential for developing future national
security leaders who understand the strategic utility of space during
employment in joint, combined, and interagency operations. These
positions assist faculty and staff by providing space operations
subject matter expertise in curriculum development, incorporating
relevant space concepts throughout curriculum to produce space-minded
national security professionals, and serving as liaison on space
matters to NDU and AU school leaders. They also serve as academic
advisors to space personnel at these schools by providing guidance on
selected electives, exercises, and lecture series. Their contribution
to enabling NDU and AU to provide space-minded leaders is essential and
enduring.
We do not have Space Force Chairs at private sector schools. Given
the current manpower limitations, we are evaluating the need for
additional Space Force Chairs to the Army, Navy, and USMC War Colleges
in order to meet the intent of J7 Joint Professional Military Education
(JPME) requirements within Service resourcing priorities.
For the private sector, we do have our University Partnership
Program (UPP), which we created in 2021 in order to develop a close
relationship with a network of 14 universities that can provide world-
class space research and professional development opportunities. These
relationships will enable the USSF to foster a diverse, highly
technical and specialized workforce. The aim is to collaborate, as
permitted by law and policy, on the long and short-term Science and
Technology (S&T) problem sets; and to promote partnerships with
academic institutions, government labs, and private industry. This
collaborative and inclusive approach allows the USSF to promote and
strengthen strategic relationships to deliver new capabilities at
operationally relevant speeds that enhance security and preserve
prosperity of the space domain.
We have appointed 14 general officers or Senior Executive Service
(SES) civilians and 14 colonels to serve as ``UPP Champions and Co-
Champions'' with the 14 UPP locations in order to build strong, long-
term bonds with each school. These Champions collaborate with
University Presidents, Provosts, Deans, and Reserve Officer Training
Corps (ROTC) Commanders to generate future diverse Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math (STEM) talent to join the USSF.
Mr. Scott. Are you satisfied with the development of models and
simulations that test new space doctrinal concepts? If not, why not?
General Raymond. I am not satisfied with our current modeling and
simulation tools. We still have work to do but we have made some good
progress over the past few years. The USSF Test and Training community
is building a modeling and simulation capability for use at the
National Space Test and Training Range. This past year, the USSF
successfully conducted our first wargame in which we leveraged physics-
based simulations to assess the effectiveness of future force designs.
Current modeling and simulation tools typically excel in either the
space or ground domain ... our goal is to evolve toward holistic
environments that model all elements of our systems and architectures.
Mr. Scott. Is the Space Force exploring the use of directed energy,
to include lasers and high power microwave technology, in space?
General Raymond. Our efforts to protect U.S. space capabilities are
classified. I would be happy to schedule an engagement with you in that
setting to discuss this topic.
Mr. Scott. Question for: General John Raymond 78) There are
emerging technologies such as digital predistortion (DPD) that are
improving the efficiency, power, and linearity of non-linear circuits.
Is the Space Force looking at this and other technologies to improve on
existing power efficiencies within our systems in space? Has this
exploration been included in the Space Force budget?
General Raymond. Yes, the Air Force Research Labe (AFRL) is working
on solutions to improve the power efficiency in our space systems.
Digital/Analog convergence as well as ideas for leveraging Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning in space-electronics are being worked
through multiple projects at AFRL like our Spacecraft Processing
Architectures and Computer Environment Research which focuses on new
solutions for data processing on-board spacecraft to improve the power
efficiency, computational performance, and radiation tolerance. The
approach identifies and prioritizes the areas that provide the biggest
return on investment while exploring new trade space for game changing
concepts--adiabatic circuits, a low-power electronic circuit that uses
``reversible logic'' to conserve energy, is a great example of this.
There is funding in the Science & Technology portfolio to pursue these
efforts.
Mr. Scott. Is the Space Force working with commercial industries to
include their power efficiency advances in space?
General Raymond. The Space Force Power and Energetics Capability
Collaboration Team at the Space Force's Space Systems Command is
working with commercial industry to develop pervasive power efficiency
advances in space for spacecraft. The team has prioritized a set of
published technical needs and power and energy roadmaps. The Space
Force is also partnering with The Aerospace Corporation to keep track
of ongoing/upcoming commercial advances and testing cells of interest
in mission profiles to understand their advantages for space
application. Space programs are already using some newer higher energy
density technologies by use of commercial off the shelf (COTS) cells in
many platforms. However, while these COTS cells do include many of the
newer technologies, such as advanced electrodes and electrolytes, they
are designed for different commercial applications and may not be
suited for use in space. Instead they must first be tested and verified
for their particular space applications/orbital profiles.
Mr. Scott. How can the Coast Guard, as part of the joint force,
assist the United States Space Force in executing their mission?
General Raymond. The USCG directly supports the USSF through
maritime safety and security operations for USSF spacelift operations,
search and rescue support for NASA crewed spaceflight missions, and
recovery and return of expended spacecraft boosters to port. The USCG
indirectly supports the USSF through pollution monitoring, hazard
response, anti-terrorism, and force protection activities along the
coasts of the USSF's space launch bases. As we continue to work within
the DoD and interagency to evolve operating standards and norms of
responsible behavior in the space domain, there may be useful maritime
lessons or exemplars from USCG experience.
Mr. Scott. What advice do you have for the U.S. Coast Guard on how
it can best capitalize on cheap, ready access to space to facilitate
its missions?
General Raymond. The Department has multiple solutions that provide
satellite communications (SATCOM), Position, Navigation, and Timing
(PNT), weather, and intelligence, reconnaissance, and surveillance
(ISR) capabilities that can be, and are, leveraged by the USCG to
conduct their missions. Integrated SATCOM efforts utilize both
commercial and military capabilities to provide access to multiple
wavebands, providing the ability to communicate in all-weather
situations. There are space based environmental monitoring capabilities
that provide timely weather data and coverage over denied and austere
areas, providing cloud characterization, theater weather imagery,
tropical cyclone intensity, sea ice characterization, and ocean surface
wind vector data. PNT capabilities provide detailed location and timing
services used both in land-based and ship-based situations. All of
these capabilities support search and rescue operations, enabling
monitoring of ports and waterways, and support movement and maneuver to
enable other Coast Guard operations.
Mr. Scott. Does the United States Space Force have all the
authorities it needs to conduct space-based search and rescue
operations? If not, what authorities are missing?
General Raymond. The Space Force and DoD are not assigned an in-
space search and rescue mission, and we do not currently have any
capability to conduct in-space search and rescue operations. However,
the DoD provides Search and Rescue support to the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) for NASA's Commercial Crew Program and
Artemis Program in accordance with established interagency
arrangements. USSF has the ability to provide Space Domain Awareness,
Beyond Line of Site satellite communications for rescue vehicles, and
global 24/7 positioning, navigation and timing to search and rescue
teams, as well as collaborating with the Intelligence Community and
other agencies to share real-time data and imagery from weather and
other satellites to support rescue operations.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KEATING
Mr. Keating. The Air Force stated it will replace the current F-15
fighters at Barnes Air National Guard Base, Fresno Yosemite Airport in
California, and Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans with
either F-15EX planes or the F-35As. Your testimony made clear that Air
Force now only wants to buy 80 F-15EXs. I am concerned with what that
might mean for remaining F-15C/D Eagles that the Air Force previously
said would replace with new aircraft. In May of 2021, Barnes Air
National Guard Base was evaluated as a possible base for the next-
generation of F-35A Lightning II fighter jets. Can you please explain
what your testimony means for Barnes and the F-35A/F-15EX decision
making process?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force is currently executing a Global
Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure all fighter
basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National Defense
Strategy and fit within the existing Air Force budget. Once this review
is complete, the outcome will be used to inform the strategic basing
process which will then determine force posture laydown and impacts to
individual units and bases. The strategic basing process utilizes site
assessment criteria that includes Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories.
Mr. Keating. In May of 2021, Barnes Air National Guard Base was
evaluated as a possible base for the next-generation of F-35A Lightning
II fighter jets. How did Barnes Air National Guard Base finish in the
Basing Action and scoring for both the F35 and F15X?
Secretary Kendall. The process to determine the location for the
tenth F-35A Operational Location (Ops 10) is still on-going. I
anticipate selecting the preferred location before the end of the
calendar year. The other candidate locations are anticipated to be
recapitalized with F-15EX aircraft.
Mr. Keating. What is the specific plan (timing for aircraft) to
recapitalize the ANG F-15C bases in MA, CA, and LA?
Secretary Kendall. The specific timing for recapitalization at all
locations that are divesting aircraft is pending the results of the Air
Force Global Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure
all fighter basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National
Defense Strategy and fit within the existing Air Force budget. Once
this review is complete, the outcomes will be used to inform the
strategic basing process which will then determine force posture
laydown and impacts to individual units and bases. The strategic basing
process utilizes site assessment criteria that includes Mission
(weather and training infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics,
and maintenance facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality
and encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories.
Mr. Keating. What is your best military advise on what F-15C unit
should be the next to transition to the F-35?
Secretary Kendall. Best military advice for selecting F-35 bed down
locations is to follow the strategic basing process which utilizes site
assessment criteria that includes Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. As fighter
force structure size changes, the strategic basing process should
additionally be informed by the current Air Force Global Posture Review
focused on the fighter enterprise. This review is intended to ensure
all fighter basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National
Defense Strategy and fit within the existing Air Force budget.
Mr. Keating. The Air Force stated it will replace the current F-15
fighters at Barnes Air National Guard Base, Fresno Yosemite Airport in
California, and Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans with
either F-15EX planes or the F-35As.
Your testimony made clear that Air Force now only wants to buy 80
F-15EXs. I am concerned with what that might mean for remaining F-15C/D
Eagles that the Air Force previously said would replace with new
aircraft.
In May of 2021, Barnes Air National Guard Base was evaluated as a
possible base for the next-generation of F-35A Lightning II fighter
jets. Can you please explain what your testimony means for Barnes and
the F-35A/F-15EX decision making process?
General Brown. The Air Force is currently executing a Global
Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure all fighter
basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National Defense
Strategy and fit within the existing Air Force budget. Once this review
is complete, the outcome will be used to inform the strategic basing
process which will then determine force posture laydown and impacts to
individual units and bases. The strategic basing process utilizes site
assessment criteria that includes Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories.
Mr. Keating. In May of 2021, Barnes Air National Guard Base was
evaluated as a possible base for the next-generation of F-35A Lightning
II fighter jets. How did Barnes Air National Guard Base finish in the
Basing Action and scoring for both the F35 and F15X?
General Brown. The process to determine the location for the tenth
F-35A Operational Location (Ops 10) is still on-going. The Secretary of
the Air Force anticipates selecting the preferred location before the
end of the calendar year.
Mr. Keating. What is the specific plan (timing for aircraft) to
recapitalize the ANG F-15C bases in MA, CA, and LA?
General Brown. The specific timing for recapitalization at all
locations that are divesting aircraft is pending the results of the Air
Force Global Posture Review focused on the fighter enterprise to ensure
all fighter basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National
Defense Strategy and fit within the existing Air Force budget. Once
this review is complete, the outcomes will be used to inform the
strategic basing process which will then determine force posture
laydown and impacts to individual units and bases. The strategic basing
process utilizes site assessment criteria that includes Mission
(weather and training infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics,
and maintenance facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality
and encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories.
Mr. Keating. What is your best military advise on what F-15C unit
should be the next to transition to the F-35?
General Brown. Best military advice for selecting F-35 bed down
locations is to follow the strategic basing process which utilizes site
assessment criteria that includes Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. As fighter
force structure size changes, the strategic basing process should
additionally be informed by the current Air Force Global Posture Review
focused on the fighter enterprise. This review is intended to ensure
all fighter basing decisions are best aligned to the new 2022 National
Defense Strategy and fit within the expected Air Force budget.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. Mr. Secretary, there has been a lot of discussion
recently about autonomous fighter aircraft and the efforts the Air
Force is pursuing to develop those platforms. Is the Air Force working
to automate cockpit systems of big wing aircraft in the fleet? If so,
which platforms? Can you describe the Air Force's approach for bringing
autonomous flight capabilities to large-wing aircraft platforms?
Finally, how would autonomous C-130Js and other large aircraft address/
impact the pilot shortages that the Air Force is currently facing?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force is examining different levels and
applications of autonomy across many of our current and future
platforms, to include crewed, uncrewed, and optionally crewed
alternatives. We will continue to invest in those that realize
meaningful gains in efficiency and effectiveness for the service. To
the specific example of the C-130, we are still researching whether
those gains from autonomy will result in the removal of Airmen from the
cockpit, and if increasingly automated systems will change the formula
for training, operations, and sustainment of the system, which has the
potential to impact the threshold requirement for pilot manning.
Mr. Brown. What is the Air Force's plan to bring F-35s to Joint
Base Andrews (JBA) for the D.C. Air National Guard, the nation's last
line of defense in the event of a conflict?
Secretary Kendall. As we continue to recapitalize our fighter fleet
to new platforms, the DC Guard will receive special consideration due
to their unique mission set, defending the National Capital Region.
Mr. Brown. With regard to the Crash Rescue Helicopter, the USAF has
already begun to retire the existing HH-60G fleet.. What is your long-
term plan to provide rescue capability for combat force? How will the
USAF keep the active and guard and reserve fleets available to support
the DoD's rescue mission demands?
General Brown. The HH-60W plays a significant role in bridging the
legacy Combat Search and Rescue capability. Other means of rescue and
developing concepts and technologies are currently being explored that
may be more effective in emerging threat environments. The current
Combat Rescue Triad (HH-60W, HC-130J and Guardian Angel) will span the
gap between today and these emerging concepts and technologies. In the
near-term, the department must invest in HH-60W modernization,
increased integrated training opportunities in contested environments,
and weapon system sustainment in order to ensure operational risk-
reduction prior to fielding of follow-on platforms. The added
maintainability, increased aircraft availability, and reduction of
rotational deployments will mitigate some of the losses of capacity to
the DAF Total Force. The Department is taking prudent near term risk in
order to transition from the force we have today to the force needed to
meet our pacing challenge.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON
Mr. Wilson. As F-35A procurement stays at lower than planned
levels, the USAF must ensure the smaller fleet of F-35s are able to
meet the platform's full potential. Specifically, I am concerned the
USAF Strategic Basing Process is not adequately considering long-term
training, resilience, and readiness. Please describe how installations
are being prioritized for F-35 basing, and provide the criteria
referred to by CSAF ``Strategic look'' for future fighter fleet basing.
Are all available installations are being fairly evaluated based on the
long-term readiness of the F-35 fleet?
Secretary Kendall. Installations considered for F-35 basing are
evaluated using the strategic basing process which utilizes site
assessment criteria including Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. This
criteria fairly evaluates all installations in a way that ensures the
long-term readiness of the F-35 fleet.
Mr. Wilson. Please describe how organic military installations are
being prioritized for F-35 fielding and basing decisions. It seems
logical the USAF would prioritize USAF-owned military installations and
airfields, especially for ANG F-35 fielding. Is the USAF prioritizing
Federally-owned and operated airfields? If not, why?
Secretary Kendall. The Air Force Strategic Basing process provides
a deliberate, repeatable, standardized, and transparent process for
making Air Force strategic basing decisions. The process uses a
criteria-based analysis to link mission and Combatant Commander
requirements to the attributes of Air Force installations in order to
identify locations that are best suited to support any given mission.
The criteria for the next round of Air National Guard (ANG) basing has
not been established yet, but is anticipated to mirror the criteria
used during the last round of ANG F-35A basing. Previously, federally-
owned and operated airfields were not prioritized over other airfields
as this wasn't a requirement stipulated by the National Guard Bureau,
Air Combat Command, or the Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans and
Programs.
Mr. Wilson. Given Secretary Kendall and General Brown's assurance
to look for creative solutions: How valuable to the Air Force fighter
fleets would being able to split 28 x F-16 Block 52s between
recapitalizing an ANG Wing (18 PAA) and then allowing the RegAF to
retain the remaining F-16 Block 52s (6-7 aircraft) into Operational
Test & Evaluation or other Air Force institutional mission? Please
evaluate and share your assessment how the USAF can benefit long term
by recapitalizing the 169th Fighter Wing (28 x F-16 Blk 52s (24 PAA))
with 20 x F-35 (18 PAA); yielding the opportunity for additional RegAF
resources in institutional missions while still preserving enough
fighter aircraft to cover a current ANG Fighter Wing (18 PAA)?
Secretary Kendall. The strategic basing process utilizes site
assessment criteria including Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. The 169th
Fighter Wing currently operates the newest block of multi-role F-16
Block 52 fighter aircraft ensuring a fighter mission at McEntire Air
National Guard Base for many years to come. It is unlikely that a near
term transition to the F-35 would be an optimum solution since it would
generate transition costs for a fighter aircraft location that is not
in need of recapitalization. Additionally, the Air Force's Operational
Test & Evaluation fleet as well as other small units such as the Air
Force's Aerial Demonstration Squadron, the Thunderbirds, are currently
right sized with block 50/52 F-16s and would not benefit from
additional aircraft in a way that is affordable.
Mr. Wilson. Can you guarantee that McEntire Joint National Guard
Base will be honestly and earnestly considered for the ongoing Global
Posture Review and in turn F-35A basing decisions?
Secretary Kendall. Yes. Headquarters Air Force works closely with
the National Guard Bureau and Air Force Reserve through the annual POM
process to determine appropriate force mix between the active duty, Air
National Guard, and Air Force Reserve. This force mix assessment
includes the strategic basing process which utilizes site assessment
criteria that includes Mission (weather and training infrastructure),
Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance facilities, and ramp
space), Environmental (air quality and encroachment), and Cost (one-
time and recurring) categories.
Mr. Wilson. As F-35A procurement stays at lower than planned
levels, the USAF must ensure the smaller fleet of F-35s are able to
meet the platform's full potential. Specifically, I am concerned the
USAF Strategic Basing Process is not adequately considering long-term
training, resilience, and readiness. Please describe how installations
are being prioritized for F-35 basing, and provide the criteria
referred to by CSAF ``Strategic look'' for future fighter fleet basing.
Are all available installations are being fairly evaluated based on the
long-term readiness of the F-35 fleet?
General Brown. Installations considered for F-35 basing are
evaluated using the strategic basing process which utilizes site
assessment criteria including Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. This
criteria fairly evaluates all installations in a way that ensures the
long-term readiness of the F-35 fleet.
Mr. Wilson. Please describe how organic military installations are
being prioritized for F-35 fielding and basing decisions. It seems
logical the USAF would prioritize USAF-owned military installations and
airfields, especially for ANG F-35 fielding. Is the USAF prioritizing
Federally-owned and operated airfields? If not, why?
General Brown. The Air Force Strategic Basing process provides a
deliberate, repeatable, standardized, and transparent process for
making Air Force strategic basing decisions. The process uses a
criteria-based analysis to link mission and Combatant Commander
requirements to the attributes of Air Force installations in order to
identify locations that are best suited to support any given mission.
The criteria for the next round of Air National Guard (ANG) basing has
not been established yet, but is anticipated to mirror the criteria
used during the last round of ANG F-35A basing. Previously, federally-
owned and operated airfields were not prioritized over other airfields
as this wasn't a requirement stipulated by the National Guard Bureau,
Air Combat Command, or the Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans and
Programs.
Mr. Wilson. Given Secretary Kendall and General Brown's assurance
to look for creative solutions: How valuable to the Air Force fighter
fleets would being able to split 28 x F-16 Block 52s between
recapitalizing an ANG Wing (18 PAA) and then allowing the RegAF to
retain the remaining F-16 Block 52s (6-7 aircraft) into Operational
Test & Evaluation or other Air Force institutional mission? Please
evaluate and share your assessment how the USAF can benefit long term
by recapitalizing the 169th Fighter Wing (28 x F-16 Blk 52s (24 PAA))
with 20 x F-35 (18 PAA); yielding the opportunity for additional RegAF
resources in institutional missions while still preserving enough
fighter aircraft to cover a current ANG Fighter Wing (18 PAA)?
General Brown. The strategic basing process utilizes site
assessment criteria including Mission (weather and training
infrastructure), Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance
facilities, and ramp space), Environmental (air quality and
encroachment), and Cost (one-time and recurring) categories. The 169th
Fighter Wing currently operates the newest block of multi-role F-16
Block 52 fighter aircraft ensuring a fighter mission at McEntire Air
National Guard Base for many years to come. It is unlikely that a near
term transition to the F-35 would be an optimum solution since it would
generate transition costs for a fighter aircraft location that is not
in need of recapitalization. Additionally, the Air Force's Operational
Test & Evaluation fleet as well as other small units such as the Air
Force's Aerial Demonstration Squadron, the Thunderbirds, are currently
right sized with block 50/52 F-16s and would not benefit from
additional aircraft in a way that is affordable.
Mr. Wilson. Can you guarantee that McEntire Joint National Guard
Base will be honestly and earnestly considered for the ongoing Global
Posture Review and in turn F-35A basing decisions?
General Brown. Yes. Headquarters Air Force works closely with the
National Guard Bureau and Air Force Reserve through the annual POM
process to determine appropriate force mix between the active duty, Air
National Guard, and Air Force Reserve. This force mix assessment
includes the strategic basing process which utilizes site assessment
criteria that includes Mission (weather and training infrastructure),
Capacity (operations, logistics, and maintenance facilities, and ramp
space), Environmental (air quality and encroachment), and Cost (one-
time and recurring) categories.

[all]
