- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-30] SHIP AND SUBMARINE MAINTENANCE: SUSTAINMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR A CHANGING FLEET

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-30]

SHIP AND SUBMARINE MAINTENANCE:

SUSTAINMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR A CHANGING FLEET

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MAY 6, 2021

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-495               WASHINGTON : 2022

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JACKIE SPEIER, California            JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JASON CROW, Colorado                 AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan, Vice       JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
Chair                            MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington

Melanie Harris, Professional Staff Member
Ian Bennitt, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Wilson, Hon. Joe, a Representative from South Carolina,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     3

WITNESSES

Galinis, VADM William J., USN, Commander, Naval Sea Systems
Command; RADM Eric H. Ver Hage, USN, Commander, Naval Regional
Maintenance Center, and Director, Surface Ship Maintenance and
Modernization, Naval Sea Systems Command; and RADM Howard B.
Markle, USN, Deputy Commander, Logistics, Maintenance and
Industrial Operations, Naval Sea Systems Command...............     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Galinis, VADM William J., joint with RADM Eric H. Ver Hage
and RADM Howard B. Markle..................................    36
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................    51
Mr. Garamendi................................................    51
Mr. Golden...................................................    52
Mr. Moore....................................................    52
Mr. Scott....................................................    51

SHIP AND SUBMARINE MAINTENANCE: SUSTAINMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR A
CHANGING FLEET

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Thursday, May 6, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. John Garamendi (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. [Inaudible] this hearing of the Readiness
Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee.
First, some administrative and technical notes. All of us
have heard this many times, but nonetheless, our general
counsel says we must go ahead and do it one more time.
Members are reminded that they must be visible on screen
within the software platform for the purposes of identity
verification. Members must continue to use the software
platform's video function while attending the hearing unless
they experience connectivity issues or other technical problems
that render the member unable to fully participate on camera.
If you experience technical difficulties, please contact the
committee staff for assistance.
When you are recognized, video will be broadcast via
television and internet feeds. You will be recognized as normal
for questions. But if you want to speak at any other time, you
must seek recognition verbally.
Please mute your microphone when you are not speaking.
Remember to unmute prior to speaking. Please be aware there is
a slight lag between when you start speaking and when the
camera shot switches to you.
Please also remember to keep the software platform's video
function on for the entirety of the time you are attending the
hearing. If you leave for a short period for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding, please leave your video
function on. If you are leaving to join a different proceeding,
or will be absent for a significant period of time, you should
exit the software platform entirely and then rejoin when you
return.
Please be advised that I have designated Melanie on my
committee staff to be the enforcer. She will mute you if you
are not muting yourself. If you attempt to speak when you are
not spoken to, maybe she will unmute you.
Please use the platform's chat feature only to communicate
with staff regarding technical or logistical support issues.
Finally, you will see a 5-minute countdown clock on the
software platform display. Please pay attention to it. However,
I will remind you when your time is up.
Next, I will now seek unanimous consent to permit a non-
committee member, who happens to represent one of the shipyards
that we will be discussing here. I would like to seek your
permission for Eric--excuse me, Derek Kilmer to participate.
Without objection, so ordered.
Derek, you will be last on the gavel list, as you know, and
I will call on you when that time arrives.
So with that out of the way, I would like to make a few
opening remarks.
Two of the most significant inhibitors of fleet readiness
are delayed maintenance and out-of-date shipyard facilities.
This is a high-stakes problem. As the Navy's fleet is the
foundation of our global power projection, rigorous and timely
maintenance means we can have more ships at sea at any given
time.
It is also essential to preserving our ships' availability
throughout their expected service life. Unlike other platforms,
major ship maintenance work is complex, enormously expensive,
and takes months to complete, and is relatively infrequent.
As the administration contemplates a larger fleet of naval
vessels, we must consider whether an already struggling
shipyard enterprise has the capacity to sustain them.
Unfortunately, the planning and performance of the Navy ship
maintenance seems to be stuck in a cycle of delay due to
optimistic assumptions in acquisition, and extended
deployments, deferred maintenance, and also inaccurate
projections of both the duration and the cost of ship
maintenance.
Indeed, since 2012, two-thirds of the Navy ships and
submarine maintenance availabilities have been completed late,
leading to tens of thousands of lost operational and training
days.
I look forward to hearing about the Navy's efforts to
address these problems. I understand there are several
initiatives underway to improve the Navy's maintenance
operations; for example, shipyard hiring and modernization
plan, a new contracting strategy, and analytical efforts to
better forecast maintenance needs, among others. Of these, I am
most concerned about the modernization of the four public
shipyards.
The Navy's 20-year, $21 billion [Shipyard] Infrastructure
Optimization Plan [SIOP] is essential to fixing the public
yards, which are all--all--in poor or failing condition, with
too few functioning dry docks and equipment well past its
service life.
I applaud the Navy's development of this plan, which will
overhaul antiquated facilities, recapitalize equipment, and
reorganize workflow to reduce wasted time. However, I want to
see the details of the plan. I want to know what is going to be
done in the next 5 years, and in the 10 years, and if it goes
to 20 years, the years 10 to 20.
Now, Congress directed the development of this plan, and I
worry that without our continuing prodding that it will fail to
come to fruition. The Navy is in the unfortunate habit of
prioritizing resources for new platforms over the essential but
perhaps less glamorous investment in facilities to sustain and
the military construction necessary in our shipyards.
I also worry that the projected 20 years is far too long to
modernize this critical infrastructure and that the current
plan leaves no margin for flexibility to accommodate a larger
and reconfigured nuclear fleet.
Upgrading our shipyards is one of the prerequisites for
meeting the needs of tomorrow's Navy. Overhauling the way the
Navy performs maintenance is another. To this end, I am
particularly interested in hearing how the Navy is using
sensors, algorithms, and other data-driven maintenance
strategies to perform smarter, more cost-effective maintenance
that will extend the life spans of existing ships.
Finally, fixing fleet maintenance must also involve
grappling with self-inflicted damage caused by years of
misaligned priorities. For far too long, the Navy has operated
at an untenable pace, sustaining the global presence it has
maintained 25 years ago--it maintained 25 years ago with a much
smaller fleet today.
At the same time, leadership has prioritized building new
ships over directing resources and management attention to
maintaining the current fleet. A successful strategy must
confront both the overall size of the fleet and the guarantee
that the fleet can be maintained successfully.
With that, I would like to turn to you, Mr. Wilson, who is
covering for our ranking member, Doug Lamborn of Colorado, who
is not with us today.
Mr. Wilson.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM SOUTH
CAROLINA, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman John Garamendi. I look
forward to a productive hearing today. The issues of delays and
cost increases when it comes to maintaining our ship and
submarine fleet is unfortunately a problem we have faced for a
long time as a challenge to deterrence to provide for peace
through strength.
The threats we face are only becoming more complex as we
confront a rising China who is building ships at a faster rate
than anyone has in recent history and now has the world's
largest navy. It is more important than ever that we get to
work on maintaining and repairing our fleet correctly, while
also expanding it both in size and capability.
Former Deputy National Security Advisor Matthew Pottinger
has advised that the Chinese military buildup is the largest in
peacetime in world history. This is one of the many reasons I
am concerned that the budget top line released recently by the
administration fails to keep pace with inflation and cuts
defense spending in terms of real dollars.
Along with Chairman Garamendi, I want to see the budget
details and assess our progress towards increasing maintenance
capacity. Our four public shipyards have too few functional dry
docks that are equipped with capital equipment well beyond a
service life that was originally manufactured by companies that
no longer exist. All of this contributed to an aircraft carrier
average overage of 113 days and overdue submarine
availabilities an average of 225 days. That also means 75
percent of the maintenance periods for aircraft carriers and
submarines were completed late between fiscal year 2015 and
fiscal year 2019.
Congress directed the Navy to develop the Shipyard
Infrastructure Optimization Plan, SIOP, in 2018, to address
many of these issues. I remain very concerned that the plan
only accounts for 67 of 68 of the anticipated maintenance
availabilities of the current fleet. That does not account for
any of the reconfiguration of the current fleet that may occur
or even any unscheduled work as we recently saw with the
Bonhomme Richard.
We must see real investments in these yards in this year's
budget. I am not--it is not just a question of allocating the
required funding but also the resources required to support the
workload planning that can provide certainty to our partners in
the private shipyards.
The Navy contracts with 22 certified private dry docks but
without consistent, predictable workloads and contracts, it is
impossible for these yards to make the capital investments
needed to support the current and future needs.
I am interested to hear how the persons testifying today
are working to bring certainty to the workload planning for the
private yards and increase capacity. When it comes to the
workforce, we all know that these men and women are critical to
maintaining these warfighting capabilities and are often
operating without any room for error.
Many times, we see skill gaps that are not being adequately
addressed. I would like to hear how you are working to increase
the availability of artisans with critical skills, whether it
is partnering with trade schools or apprenticeships, and how we
can be supportive.
This lack of skilled workers has also contributed to the
Navy continuing to use overtime to complete planned workload.
GAO's [Government Accountability Office's] analysis found that
the high overtime among certain production shops, such as
painting or welding, averaging from 25 to [32] percent for the
fiscal years 2015 through 2019, with a peak overtime as high as
45 percent. Core requirements indicate you should be able to
get planned work done without the use of overtime to allow for
surge requirements and contingencies.
I am very concerned that we lack the surge capacity in our
workforce. I appreciate the continued service and the
experience of all of you who are here today to provide for our
Nation, and I look forward to the discussions today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
I would like to welcome and thank our witnesses appearing
today, as Vice Admiral William Galinis, Commander of Naval Sea
Systems Command [NAVSEA]; Rear Admiral Eric Ver Hage, Director
of the Surface Ship Maintenance and Modernization at NAVSEA;
and Rear Admiral Howard Markle, Deputy Commander for Logistics,
Maintenance, and Industrial Operations at NAVSEA.
Gentlemen, please proceed. I believe, Admiral Galinis, you
are going to start.

STATEMENT OF VADM WILLIAM J. GALINIS, USN, COMMANDER, NAVAL SEA
SYSTEMS COMMAND; RADM ERIC H. VER HAGE, USN, COMMANDER, NAVAL
REGIONAL MAINTENANCE CENTER, AND DIRECTOR, SURFACE SHIP
MAINTENANCE AND MODERNIZATION, NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS COMMAND; AND
RADM HOWARD B. MARKLE, USN, DEPUTY COMMANDER, LOGISTICS,
MAINTENANCE AND INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS, NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS
COMMAND

Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. Thank you. Chairman Garamendi,
Congressman Wilson, distinguished lawmakers, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss ship and
submarine maintenance and specifically the sustainment
considerations that you raised in your opening statements.
I will be providing our collective opening remarks. I would
first like to thank this committee for your very solid and
continued support of our Navy. It is a privilege to be with you
here this afternoon to discuss fleet readiness.
A top priority for Naval Sea Systems Command is delivering
combat power, principally the on-time delivery of ships,
submarines, and aircraft carriers out of maintenance.
In support of our CNO's [Chief of Naval Operations]
navigation plan and his priority on readiness, our ability to
deploy combat-ready ships and submarines starts in our public
and private sector shipyards and ship repair facilities around
the globe. Nearly 70 percent of our fleet at sea today will
still be in service in 2030. Our ability to effectively
maintain these ships and submarines is critical to delivering a
Navy our Nation needs.
As our fleet continues to evolve, so does our thinking and
our efforts to sustain these ships and submarines that we
operate--how we plan maintenance periods, how we contract for
the work that we execute, opportunities to improve execution,
and recapitalize our naval shipyards. We continue to learn and
pursue world-class performance.
We have taken lessons learned and input from our fleet,
from our workforce, and especially private industry in order to
refine and improve our processes and procedures. Our goal is to
deliver every ship and submarine out of maintenance on time
every time.
And while I am confident we are working on the right things
and the trends are absolutely moving in the right direction, I
will tell you we still have more to do as you indicated during
your initial comments.
Across surface ship maintenance where the work is done in
the private sector, our Navy has evolved our contracting
strategies to provide a better balance of the Navy's cost and
schedule requirements, industry's needs for stable funding, and
workload and contract award dates that allow for proper
planning and material purchasing of the shipyards executing
these availabilities.
We have also made great strides in using the data available
to us to better plan and execute this maintenance by utilizing
the Navy's Performance to Plan [P2P] analysis and expanding
directed maintenance strategies and improving our availability,
duration, and planning tool, known as the Availability Duration
Scorecard 3.0. This allows us to better forecast availability
schedules and reduce the number of maintenance delays.
As we progress with the next-generation destroyer, the
light amphibious warship, and other new designs, we are
leveraging our collective maintenance and sustainment knowledge
into the design process, so these ships are built with
maintainers in mind.
Within the four public shipyards, we have grown the size of
our organic workforce, delivered on new technologies and
processes that as stated in our written testimony have made
significant headway in reducing the days of maintenance delay.
The Shipyard Infrastructure and Optimization Program, SIOP
as it is affectionately called, is absolutely foundational to
the Navy's ability to execute planned submarine and aircraft
carrier maintenance for the next generation of aircraft
carriers and submarines.
And as we complete a ``digital twin'' model for each of our
four shipyards, and build out each shipyard's area development
plan, we will be able to design and build modern shipyards that
will maximize work efficiencies and throughput and accommodate
the Ford-class carriers and the Virginia payload module
submarines, the new Block Vs coming down the line.
A newer though no less important effort is our work to
improve cost and schedule performance in our naval shipyards.
This plan uses data analytics to identify availability planning
and execution performance and shortfalls and areas for
improvement in our four naval shipyards.
As I mentioned to this committee in March, we are also
utilizing the Naval Sustainment System-Shipyards effort to
institute significant and systemic and transformational changes
across all four public shipyards to improve our planning and
execution performance.
Where SIOP is focused on rebuilding and modifying the
shipyards' physical infrastructure, Naval Sustainment System-
Shipyards will fundamentally change the way we operate the
shipyards, from a business perspective, focusing on our
production workforce, their immediate supervisors, our
engineers and logisticians, to ensure that they have what they
need when they need them, so they can execute their tasks
efficiently and not expend unnecessary time and effort on non-
value-added work.
Leveraging industry best practices, this effort is being
executed with a collective sense of urgency to empower our
people at the waterfront to either solve issues immediately or
push them up the chain of command for resolution.
As I mentioned when I started, ship maintenance is
continuing to evolve, and we look forward to the opportunities
to improve across the enterprise and execute NAVSEA's number
one priority of delivering combat power on time.
Thank you again for this opportunity to spend some time
with you this afternoon, and we look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Galinis, Admiral
Ver Hage, and Admiral Markle can be found in the Appendix on
page 36.]
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral, thank you very much for the
testimony and for the written testimony. The detail in the
written testimony is extremely helpful to us as is your oral
testimony here.
I am going to pose one overarching question, and that is
you are headed in the right direction on both the public and
the private yards in what you are intending to do. A lot of
this came from the previous NDAAs [National Defense
Authorization Acts]. We will, in the next 3 months, 2 months
actually, complete the House version of the NDAA.
What do you need in that law to not only continue what you
are doing but to advance the timeframe in which these tasks
will be done? What do you need?
Admiral Galinis. So, sir, what I would tell you is just to
start off, you know, on the public sector side--and let me just
start with the SIOP effort--you know, the focus on being able
to accelerate the planning efforts is probably top of that
list.
When we talked a few months ago, I mentioned kind of
opportunities to accelerate that plan. We are coming through
the end stages of that effort and will be ready to discuss with
you here, you know, in the very near future. But our ability to
get the planning done up front, which includes the area
development plans that talk about, you know, the
infrastructure, the foundational environments that we want to
build these new buildings in, you know, that is probably a key
part there.
The other thing that we are going to be doing over the next
several months is finishing the digital twin models for each of
the four shipyards. They will be done by the end of this year,
so that is absolutely key. So that is important.
On the private sector side, I think we really do need to
continue to execute the plan that Admiral Ver Hage and his team
has laid in place, from a contracting perspective what they are
doing with, you know, bundling availabilities or materiel
procurement plans and things of that nature to continue to
improve on these efforts.
So those are kind of the near-term things that we need to
do and need to get after, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Here is what I would like to do, and I will
take this up with our committee members, is that I would like
to have a specific plan for the next 5 years on each of those,
on the government yards, the public yards, as to what you need
to carry out that planning. And then I would like to have a
report back.
Well, we will call you back within the next 6 months to get
a report, but we are going to write in the NDAA certain
timeframes in which we expect you to achieve goals that will
put in place the SIOPs for the public yards.
So we are going to work together with--our staff will work
with you over the next month as we prepare, and it is going to
be step by step, and a date associated with each step and the
money that is necessary to carry out those steps. Does that fit
with what you--can you carry that out? Can you do that?
Admiral Galinis. Absolutely. Yes, sir. We are ready to
provide that. We can have that for you. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good.
I am going to let my--I am going to end my questions there.
I would hope one of our members takes up the public yards--
excuse me, the private yards, and Admiral Ver Hage's work on
that.
Joe, it is your turn, Joe Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And for Admiral Galinis, as you indicated--and this is in
line with what the chairman just mentioned--the stability of
the Nation's--of the Navy's maintenance industrial base is an
important consideration in the context of great power
competition. Commercial providers that support the Navy
typically require special skills, facilities, and
certifications, which limit the ability of the base work at a
new commercial provider on a short notice.
How would you assess the industry's ability to handle
fluctuations in work and accommodate future modernization
efforts?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. Let me--I just want to make sure
I understand the question. This was private industry's ability
to handle----
Mr. Wilson. Yes.
Admiral Galinis [continuing]. Future work.
Mr. Wilson. Yes.
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wilson. With the stability that you mentioned, so----
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. Okay. I would say right now, you
know, I think the shipyards that we have are able to handle the
work that we currently have. One of the ongoing discussions I
will say that we are having right now is as we, you know,
potentially look to possibly grow the fleet, what additional
capability or capacity might we need to bring online? Okay.
And so, you know, when I think through that on the private
sector side--and I will ask Admiral Ver Hage to provide his
comments on this--but, you know, where can we bring on
additional capacity, okay? You know, we have seen examples of
that on the west coast as of late, where we have had, you know,
a couple of new shipyards come into play. We have seen that in
Pearl Harbor, where we had one ship repair provider, you know,
leave the island, and a couple of other companies step up and
come into that.
There are also a number of smaller shipyards out there that
I don't think we have fully utilized. So, there is some of that
capacity that is out there.
The other part of this is some of the smaller companies
that really support these larger ship repair yards--so these
are the subcontractors that provide very specific services,
whether they be mechanical or electrical, or even support
services in terms of, you know, things like staging and coding
applications, things of that nature.
So that is a part of industry that we really need to
continue to focus on, and we will continue to look at that.
Another element of this would be, you know, opportunities
for CAPEX [capital expenditure]. And I think that is something
we need to continue to look at for some of our private
industries. I will tell you, on the current contracting
strategy and fixed price, you know, frankly, that is probably
more difficult for industry to find CAPEX money to provide
there.
And with that, I will stop, sir, and ask Admiral Ver Hage
if he has any additional comments, sir.
Admiral Ver Hage. Congressman Wilson, thank you for that
question, sir. I do agree we are headed in the right direction.
There is more work to do, and both industry and the Navy need
to do more. I do think we are heading on the right trajectory,
as you said.
Two parts kind of would be my answer to this. One is we
need to maximize our productivity for each day that a ship is
in the yard. So, we need to do better with the capacity that we
have, and both industry and the government--Navy--has a part in
that. And so things like awarding earlier to allow better
planning, speeding our decision-making whenever there is growth
or new work, you know, providing all of the long lead material
ahead of time, those are all things that the government is
doing collaboratively with industry.
On the industry side, they are focused on schedule
management, kind of investing in their trades, and exploring
ways to expand capacity. I think the second piece on expanding
capacity, I would like to see a CAPEX-like approach, things
focused on training, things focused on, maybe, dredging or
expanding dry dock capacity. Those things will give us some
flexibility and surge capacity, you know, both during kind of
normal operations and more kind of emergency situations.
So great partnership ongoing right now with Hampton Roads
Maritime Consortium. It is the State, the Federal, the local,
Old Dominion University, all of us working together on how best
to position our collective ship repair base for long-term
success.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. A couple of things
come to mind from that discussion, and thank you for raising
that set of issues, Mr. Wilson.
You talked about capitalization. There is a small shipyard
program in the MARAD [Maritime Administration] over in the T&I
[Transportation and Infrastructure] Committee. We need to look
at that specifically. I know that the old program at Mare
Island in San Francisco Bay, they have a very large dry dock
that is not operable right now, but with a certain amount of
capital expenditure, they could be, and then they could bid for
the repair of naval ships.
I know that is not unique. I know that is repeated around
the Nation. And so, as we look at this in a holistic way, we
need to also bring MARAD into it, so that the privately owned
docks, not just the big ones that we know so much about, but
some of the others that are out there that can take on some of
the smaller jobs, could be made available to the Navy,
providing more competition and perhaps, hopefully, better
readiness.
Admiral Ver Hage, we would like to work with you on that.
Any suggestions you have, we can take that over to--Salud
Carbajal is the chairman of that subcommittee. We will work
with him.
Here is the gavel order for the next three people--Golden,
Scott, Luria. So, Mr. Golden, your turn.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi.
I am going to ask Vice Admiral Galinis a question here.
Admiral, the Congress, as you are aware, is having a
conversation about investing in critical infrastructure for the
entire Nation, not just, you know, from a DOD [Department of
Defense] perspective and a national security perspective, but
across the board our Nation's infrastructure.
Looking at the Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Plan, I know it is 20 years, about a $21 billion effort to
recapitalize the public shipyards. Do you have an estimate--
does the Navy have an estimate--for what type of investment is
necessary for the private yards as well in order to best meet
the needs of the Navy's maintenance schedule?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. We
do, and, you know, we have been working with a couple of
private yards, and where we would potentially make some of that
investment there are things such as, you know, potential, I
will say, dredging projects that would help in one port, you
know, the addition of maybe a ship lift system to better
utilize the capacity within the shipyard may be another
project. Okay?
I think, as Admiral Ver Hage, you know, talked about, the
development of the workforce is always, you know, high on my
list anyway in terms of, you know, ensuring that we have a
well-qualified and trained workforce. So those are a couple of,
I will say, projects, you know, that we have, kind of shovel-
ready-type efforts if you will.
You know, so there is some of that out there, and, you
know, we certainly have--we get a lot of input from industry on
this as well, and, you know, if that opportunity were to
present itself, sir, I feel pretty confident we can provide a
pretty good detailed list, you know, in relatively short order.
Over.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Admiral. And, you know, I hope the
chairman would be interested in looking at some of those
numbers as well. I mean, there is no doubt that this is
critical infrastructure, and also no doubt that it would be a
big help to the Navy and important to our national security.
But, you know, that work needs to be done. If we are able to
accelerate it, I am sure that is also going to be supporting
some good jobs and developing, as you said, Admiral, important
skills, which we need in general in our shipbuilding workforce.
I think it is something worth looking at in the context of
the American Jobs Plan, Chairman Garamendi. I don't know what
the actual cost would be, but certainly very important.
While we are talking about it, what other ways do you see
public-private shipyard partnerships being able to help the
Navy speed up the effort to get a reduction in the schedule
backlog and maintenance delays going forward?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. So, you know, one of the things
we are working right now, and the example, we have a couple of
submarines, as you know, in one of our private-sector
shipyards, and we are working closely with them to provide
some, you know, lessons learned from how we finish 688 [SSN
688, Los Angeles-class] submarines and how we certify the
submarines for sea.
We are working with them on SUBSAFE [submarine safety
standard] qualifications. You know, we have also started a
partnership with the yards on welding and NDT [non-destructive
testing] processes, okay, which are key to any ship repair or
new-construction effort as you well know. So those are a couple
of, you know, kind of specific things that we are working with
them on.
You know, and I will go back on the--you know, back on the
workforce, if I could, for just one second, and, you know,
Admiral Ver Hage mentioned the effort ongoing down in Hampton
Roads, but, you know, we are seeing in the new-construction
world every new-construction shipyard really does have I will
say a pretty good apprentice program. And we need to kind of
leverage some of the work that has been done, you know, up in
the northeast there or on the gulf coast or, you know, there is
good apprenticeship programs out there.
We have got good apprenticeship programs in our public
shipyards as well, teaming with community colleges, as I
mentioned during our last discussion back in March. But I
think, you know, being able to kind of expand that more into
the private sector, and not just the private repair yards but
even down to some of those subcontractors that I mentioned, to
kind of work in that area as well. So I would offer that as
another we could certainly, you know, kind of advance the
partnership a little bit. Over.
Mr. Golden. I see I am out of time, Chairman.
I appreciate that last bit there, Admiral, and I will let
you know I am actually working right now with Bath Iron Works
in Maine, and our community college system in Maine, to get
some mobile welding opportunities out there to, you know,
apprenticeship-style programs, so we can get even more people
trained up quickly to hire at that yard, which I know you are
familiar with.
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Golden. The program
that you are working with in Maine, could you please develop
that information, get it to the committee? And we may want to--
we do want to spread that kind of activity around, so that--you
know, Maine is good, but there are other places that need to
have the wisdom of the far northeast.
Thank you.
Mr. Golden. I would be more than happy to share that.
Mr. Garamendi. One of the things that we are going to need
to do here, as this hearing continues, is to circle back. Our
committee schedule is full, the formal committee's. I am, after
just 36 minutes of this hearing, of the opinion that I would
need to pull together an informal roundtable with the private--
with the admirals, the private shipyard--the government
shipyards, and the private shipyards, to discuss the good and
the bad and what needs to be done. We really need to hear from
the private companies, the issues they have with the Navy and
what they need.
The infrastructure issue that you raised, Mr. Golden, is a
fascinating one, to include in the infrastructure bill
shipyards. We have certainly talked about dredging, but I don't
believe we talked specifically about funding not only the
military but the private shipyards.
Very good. Okay. Our next witness or next presenter is
Austin Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Admirals, I am landlocked here in south Georgia, but I
represent Robins Air Force Base. And one of the key things to
us as we talk about the air logistics complex is that the Air
Force has been very public about the fact that they cannot
operate with any less than three depots, and that obviously
gives some comfort to the contractors around the base and
industry that builds up around the base, that the base is going
to continue to be there in the future.
Could the Navy survive with less than four--the four
shipyards that you currently have?
Admiral Galinis. We could not survive with less than four.
No, sir. I will tell you that. You know, in fact, one of the
efforts that we are going through right now is actually to
expand the productive capacity of our yards. I mean, as you
know, sir, back, you know, in the late part of the last
century, in the 1990s, we had eight public shipyards in
operation, and we necked down to four. We absolutely can go no
lower. No, sir.
Mr. Scott. Admiral, that is the point that I was about to
make is that in 1996 and 1997 we closed 50 percent of the
public shipyards that our Nation depended on for our naval
operations, which is obviously probably the most important
aspect of our national security.
And, you know, I think it would be worth the Navy
considering making a very public statement, as the Air Force
has, that the United States Navy has a position that there will
be no less than four public shipyards. And I would encourage
you to consider that, just as the Air Force has made it clear
that there will be no less than three depots. I think it would
certainly help you as time goes on with regard to the people
wanting to build around the bases with infrastructure that
supports you and other things.
So have you--you talked about on five and six about best
practices and improving planning. As I said, I spent more time
with the Air Force than the Navy, but do you meet with your
colleagues in the Air Force at the senior level to collaborate
about best practices, and if you have been able to share across
the different branches those best practices?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. I can't say I have personally
met with folks in the Air Force on this. You know, kind of what
we do in the shipyards and in ship repair, you know, there are
opportunities occasionally to get together with other services,
but I can't say that I have specifically talked to them about
what we are doing.
But let me turn this over to Admiral Markle, and I think he
can give you a little bit better answer here, sir.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Admiral Markle. Good afternoon, sir. Appreciate the
question and the opportunity to talk about our partnerships
with our sister services.
So the Department of Defense as a whole brings us all
together across the services, and in particular the depot
maintenance community, to share our lessons learned, our
struggles, our challenges, which, as you can imagine, are
similar to one another and talk about how it is that we are
navigating those particular areas as we move forward.
We do that not only with--the depots are different, but
they even at times have different funding. Some may need
working capital, some are missing funding, but they all share
the same thing in that they see challenges with development of
the workforce, the partnerships with the private sector, the
maintenance of their facilities, et cetera. And we all learn
from one another in those forums of what we are doing to impact
work on those individual pieces. Like we have shared our SIOP
discussion with other services as well. Over.
Mr. Scott. Sure. And I know that, you know, there is a lot
of difference in a ship and an airplane. But when it comes to
the software and some of the other types of onboard systems if
you will, there is a program in Georgia called Project Synergy
that is a collaboration between the private sector and the
public sector in software development. And that would be one
that I would suggest might be worth taking a look at.
I know it is different from a construction standpoint, but
some of the software development and other things, I do think
there are some opportunities there.
One other thing--well, I am down to 10 seconds. Let me
thank you for your time. And if we have another round of
questions, I will ask those questions then. But I yield the 5
seconds, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Scott. We will almost
certainly have a second round of questions.
We now have Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Admiral Galinis, in a March 2021 Congressional Budget
Office report, the CBO compares the class maintenance plan
expectation of days in the shipyard and days of labor to the
scheduled and actual amounts for the extended dry-docking
selected restricted availability, or EDSRA, the first five
Virginia-class submarines, and on page 12 of the report shows
that the class maintenance plan for the EDSRA should have been
450 days and 203,000 labor days.
However, the scheduled days for four of these five
availabilities far exceeds the class plan. And, furthermore,
the actual days it took to complete these availabilities
exceeds the class plan by an average of nearly 70 percent
across the five availabilities, which resulted in a loss of
1,552 days of operational time.
And over the 9-year period when these availabilities
occurred--so the first five Virginia-class submarines--the Navy
lost 4\1/4\years of operational availability of the submarines.
Then, in May of 2019, the Navy changed the Virginia-class
maintenance plan to increase the duration of the EDSRA from 450
to 590 days, which was a 31 percent increase, even though
historically at that point these EDSRAs have been taking about
760 days. And, you know, additionally, the Virginia-class
submarine, its design was expected to have 22 percent fewer
days of labor on average than the Los Angeles-class, yet the
data described in the CBO report shows that the actual labor
days were 43 percent higher.
I was curious, what organization developed the Virginia-
class maintenance plan?
Admiral Galinis. Yes. So, ma'am, thanks. That is a great
question, and I tell you, it is something that we have had a
lot of discussion on within our team here, because it is--you
know, you spoke specifically very eloquently about the
Virginia-class submarines that we are--what we are seeing, you
know, similar trends on the 688s [Los Angeles class] where we
are doing a lot more work.
Mrs. Luria. Yes. So, Admiral, I hate to cut you off, but I
have limited time for my questions, and I just wanted to get
through a few separate parts of it.
Admiral Galinis. Sure. Yeah. So, it is our submarine
maintenance and engineering team that does that. They are
located up at Portsmouth New Hampshire shipyard.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And so why would you assess that the
class maintenance plan was so far off from the actual time and
mandates it took to do the maintenance when it was actually
executed?
Admiral Galinis. At a very high level, what we are seeing
is, you know, replacements and system repair work is required
inside of the planned service life of that particular component
or system, and then we couple that with some challenges,
materiel challenges in getting parts, and whatnot, for the
submarines. So, it is really systems not lasting to their
service life, and then spare parts.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, Admiral, you know, when I look at
this kind of data, what it says to me is that the Navy hasn't
accurately estimated the maintenance requirements. And it is
one of the many reasons that I think the Navy has a credibility
problem when you come to us.
And, you know, you combine that with grossly underestimated
cost estimates for new construction and timelines for project
completion, you know, I think misplaced faith in new
technologies that aren't fully developed, and then an inability
to deliver promised capabilities.
I wanted to shift to a statement you made about submarines
in your remarks. So you said that Portsmouth Naval Shipyard
undocked the USS California, SSN 781, ahead of schedule, and
completed its follow-on steaming program milestones 5 days
early.
Is this the same way of saying that the availability
finished early, or does this mean something else?
Admiral Galinis. No, ma'am. So, to be specific on that, you
know, last June we reset--for all availabilities that were in
execution, we reset the completion dates because of the
pandemic.
On California specifically--and this is through targeted
use of overtime, the use of the reserve, the SURGEMAIN [Surge
Maintenance] force that we have, and just really the work by
the shipyard--we were able to actually beat the schedule that
we set for ourselves last June. So, you know, that early
undocking and the early delivery was really to the reprogrammed
schedule.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I understand the impacts of COVID. So
with my colleagues, we have been discussing the size of the
fleet that we need in the future. And if the assumptions that
we use in the analysis in making those decisions, such as the
time required in maintenance, are not correct, then the size of
the fleet that we determine we need can also not be correct.
And as we start to build the new Columbia class and the
Constellation class, you know, I hope that the Navy has plans
in place to be able to better estimate the maintenance
requirements for these new classes.
Admiral Galinis. Yes, ma'am. In fact, that is one of the
efforts that we are working on right now is there is a--I will
say a new avail [availability] duration model for the public
sector availabilities that we are doing. We just finished that
work last month. I talked last time about the 15-year public
sector maintenance plan. That model, that availability duration
model, is foundational to that plan.
We are just coming through some final testing and
validation of that model, but I think that will give us a much
better and a more accurate picture of the duration of these
availabilities.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Admiral. I look forward to learning
more about that.
And I know my time has expired, but I just wanted to
highlight that what I see in this data is that maintenance
delays are significantly impacting the operational availability
of our ships and submarines. And like many have said today, the
investments in the public and private shipyards and in that
workforce actually increase the effective size of the fleet.
So investment is needed today and not 20 years from now. So
thank you, and I yield back.
Admiral Galinis. Absolutely agree. Yes, ma'am.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mrs. Luria.
We are going to do a second round of questions, and you can
certainly expand on that point, which is a very, very good one.
Mr. Kilmer, welcome. Delighted to have you, and what
exactly do you represent in Washington?
Mr. Kilmer. I represent the Sixth District, which includes
Naval Base Kitsap, Puget Sound Naval Shipyard. And thank you,
Chairman, for inviting me to sit in. I appreciate it.
And, Admiral Markle, it is good to see you. We miss you out
in Kitsap.
As a former member of this committee, too, it is always
good to be back.
Admiral Galinis, let me start by just saying thanks. It was
good to see you out at Puget just a couple of weeks ago. I am
relieved to see the Navy recognize the need to update and
modernize their shipyards through the SIOP. I am concerned,
though, that given the 20-year project life span of the SIOP
that the $21 billion needed to complete these upgrades may be,
at one point or another, allocated to other priorities.
I guess I am less concerned about SIOP being crowded out by
other forecasted priorities, like the Ford-class carriers or
Columbia- and Virginia-class subs, which I support. I guess I
am more concerned about unforeseen budgetary priorities that
could arise over the next 20 years. Specifically, I am worried
about the impacts of things like natural disasters, which we
have seen more frequent and severe hurricanes and other
catastrophic events like earthquakes.
Even within the past few years, we have seen natural
disasters impacting the Navy's planned budgetary spending. The
funding required to repair damages from the earthquake at China
Lake and the impacts of Hurricane Sally in the Pensacola area
are two prime examples. I know those disasters alone have cost
the Navy upwards of a billion dollars, and that spending has
cut into other planned priorities.
So my concern is that unforeseen spending, however
necessary, could delay the SIOP, and that has--as we have
discussed over the course of the last 50 minutes, that could
have disastrous consequences for the Navy's ability to respond
to the threats of the present and the future.
So, one, I would love to hear your guarantee that the Navy
will continue to prioritize the SIOP even as future spending
needs--expected and unexpected--arise. But what can Congress do
to maintain focus on SIOP, to invest in the much-needed
upgrades at our public shipyards? If money is not allocated to
backfill unforeseen spending, what is the Navy's strategy to
prevent unexpected missions from drawing funding away and
resources away from the SIOP?
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. Congressman Kilmer, good to see you
again, sir, and thanks for your time when we were up in Puget
there a couple weeks ago.
You know, the budget always gets a vote. I think the way I
would answer your question, I would go back to the request that
Chairman Garamendi, you know, asked initially when we opened
this is--is kind of that 5-year plan, and for us to kind of lay
out, you know, I will say, in a fair amount of detail what our
plan is, and we have that.
And, you know, I will just tell you, within the last, you
know, month, 6 weeks or so, we now have the full program office
in place, and they have been really kind of getting after the
acquisition strategy and the details of the plan that the
chairman asked for.
But I will also kind of ask Admiral Markle to provide his
comments on this as well, sir.
Admiral Markle. Hey, Congressman. Great to see you again.
Absolutely look back fondly on our time together up in the
PACNORWEST [Pacific Northwest].
I will kind of answer with the entry into the discussion of
greatly appreciate your support then, continue to appreciate
your support now of both the PACNORWEST and broader on the
committees that you serve on. It truly is--one thing you can do
is continued advocacy and support of us, always help when we
have our congressionals behind us on what we need in order to
be successful, whether that is through legislation or whether
that is through, you know, advocating for it in the various
ways that you engage across the spectrum.
So I will tell you that, just simplistically, just to build
upon the admiral's comments, not only do we owe you a plan, and
a discussion of the plan, we owe that to the broader Navy, and
then from there, obviously, looking for your support as we move
out on it.
Mr. Kilmer. Let me ask quickly, I know even today we have
heard some discussion around potentially accelerating the work.
You know, obviously, moving things left reduced the risk of
things getting crowded out. I also know it is a logistical
challenge. This is a heck of a game of Jenga, because you are
trying to modernize the shipyards while they still have to
work.
If your evaluation determines that aspects of SIOP can be
accelerated, do you expect additional funding will be needed?
Admiral Markle. So as you look at the potential for
acceleration, there is obviously two very large constraints
that would constrain that. And those are funding and those are
the ability to accelerate those and integrate them with the
ongoing maintenance, ensuring that we could meet our mission.
Opportunities certainly can exist as we continue to study
SIOP and perform our analysis on those mega-projects. Clearly,
we are focused on the docks up front. You can see that in the
previous President's budget, and you will likely see further
commitment to that. But as we look to the broader optimization
piece and those things that support that, those are certainly
areas of opportunity for us to accelerate integrating with
overall mission execution. Over.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. One of the reasons that I am driving so hard
for a 5-year, what are we going to do next year and the year
after that and the next 3 years beyond is--I will give you an
example. Last week, several billion dollars was returned to the
Department of Defense for military construction programs.
To my knowledge, none of that will be available for this
particular purpose, because none of the programs that we have
been talking about, none of the activities we have been talking
about here, are yet in the military construction, MILCON,
program, they're not programmed.
So I am going to drive very hard--Admiral Galinis, you know
this--for detail for the next 5 years, so that we can every
year know what you need, and then, Mr. Kilmer, we become the
problem, not the Navy. And so we can, you know, begin to
discipline ourselves.
Okay. I want to go to a piece here that we have talked
about, and that is that the repair of a ship when it arrives at
the dock--is there satisfactory and sufficient information on
what needs to be done on that ship? Some call this analytics,
data analytics. I call it big data. But it seems to me that we
now have the necessary tools to have a much better
understanding of what a ship will need when it gets to the
dock, long before it arrives, so that the parts and pieces and
spares and drive shafts and other equipment will be there when
the ship arrives rather than--and this takes us to the delay
that--the delays that Mrs. Luria talked about.
It seems as though most of those delays are caused by,
``Gee, we didn't know we needed this piece until the ship
arrived.''
So, Admirals, whichever one of you wants to take it, make
me really happy and tell me that you are doing data analytics,
that you are getting ahead of it, that you are data mining, and
that when that ship arrives, you know 99 percent of what will
be needed when it gets to the dock. Admiral----
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Galinis, do you want to start?
Admiral Galinis. I will start, and then I will turn it over
to my colleagues here. But I would tell you the answer is yes,
we are using data analytics in both the public and the private
sector side. You know, foundationally, it all starts with the
class maintenance plan. And as Congresswoman Luria pointed out,
you know, in some cases, you know, we have got work to do on
the class maintenance plan.
The second part of this is the assessments that we do and
the tests that we do on the ships and the submarines before we
get them into the yard to get a better understanding of the
condition of the ship. And one of the things that we have done
over the last couple of years is we have driven more discipline
into that process. There is a clear understanding by the fleet
that that needs to be done, that they need to allocate the time
for the ship or the submarine to be able to do those tests, and
so that is an important piece.
So with that, I will turn it over to Admiral Ver Hage, and
he can talk a little bit on the private sector side, and then
Admiral Markle.
Admiral Ver Hage. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question. Congresswoman Luria came over to our war room and
spent--very graciously spent 2 hours with us and got to see I
think in person kind of our passion for data and for analytics
and using it to drive or to inform our thinking and, more
importantly, drive our actions.
And we have expanded our partnership on that effort to
include with the Office of Naval Research, a number of
universities, and of course already had Center for Naval
Analyses and Naval Surface Warfare Center Corona, who leads our
Navy's analytics for NAVSEA.
One quick vignette, which I think hopefully will give you
confidence. So just this week, we had a ship that was getting
ready for about a 60-day mission, and she had a problem with
one of her gas turbine engines or gas turbine generator. We
were able to take the data off that ship, send it to our in-
service engineering agent in Naval Surface Warfare Center
[NSWC] Philly, Philadelphia. They analyzed the data and
provided that information back to our regional maintenance
center. It allowed us to target the technicians we needed to
put on that ship to get--to make the effective repairs.
And so what would have taken quite a long time was--we were
able to speed that up and compress it because of the use of
that--what we call ICAS [Integrated Condition Assessment
System] data and the digital twin that we had in Philadelphia.
So that is a combined initiative with NAVSEA 05--our chief
engineer--our warfare centers, and SEA 21 [Director for Surface
Ship Maintenance, Modernization and Sustainment], and our RMC
[regional maintenance center]. So that is a good example.
We have got more to do, but that is a good example where we
are using data to inform our thinking and get more operational
availability out of our platform. So that ship is sailing today
for the Mediterranean with repairs completed quicker than they
otherwise would have because of data. Over.
Admiral Markle. Yes, sir. Building upon that, and not
repeating anything that has been said, just a couple of
thoughts. We talked about the Performance to Plan initiative
that we have that takes the totality of the data that we have,
gets some data scientists involved, provides us the analytics
to both--to what has been discussed, take a look at how better
to project what it is that we need in order to estimate cost
and schedule for the availability.
It provides us the focus areas that we need to work on,
down to the individual levels. It provides us a better
understanding of what components need to be repaired when. And
then things like Admiral Ver Hage talked about, looking at
things like vibration analysis that gives us indications of
what we need to work on and when.
And then just to take a slightly different look at what
large data can do for us, doing things such as 3D scanning of
and modeling of the hulls themselves provides us an opportunity
to help our folks train on realistic conditions of what the
specific configurations of the ship are and provides us a
better planning tool such that we can write more accurate paper
ahead of the availability to prepare for those upcoming
assessments. Over.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much. We will be following
this data trail very, very closely, and, frankly, demanding
that you not only do what you are doing but you do more of what
you are presently doing.
With regard to the gavel order: Wilson, Golden, Scott. Mr.
Wilson, you are up.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi.
And, Admirals, I am particularly impressed by your
presentations, and I also want you to be aware that I am a very
grateful and proud Navy dad. I have a son who is an orthopedic
surgeon in the Navy, and it just is inspiring to me to see the
leadership of our Navy, and I look forward to joining with
Chairman Garamendi to work with you.
And, Admiral Ver Hage, what are you doing to prepare for
the maintenance requirements of a growing and modernizing
fleet? Does the $21 billion Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Plan account for forecasted maintenance needs for
an expanded fleet?
Admiral Ver Hage. Congressman Wilson, thank you for that
question. Two strategies for that. One is, as we talked a
little bit earlier, make the maximum use of the capacity that
we have today. And there are improvements needed on both the
government side and industry side to get to where we want to
be.
One of the best things to do is to give industry a stable
and predictable demand signal. And when they have that, then
they can make wise investment choices to improve their
performance.
We are awarding our contracts earlier than we used to. As
we speak, our average days prior to the start of the avail that
we have ordered--we have awarded our contracts this year is 123
days prior, which is I think a magnificent improvement.
We are also adding a second ship sometimes, which we call a
horizontal bundle, and that is to provide certainty to the
company that wins that second ship, two in a row, but also
allows others that didn't win that contract some certainty as
well to inform their planning.
So better demand, level loading our ports, making better
use of the capacity we have, and we each have a part. And then
we talked earlier about CAPEX-like or the MARAD grant, which I
have read up on. You know, those types of things I think could
be useful as we work to, you know, support properly a larger
fleet.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much for that insight.
And, Admiral Markle, a 2019 GAO report found that since
2014 Navy ships spent more than 33,700 more days in maintenance
than expected as a result of insufficient shipyard capacity and
a shortage of skilled workers. What metrics does the Navy use
to measure progress toward growing more shipyard capacity?
Admiral Markle. Yes, sir. Appreciate the comment and
appreciate the opportunity to discuss our need to balance the
workload, the workforce, and the partnering that obviously is
necessary there with the private sector.
So we often look to Admiral Ver Hage to talk about the
private sector, and of course, as I execute my workload, and we
look to find the right levers to execute it, clearly, there is
a partnership to be had in the individual ports with the
private sector, whether that is on larger avails, as Admiral
Galinis discussed earlier in contracting them out to the
Electric Boats and Newport News Shipbuildings of the world, or
it is the discrete contracting that I do for preservation work
and other items on the major availabilities utilizing some of
the same private partners that Admiral Ver Hage has.
As we look to what Admiral Galinis talked about with our
15-year maintenance plan, it is in fact just that: taking a
look at historical data, taking a look at the demand signals of
the future and coming up with an articulation of both what we
need to do within the public sector and what we need to develop
within the private sector with our partners in order to execute
that workload.
Mr. Wilson. And, finally, for Admiral Galinis, how has the
Navy been performing with respect to reducing the idle time for
submarines?
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. I will tell you, Congressman, we
still have work to do in that area, frankly. Okay? While we are
seeing a downward trend in the days of maintenance delay, we
really have not put much of a dent into the idle time, which
is--as you well know, you know, is the time from the
certification expiration date of the submarine before it enters
the maintenance availability.
So, again, the throughput of the submarines through their
maintenance period needs to improve. This gets back in a little
bit to Congresswoman Luria's comments about the class
maintenance plan and the work that we are doing being so much
higher than what is in the class maintenance plan, sir.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
And I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
I believe it is Mr. Golden. You are next.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi.
You know, I would say quickly, you are asking for details
on apprenticeships and training that goes on in the northeast,
and I can speak to Maine, and my staff will be following up
with yours and the subcommittee's [staff] on some details.
But as Bath Iron Works, specifically, in Maine, is working
to grow their workforce, they are building the destroyers, as
you know, sir. They are looking at accelerated training
programs to bring in new unskilled workers, get them the skills
they need to get a foot inside the yard. The union is really
working with the company to look at the continued ongoing
training opportunity from there.
But there is also, you know, a deeper relationship as well,
with Maine Maritime Academy, where, you know, a true, more
traditional apprenticeship program as well, which is important,
I think, when you are looking at the career opportunity for
young men and women wanting to get into the shipbuilding trade.
But, Admiral Galinis, I wanted to ask--one thing that we
have seen at Bath Iron Works, certainly other private yards,
with fluctuations where we see increases in--decreases in the
shipyard workflow schedule can lead to issues, which I know you
are familiar with the term ``the bathtub effect'' where we end
up with, you know, an older workforce that is, you know,
looking to retire, moving on, and then a very young workforce
that is--as the yard accelerates and is growing, and they are
lacking that kind of middle experience group. It can cause a
lot of problems, and, you know, I think certainly a big concern
at a lot of private yards.
Are you seeing similar outcomes and effects at public
shipyards with their workforce? And, if so, do you have any
recommendations on how to utilize training and other methods to
maintain a skilled workforce at our public shipyards?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. We are seeing that. And I will
ask Admiral Markle to talk about the training strategy that he
has put in place in the public shipyards. But we are seeing
that.
And if you look at the demographics in the public
shipyards, and go back, you know, I will say 10 years or so,
you know, the average experience of our mechanics in the yards
at that point was in the 14- to 15-year point, okay? If you
looked at that same metric today, it is down to about 7 to 8
years. So, you know, you kind of see that delta in the
experience, okay, of the trade.
So we are absolutely seeing that, and I will tell you, from
my experience, having worked with both the public and the
private sector side, that is a common trait as you indicated,
sir, across, you know, both public and private yards, and I
would say both in repair as well as new construction.
And so I will ask Admiral Markle to kind of talk about what
he is doing in training on the public side.
Admiral Markle. Yes, sir. Thank you. And I appreciate the
question, Congressman. So just like you talked about, so, it is
providing the opportunities for the future artisans to enter
the workforce and provide them growth opportunities, whether
that is through a high school work-study program where you
provide some level of initial understanding and opportunity for
the folks that enter the shipyard and understand what the
trades are, further developing it into an apprenticeship
program, to your point partnering with the local community
college that can ultimately provide them, alongside their trade
skills, the college skills necessary to work on both their
associate's degree when they graduate from the apprentice
program and then leveraging to build upon that later on as they
develop into baccalaureate and wherever they may go.
To the question on training, of course, you know, the
apprenticeship program is wonderful, and it is a great
opportunity to develop someone into a journeyman. But, of
course, everyone needs work along the way in order to make sure
that their golf game stays the way they want it to be.
So, providing just-in-time training when needed in order to
continue the development of those folks, to make sure that
their experience level is where they need to be, and to perform
the way we expect them to be at the waterfront, is incredibly
important.
That same program, of course, is what we utilize to get
people faster [inaudible] and reduce our time to train folks by
upwards of--on average of 50 percent, and takes it from 1 to 2
years to getting people on the deck plate to 1 to 4 months.
Mr. Golden. Thank you to both of you for that. I think it
is helpful background for the committee. Appreciate it very
much.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Golden, I believe your time has expired.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Scott, you are next.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Excuse me. Mr. Scott, before you go, I am
going to go Scott, Luria. I noticed that Mr. Kahele was here
earlier. I don't know if he is still on. If he is still on, he
will come after you, Mr. Scott. Otherwise, it will be Mrs.
Luria. Go ahead, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And most of my
questions revolve around the $21 billion over 20 years, and
certainly $21 billion is a lot of money. But when it is spread
over 20 years, and over the course of the magnitude of the
shipyards that we have, you know, just the same questions that
other members had about, you know, the money ended up going to
other places, and whether or not it was going to be enough to
put us in the position we need to be to service the fleet.
So I will skip that and move to kind of a Russia/China-type
question if you will. Are our investments in our shipyards
keeping pace with what we are seeing from our peer competitors
in China and Russia? Or are they doing a better job of--with
their infrastructure for the maintenance of their fleets than
we are?
Admiral Galinis. Sir, I would have to tell you at this
point I think the yards in China are probably more advanced
than what we have in the U.S., at least certainly in the public
sector side right now.
Mr. Scott. How far ahead of us are they? And when did they
pass us?
Admiral Galinis. Well, they have long had much more
shipbuilding capacity than we have, just with the number of
shipyards. I don't have those numbers off the top of my head.
We can certainly provide those. But they have had a larger
number of shipyards than we have for some time now. I think
what you are seeing as of late is kind of an increased focus
on, you know, building navy platforms, a transitioning from
commercial shipbuilding into the military shipbuilding, sir.
Mr. Scott. Sure. And I suppose I could have prefaced that
that I was speaking more specifically on the military
shipbuilding. Just approximately, I mean, did they catch us on
the military side 5 years ago? Was it 10 years ago? When did--
--
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. Let me--I would have to go probably
do, you know--I mean, they have really--from my assessment,
really kind of in the last 5 to 10 years, they have really
turned the corner on their military shipbuilding. I don't know
that their processes and their capabilities, quite frankly, are
better than ours. In fact, I would say they are not. I think
what we do, inside our public shipyards, there is no other
group of shipyards in the world that maintains nuclear ships
like we do. Okay?
Mr. Scott. Yes.
Admiral Galinis. So we have a tremendous capability. What
we need to do is get better at how we use that capability.
Mr. Scott. Yes, sir.
Admiral Galinis. But I will turn it over to Admiral Markle.
Mr. Scott. They don't have any--I doubt they have anywhere
near the quality that we have. I do worry about their ability
to pump out quantity, and quantity, you know, at some point
becomes a quality in and of itself when you are in a fight.
I do--if I can mention something for you and for the
members. Admiral Faller the other day testified that Communist
China's money laundering is the number one source of illicit
funds for the transnational criminal organizations. It was the
first time that I had heard somebody at Admiral Faller's level
call it out publicly like that in a hearing.
And then General Townsend a week later called out China for
the illegal fishing off of the coast of Africa and the damage
that it was doing and the widespread hunger that it had the
potential to create inside of that continent, in several
countries in that continent, and the potential civil unrest.
You guys said that the China fight would be a naval fight.
I mean, what is your assessment of China's activity in the
Taiwan area and the illegal fishing?
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. Sir, I really appreciate the
question. I am not sure I am in a position to give you a real
good answer there. But we can certainly take a question and get
back with you on that one, sir.
Mr. Scott. Well, I know that wasn't the subject of the
meeting, but it is--I picked up very clearly that some
extremely high-ranking military leaders that I've very long
trusted are now speaking publicly about things that we used to
say behind closed doors. And I picked up on the G7 [Group of
Seven] coming together to effectively caution China on any
action against Taiwan.
I worry about our dependence on not just chips but other
things similar to what we would consider to be semiconductor or
an optical chip and dependence on companies in other countries
that manufacture those that we have to have in all of our
computer systems, whether it be an aircraft or a naval vessel.
With that, I yield the remainder of my time. Thank you for
what you all do.
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Scott.
I want to bring to your attention, and I think the other
committee members probably know it also, we have been working
on trying to energize the American shipbuilding industry using
the export of natural gas and petroleum products, but that
would be on American-built ships.
We do know that the American shipbuilding industry has
atrophied and basically given the commercial market to Japan,
Korea, and China. And in that, we have lost a great deal of our
capacity upon which the Navy would depend, not only for the
ongoing repair but for ships that we would need to get to 350
or even more.
So it is an issue that goes beyond just the naval ships. It
goes to the commercial ships. Similarly, the Jones Act plays
into this, and the ability of the shipyards.
My final point I guess for all of us, and, Admirals, for
your awareness and pushback to us, is that the shipyards are
going--the privately owned shipyards are going to need to be
upgraded, capital upgrades, particularly the smaller ones that
could provide additional services.
And I would like to have from you, Admiral Galinis, the
estimate of smaller private shipyards that you would intend to
contract with for certain kinds of repairs. I want to feed that
back into the issue that was raised earlier by one of our
colleagues about the infrastructure bill.
Okay. Mrs. Luria, it is your turn.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the first round, I
discussed the class maintenance plan for the Virginia-class
submarine, but I would like to shift to surface ships for the
second round. Many people use the term ``legacy platforms'' to
describe anything that they want to get rid of, and I found
that it is interesting today that people are using the term
``legacy platform'' for ships that are not even 10 years old,
like the LCS [littoral combat ship], the first four in the
class, and they are also applying it to the Ticonderoga-class
cruisers, which still have usable service life remaining.
I served as the XO [executive officer] on USS Anzio, so I
understand it costs more, and it is difficult to maintain these
ships. But global presence matters, even if the presence isn't
the latest shiny object. And divesting of these platforms today
will--their replacement is nothing more than a concept in the
future. I don't think it is prudent, and, as we know, both the
outgoing and incoming INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command]
commanders testified recently to the Senate that China could
make an offensive move on Taiwan in the next 6 years.
So it is curious to me why we would suggest getting rid of
these platforms without a replacement. So I think the Navy
needs to look at today, Battle Force 2025, before we can truly
talk about Battle Force 2045.
So just some information that I would like to know, Admiral
Galinis, if you could provide the committee--the amount of
funds over the FYDP [Future Years Defense Plan] that would be
required to maintain the 11 cruisers and the first 4 LCS that
the Navy is proposing to decommission in the Battle Force 2045.
Admiral Galinis. Okay. Yes, ma'am. We will take that
question, and we will get a more detailed answer than I can
provide you in this setting. But I understand the question, I
think it is a fair one, and we will get you that information.
Yes, ma'am.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Thank you. I look forward to that. And
next, sort of pivoting back to the CBO report that I discussed
during the first round of questions, it has a really
interesting chart in there where it compares workload versus
the workforce. So if you look back to when we had eight
nuclear-capable shipyards, the workforce exceeded the workload
capacity by about 10 percent, and then we reduced to four
nuclear shipyards and the workforce and workload were balanced
for about 5 years.
However, as we decommission conventional carriers, the
workload exceeds the workforce in every year. And in the CBO
report, it forecasts out that even with the full implementation
of the SIOP, that workload will exceed workforce capacity in 25
of the next 30 years. I think that is not even taking into
account the ships that we plan to build, the additional
submarines, and Battle Force 2045. It is clear that the public
shipyards will not be able to maintain the pace of that
maintenance.
So, Admiral Galinis, in your assessment, with such an
ambitious plan as Battle Force 2045, and the number of
submarines we plan to build, do you feel like it is time to
invest in another nuclear-capable shipyard?
Admiral Galinis. Yes, ma'am. I think that is a great
question. I will tell you, at this point--and it has to go back
to the 15-year maintenance plan that we are working on right
now. I will tell you that submarine maintenance is probably my
number one priority right now.
And how we execute that, especially as we get out into the
late 2020s and into the early 2030s, okay, when we start, you
know, we are going to--as you well know, you know, based on the
ship construction plan, we are going to go through a little bit
of a valley here over the next few years, but then it quickly
ramps up in the late 2020s and into the 2030s.
And our ability to be able to support that fleet and to--
you know, what we are doing right now with the SIOP effort, the
naval sustainment system work, to really kind of buy back that
productive capacity, and then lay over the 15-year plan to
determine, do we have the capacity within the public yards, and
then how much would we outsource to the private yards. That
would probably better inform that type of a discussion, and I
am happy to have that with you when we get that analysis
completed.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. And just--we have a minute
remaining, so I just wanted to point out that, you know, the
one thing I hear most frequently in my visits across the
waterfront here in Hampton Roads, you know, one-quarter of all
of the shipbuilding and repair in the country happens here, and
you have referenced the importance of the region for
maintaining the Navy readiness.
It is level loading. It is level loading of the port so
that there can be predictability, so that our partners in the
private shipyards can make the investment in their
infrastructure and their workforce.
And so I went and visited the Gettysburg and the Vicksburg
recently, and, you know, here we are, you know, it is shocking
when they have made investments in the work that is coming down
the pipeline to modernize the cruisers, yet all of a sudden a
plan comes out now with--it shows yet more unpredictability
that, you know, we might decommission 10 or 11 of these
cruisers.
And, you know, every time that happens, it is 600, 800,
maybe more workers across the waterfront who are laid off, and
those are skills that are difficult to replace. So, you know,
just making a point of what I am hearing the most from the
waterfront here and our private partners.
And I know my time has expired, so I will yield back.
Admiral Galinis. I would just say, ma'am, I appreciate that
comment, and I get the same thing when we interface with
industry. And as Admiral Ver Hage pointed out, you know, that
stable and predictable workload, I think we owe industry that
plan. So, thank you for those comments. I appreciate that.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mrs. Luria.
We are definitely going to have a roundtable with the
private shipyard owners to discuss a range of issues, some of
which have already been mentioned here. Certainly, the
scheduling is an issue, what kind of repairs need to be done,
all of those things.
And, Admirals, we will invite you to that. It will have to
be an informal hearing, just because of the scheduling.
I believe we now have Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks again to
you and your staff for the generosity of letting me
participate.
Admiral, I worry a bit--and maybe it is just after this
last year--I worry that the sands of the hourglass could run
out before we have had a chance to shore up the infrastructure
at our shipyards. You know, what we have learned over the past
year is that anything can happen, and it is certainly possible
that a natural disaster could strike one of the shipyards at
any moment and render it or a crucial portion of it unusable. I
touch wood every day that a seismic event doesn't happen here
in our neck of the woods.
So has the SIOP program office built any contingency plans
into the SIOP in the event that a natural disaster occurs? Or
would the program office need to kind of go back to the drawing
board and completely rework the plan? I realize we can't plan
for every possible scenario, but I am just curious to know what
level of preparation has been completed in case a shipyard
experiences an unexpected catastrophe.
Admiral Galinis. Yes, sir. No, I appreciate that question.
I think it is a fair one, you know, and it is especially
pertinent up in the northwest as you indicated. You know, I
think our near-term opportunities to accelerate, as I mentioned
earlier, are on the design and the planning piece. And, you
know, we have got to get that work done, and then, you know,
from there we can advance into the actual construction and
execution stage.
You know, that work is ongoing. The execution work, the
production work is ongoing, as you well know, up in Portsmouth.
They are well along. We have got some fairly significant
projects going on down in Norfolk right now. We are working
through the planning piece out in Pearl to be able to--you
know, to start, in the 2023 timeframe, the dry dock in Pearl,
the new dry dock out there.
And I will tell you we are going through right now, you
know, what happens in Dry Dock 6 up there in Puget and how that
planning piece comes out--plays out. So, you know, of the three
dry docks that we are actually building new, if you will, in
Portsmouth, Pearl, and Puget--you know, that is probably the
third in line at this point based on the current plan that we
have.
You know, if there is opportunities to accelerate that--
because I will tell you, as you mentioned, you know, there is
concern about the dry dock up there and the seismic, you know,
safety of it. And, you know, that happened because it was
designed and built prior to the current seismic requirements
that are in place in your part of the country, sir. Over.
Mr. Kilmer. I want to touch on one other subject. But
quickly, Admiral, I guess I was trying to get at, are there
contingency plans in place if there is a disaster or does the
SIOP program office just have to go back to the drawing board?
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. We have not----
Mr. Kilmer. And other--Puget or any place else.
Admiral Galinis. Right. Right. I mean, I can't say that is
part of our plan. We would have to--we would readjust. I liken
it to a, kind of a ship construction contract when we have a
major hurricane, for example. You know, and think about, you
know, Katrina hitting the gulf coast several years ago, and I
was involved in that, with our--you know, with our plan or, you
know, even like we kind of came through COVID this last year.
You mentioned the pandemic and how this year was unlike, you
know, anything we have experienced.
And, you know, frankly, it was the--you know, it was the
ingenuity, the resourcefulness of the workforce and the
leadership in the shipyards that really kind of kept the
shipyards open. As you know, we didn't close any of our
shipyards for a single day over the last year. You know, there
were--sometimes they were better than others, but the team kept
getting after it. And so we would take the same approach.
Mr. Kilmer. That is a good segue to the other thing I
wanted to ask. I think our public shipyards undertook a
herculean task of continuing to work. I think it was textbook
in terms of adapting in the face of a pandemic.
Having said that, obviously, we lost workdays. The Navy
lost approximately 66,000 workdays per month across the four
yards. I was encouraged to see the Reserve force step up to
fill that gap. At Puget and other public shipyards, as you
know, the Reserve mobilized over 1,300 Navy Reserve sailors or
Surge Maintenance.
I understand that many of them have been demobilized. Have
the COVID-induced backlogs been eliminated? And outside of
COVID, would the shipyards benefit from an increased employee
base?
Admiral Galinis. Yeah. I will turn it over to Admiral
Markle.
Admiral Markle. Hey, sir. Appreciate the discussion. So
particularly in--you know, having the opportunity to
acknowledge the absolutely fantastic support we got from our
Reserve force who obviously exist even in the landlocked port
of Georgia. Many folks from the entirety of the country came in
support of what we trained them to go do, and when we mobilized
they came to the fight.
So I would say that some of the discussion of what we had
as far as delays, those are already incurred. We have rolled
those into the schedules and adjusted for them. The SURGEMAIN
workforce was vitally important. As we saw the ebbs and flows
in COVID-positive rates throughout the country, they backfilled
and helped us stem the tide, maintaining a productive level of
workforce to preclude further delay.
So I would say that is how I would answer the question, and
that we have accounted for what we ultimately found ourselves
in in the early days of COVID, put in place the mitigations,
one of which you addressed in SURGEMAIN, and ultimately got
ourselves to a stable workload-workforce balance where we sit
right now.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Wilson, do you have another question? I am complete
with questions and prepared to close out.
Mr. Wilson. I yield back. But I, again, thank the
participants today. And what inspiring people that we have
serving our country. We appreciate it so much. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
Admiral Galinis. Thank you, sir, and we thank your son for
his service.
Mr. Wilson. A proud Navy doctor. We are really grateful to
the Navy family. So thank you.
Admiral Galinis. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. So I think we have completed the hearing
here. We have got some follow-ups that we have talked about
throughout the hearing today. Staff will be in touch with
Admiral Galinis, and, of course, Admiral Ver Hage and Admiral
Markle.
We want you to be able to do your job, and we want to be a
partner in getting that done. My sense of the Department of
Defense over the last decade, but maybe longer than that, is it
has neglected the maintenance across all services. We are going
service by service. It is now the Navy's turn today. And we
want you to have the resources you need to adequately maintain
all of the fleet.
And as has been said here, when you buy new ships or
submarines, that the maintenance requirements are built into
that issue at the very outset. That has not been the case all
too often. We will be pursuing all of that. There are other
things we will be talking about.
Admirals, we appreciate your testimony today. We look
forward to working with you. Our staff will be working--the
professional staff will be working with you on follow-up
questions.
If any of the members have specific questions, they can ask
directly or they can come to us and we will put those forward
going forward.
I want to thank the members for their participation. Mr.
Wilson, thank you for filling in here for Mr. Lamborn.
Generals, thank you--excuse me, Admirals, thank you so very
much for your participation today.
And with that, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:34 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 6, 2021

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 6, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 6, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI

Mr. Garamendi. In the National Defense Authorization Act for
FY2021, the House Armed Services Committee tasked the Department of
Defense (DOD) to report to Congress on the feasibility and advisability
of using automated manufacturing technologies to increase the supply of
suitable, mission-critical repair parts available to the Department of
Defense.
Vice Admiral William J. Galinis, you previously stated that the key
piece of repairing our ships and subs is availability of parts, whether
those are parts coming from the supply system, or depot level
repairable pool items. Being cognizant of the reporting requirement
that was due on March 1st, 2021, and your repair parts challenges, what
has the Navy learned in compiling the information required for this
report?
What tools does the Navy need to further leverage the manufacturing
innovations being made in this space and how are you reaching out to
the industrial base, specifically the OEMs, small businesses and non-
traditional defense contractors to signal that you need help with this
issue? Who have you reached out to so far in this process?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN
Mr. Bergman. As of 22 March 2021, we understand an additional
$300.5 million for the Department of Defense to address readiness
activities has not been released by the Office of the Secretary of
Defense. Have these funds been released to the Navy? When released, how
much of these funds will go towards the Navy Common Readiness Model''?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. Sustainment Modeling and the application of the Navy
Common Readiness Modeling (NCRM) is optimizing decision making and
sustainment investments, helping to reduce lifecycle and readiness
costs, put money where it's needed most and provide predictive insight
for the Warfighter to maintain readiness. Can you provide the Navy's
detailed roadmap and timeline of implementation for the NCRM across all
sea platforms and systems? When is full implementation of the NCRM
expected to be completed? Do you have appropriate funding in the FYDP
to complete this effort?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. Is the 20-year Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan
(SIOP) based on the needs of a peacetime Navy or a wartime Navy?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. In retrospect, was it a mistake to close (4) public
shipyards in the 1990s?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. Should the need arise to establish new public shipyards
like what happened after the start of World War II, does the Navy have
the authorities it needs to procure the land and build a modern
shipyard to private industry standards on a wartime footing? If not,
what laws or regulations would the Navy seek relief from?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. What is the optimal number of drydocks needed across the
(4) public shipyards for a wartime Navy whose ships may need to be
repaired from battle damage?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. How is ``super flooding'' dry docks to float submarines
they service in and out of the dock an efficient use of taxpayer
dollars given it damages electrical equipment that is not meant to be
submerged?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. When new classes of warships are built, why aren't there
dry docks at the public shipyards long enough to hold them in the event
they need to be repaired from battle damage shortly after
commissioning?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. What is the private industry standard for the age of dry
docks, shipyard production shop facilities, capital equipment, and
general shipyard facilities like buildings and warehouses? Is the
private industry standards for all of the above more optimal for a
wartime Navy?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. If the 6 percent minimum infrastructure investment
required of the Navy by law is only sufficient to prevent further
degradation in mission-essential facilities, what is the recommended
minimum infrastructure investment needed to put the U.S. Navy on a
wartime footing?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. Much has also been written about our ship repair
backlog, the sad case of the Los Angeles-class submarine Boise comes to
mind and the fact that the ship has spent over 10 percent of its
expected life waiting to be overhauled. Also, it is my understanding
that both our cruiser and destroyer modification plans are now years
behind schedules, forcing us to retire platforms before we had
originally planned. What is the Navy's plan to add repair capacity to
its industrial base and to set predictable schedules for commercial
repair yards to plan and execute?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Scott. In terms of preparing for wartime operations, how does
the U.S. Navy's (4) public shipyards compare to Russia's or Communist
China's public shipyards?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GOLDEN
Mr. Golden. As the VIRGINIA (VA) CLASS sustainment effort continues
to have issues with VA Class part supply shortages due to a limited
pool of suppliers and a lack of tracking data during earlier
maintenance availabilities: How is the Program Office leveraging its
relationships with public shipyards to mitigate supply shortage issues
moving forward? Are the VA Class supply shortage lessons learned being
collected by the Program Office and public shipyards to minimize
similar issues with procurement of the COLUMBIA class?
Admiral Galinis. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. Do you feel the $21 billion dollar estimate for the SIOP
is adequate to address the challenges identified here today and if
further funds were authorized, is the Navy prepared to allocate these
resources to meet established timelines?
Admiral Ver Hage. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Moore. In this subcommittee I have advocated for the need of an
OIB wide infrastructure optimization plan. What can be learned from the
success and shortcomings of the SIOP as we begin to explore how to best
address issues across the entire military depot and industrial
facilities ecosystem?
Admiral Ver Hage. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Moore. We have heard today about the wave of retirements
experienced amongst shipyard workers due to in part to furloughs and
work stoppages. Do you feel recent changes to hiring authorities in the
organic industrial base have given the flexibility needed to fill
critical vacancies at shipyards? How can this committee best help the
services where hiring challenges are concerned?
Admiral Ver Hage. [No answer was available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Moore. Do you feel the $21 billion dollar estimate for the SIOP
is adequate to address the challenges identified here today and if
further funds were authorized, is the Navy prepared to allocate these
resources to meet established timelines?
Admiral Markle. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. In this subcommittee I have advocated for the need of an
OIB wide infrastructure optimization plan. What can be learned from the
success and shortcomings of the SIOP as we begin to explore how to best
address issues across the entire military depot and industrial
facilities ecosystem?
Admiral Markle. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. We have heard today about the wave of retirements
experienced amongst shipyard workers due to in part to furloughs and
work stoppages. Do you feel recent changes to hiring authorities in the
organic industrial base have given the flexibility needed to fill
critical vacancies at shipyards? How can this committee best help the
services where hiring challenges are concerned?
Admiral Markle. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
