- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-68] NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-68]

NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES

AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES

IN THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 9, 2022

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-961              WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 DON BACON, Nebraska
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       JIM BANKS, Indiana
JASON CROW, Colorado                 LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Chair                            C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                PAT FALLON, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Paul Arcangeli, Staff Director
Mark Morehouse, Professional Staff Member
Forrest McConnell, Counsel
Brooke Alred, Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     3
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Aquilino, ADM John C., USN, Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command.     6
LaCamera, GEN Paul J., USA, Commander, United Nations Command;
Commander, United States-Republic of Korea Combined Forces
Command; and Commander, U.S. Forces Korea......................     7
Ratner, Hon. Ely S., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Indo-
Pacific Security Affairs, U.S. Department of Defense...........     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Aquilino, ADM John C.........................................    67
LaCamera, GEN Paul J.........................................   101
Ratner, Hon. Ely S...........................................    57

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Letter from Mr. Garamendi and Mr. Waltz......................   117
INDOPACOM clarification......................................   119

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Kahele...................................................   124
Mr. Khanna...................................................   124
Mrs. Luria...................................................   124
Mr. Moulton..................................................   123
Mr. Scott....................................................   123
Mr. Wittman..................................................   123

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Carbajal.................................................   135
Mr. Carl.....................................................   147
Mr. Courtney.................................................   128
Mr. Crow.....................................................   139
Mr. Gallagher................................................   137
Mr. Horsford.................................................   151
Ms. Jacobs...................................................   141
Mr. Kahele...................................................   146
Mr. Kelly....................................................   135
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   127
Mr. Langevin.................................................   127
Mr. Moore....................................................   149
Mrs. Murphy..................................................   150
Mr. Panetta..................................................   150
Mr. Scott....................................................   129
Ms. Speier...................................................   128
Ms. Strickland...............................................   147
Mr. Turner...................................................   127
Mr. Waltz....................................................   140
NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES AND U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN THE INDO-
PACIFIC REGION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 9, 2022.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith
(chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. I am going to go ahead and call the meeting
to order.
The full committee meets today on the national security
challenges and the U.S. military activities in the Indo-Pacific
region.
Three witnesses today: the Honorable Dr. Ely Ratner,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Indo-Pacific Affairs;
Admiral John Aquilino, the Commander for U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command, and General Paul LaCamera, the Commander for United
Nations Command/Combined Forces/U.S. Forces Korea.
I realize at yesterday's hearing I did not read our little
hybrid statement, which is very tempting, by the way, because
everything seemed to go just fine, even though I didn't read
it. But I will read it this morning.
We have a hybrid hearing. We have some members appearing
remotely and other members here. So, members who are joining
remotely must be visible on screen for the purposes of identity
verification, establishing and maintaining a quorum,
participating in the proceeding, and voting.
Those members must continue to use the software platform's
video function while in attendance, unless they experience
connectivity issues or other technical problems that render
them unable to participate on camera. If a member experiences
technical difficulties, they should contact the committee staff
for assistance.
Video of members' participation will be broadcast in the
room and via the television internet feeds. Members
participating remotely must seek recognition verbally, and they
are asked to mute their microphones when they are speaking--
when they are not speaking. Sorry.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding. If members depart for a short while for reasons
other than joining a different proceeding, they should leave
the video function on. If members will be absent for a
significant period or depart to join a different proceeding,
they should exit the software platform entirely, and then
rejoin it if they return. Members may use the software
platform's chat feature to communicate with staff regarding
technical or logistical support issues only.
Finally, I have designated a committee staff member to, if
necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to cancel any
inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the proceedings.
Thank you.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. I look
forward to their testimony and questions and answers.
The Indo-Pacific region is a crucially important region to
the national security of the United States and to the peace and
stability of the world. Obviously, we have learned that the
entire world is a challenge. With Russia's unprovoked and
devastating invasion of Ukraine, we have been reminded that we
can't just focus on one part of the world, but the Indo-Pacific
region is clearly one of the most important parts of the world.
I think it will be important as we go through all of these
hearings from all the different regions, how interconnected
everything is.
It is not just great power competition, we're dealing with
Russia, we're dealing with China. Russia and China, as we know,
are actively engaged in many parts of the world. And the
competition here really is to build broad support amongst
partners, and that is a global endeavor to basically show that
partnering with the U.S. and the West is the better option for
frankly all countries than partnering with Russia and China.
And the Indo-Pacific region gives us an outstanding opportunity
to do that.
It has been described as the pacing threat. However you
want to put it, China is, without question, the country most
capable of competing with the U.S. in terms of their economic
strength, in terms of their growing military strength, in terms
of their global reach.
Now we all want a world where China and the U.S. peacefully
coexist, and that is what we are working towards. But, over the
course of the last decade at least, it has become clear that
President Xi in China intends something more combative than
that. They are trying to push us out and advance an
authoritarian way of looking at the world that has very little
respect for human rights or anything other than the blunt force
of what they want economically.
We need to compete against that. We need to convince the
world to go in a different direction, and to do that, we need a
robust presence in the Indo-Pacific region. It is just that
simple.
And our military is a huge part of that. We have important
defense relationships, certainly, with Japan and South Korea,
but with a number of other countries as well. We must maintain
and strengthen those relationships, and we must attempt to be a
balancing force to keep the peace in Asia.
Obviously, nowhere is that more important than on Taiwan.
The belligerent language that China has been putting out
recently is very, very dangerous. We could easily see a China-
Taiwan situation in the same way we now see a Russia-Ukraine
situation. We need to constantly remind China that that is not
the way global powers are supposed to behave. Whatever dispute
differences they have with Taiwan, they should be resolved
peacefully, not through the use of military force.
But a big part of making sure that happens is to have an
adequate deterrence. It is to build partnerships and have a
presence in the region that lets China know that that is not an
acceptable or doable option. And that requires us to have a
robust presence.
I am particularly interested this morning in, well, two big
things. One, how are our relationships and partnerships going
in the region? I think that is incredibly important. India, in
particular; you know, it is the largest democracy in the world,
but a country that has had a history in the past of being
closer to Russia in many ways than to us, but is now moving in
our direction. If we can enhance that relationship and
strengthen it, I think that makes the world a better and more
peaceful place.
And then, second, this committee has been briefed
repeatedly over the course of the last 6 or 7 years about
everything that China has done in their military modernization
to try to counter us, to basically put our systems and our
forces at risk, and to in essence push us out of the region.
We have known about that for some time. I know that we are
working on how to adjust to that; how to change our force
structure to better deal with what China has done. We need to
put meat on those bones. What is it we are doing? What is it we
need to be doing? What are the most important things to fund?
To me, it comes down to two words as a starting point, and
that is information and survivability. China is very focused on
improving their command-and-control information systems and,
also, equally focused on making ours vulnerable--well, not
making ours vulnerable--on taking ours down, on being able to
basically blind us and shut us down by shutting down our
communication systems and our information systems. How are we
improving that?
On survivability, it is the platforms that can get into the
region and survive--with China's missile technology, with their
cyber technology, and their ability to shut down our
information systems. And as we have talked about ad nauseam on
that committee, this comes down a lot to innovation and new
technology. And it is readily acknowledged that the Pentagon is
not as good at that as they should be. Let's just put it that
way. We have got to be able to find new technologies; make the
best use out of them; figure out how to make them applicable
faster, quicker, and better--something we are really focused
on.
So, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses this
morning on those topics and others.
And with that, I will yield to the ranking member, Mr.
Rogers.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would be remiss if I didn't acknowledge the entrance
of one of our former colleagues, Ms. Bordallo of Guam. Good to
see you again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do thank the witnesses for
being here and the time that it took to prepare for this.
The conflict between the Chinese Communist Party and
American democracy will be one of the greatest tests this
Nation has ever faced. A modernized military, well-armed
allies, and a lethal Taiwan are essential to countering China.
But we also need operational concepts that are executable.
Over the past year, members of this committee have asked
questions about INDOPACOM's [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command's]
ability to carry out its operational requirements. To date, we
have gotten few answers to serious questions about contested
logistics; few answers on accelerating new infrastructure; and
few answers on delivering new technology to the battlefield.
To make matters worse, the Secretary [of Defense] announced
Monday his intention to close the massive Red Hill fuel depot
within a year. Red Hill has serious problems, but the Secretary
closed Red Hill without laying out the resources needed to
replace that capacity. That is extremely shortsighted. Now the
response from the Department has been the same. The answer is
just one policy announcement away, and that is unacceptable.
What I would like to hear from each of you today is exactly
how you will employ new operational concepts, build new
systems, and ensure logistic support at new operating locations
throughout the Indo-Pacific. But, most importantly, I want to
know how you intend to do that in the next 5 years.
We all know China is not going to give us 10 or 20 years to
prepare for conflict. We simply cannot procrastinate any
further. The issues like Red Hill present an opportunity to
modernize beyond the World War II logistics model. But I am
deeply worried about the cycle of indecision and
procrastination at the Pentagon. And I am also worried about
getting this important work done in the timeframe that we have
to act.
This committee has tried to provide the Department the
capabilities it needs to deter China and ensure we prevail if
conflict arises, but we can't move with purpose if the
Department can't define its requirements. We have tried to nail
those down in the PDI. Congress created the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative to highlight and expedite the most essential
capabilities, but the Pentagon kneecapped the PDI process last
year with poor guidance and unclear plans. I hope the DOD
[Department of Defense] can rectify that in this year's budget
submission.
On top of all this, we have tasked General LaCamera with
holding off North Korea. In any other year, North Korea's
repeated missile test would be front-page news. General, you so
happened to pick a very busy time to start trying to deal with
your challenges over there. The South Koreans are essential
allies, and deepening our defense cooperation with them makes
us all safer. And we want to know what you need to secure the
Korean Peninsula in the coming decade.
This committee is ready to make bold investments in our
defense. I hope to hear today that the Department is ready to
do the same.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Ratner.

STATEMENT OF HON. ELY S. RATNER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR INDO-PACIFIC SECURITY AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Ratner. Well, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and it is a privilege
to be here with Admiral Aquilino and General LaCamera.
As you know, the Indo-Pacific is the priority theater for
the Department of Defense and we remain committed to upholding
a free and open regional order. At the same time, the region
faces mounting security challenges, particularly from the
People's Republic of China, the PRC, which has adopted a more
coercive and assertive approach to advancing its authoritarian
interests. North Korea's weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missile programs also constitute a serious threat to
the United States and our allies and partners.
Mr. Chairman, Secretary Austin has described the PRC as the
Department's top pacing challenge. This prioritization will be
reflected in the forthcoming National Defense Strategy and FY23
[fiscal year 2023] budget, as we continue to update our
concepts, capabilities, and force posture to defend the
homeland, deter aggression, and prepare to prevail in conflict.
We are prioritizing capabilities relevant to the China
challenge, to enable a joint force that is lethal and able to
strike adversary forces and systems at range; resilient and
able to gain information advantage and maintain command and
control through adversary disruptions; survivable and agile in
the face of adversary attacks that seek to reduce combat power
and mobilization speed; and able to provide the logistics and
sustainment needed for operations in a highly contested
environment. Alongside these capabilities, we are building a
combat-credible force posture in the Indo-Pacific, working
toward a more distributed, lethal, and resilient forward
posture essential to addressing the full suite of challenges we
face in the region.
We are also doubling down on one of our greatest strategic
advantages: our network of allies and partners. As I look
across the region, I see our defense ties growing at a rapid
pace. With the U.S.-Japan alliance as the cornerstone of
regional peace, we are deepening our defense cooperation with
the Japan Self-Defense Forces, optimizing our alliance force
posture, and integrating the alliance into a broader regional
security network of like-minded nations.
We are also continuing to strengthen the U.S.-ROK [Republic
of Korea] alliance--the linchpin of peace and stability on the
Korean Peninsula and in the Indo-Pacific region--remaining
focused on enhancing deterrence and alliance readiness.
The U.S.-Australia alliance is also surging forward with
considerable momentum. Last year, we announced several new
initiatives to substantially deepen force posture cooperation
in land, air, and maritime domains, and we announced the
historic AUKUS Trilateral Security Partnership with the United
Kingdom and Australia.
We recognize the importance of our alliances with the
Philippines and Thailand as well, as we are proud of the work
we have done to revive the Visiting Forces Agreement with the
Philippines and the steps we are taking to strengthen our
security cooperation with our Thai allies.
Likewise, we are seeing historic progress in our major
defense partnership with India, as we continue to integrate and
operationalize our day-to-day defense cooperation and
logistics, enhance information-sharing, and grow our bilateral
cooperation in emerging domains, such as space and cyberspace.
And we have been working throughout Southeast Asia to
strengthen capabilities and improve our interoperability with
partners, including Singapore, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia,
and Timor-Leste.
We are also bringing our partners together with colleagues
across the U.S. Government to elevate the Quad [Quadrilateral
Security Dialogue] as a premier regional grouping, while we
remain committed to ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian
Nations] centrality.
Consistent with our commitment to our One China policy, the
Taiwan Relations Act, the Three Joint Communiques, and the Six
Assurances, we are focused on maintaining peace and stability
in the Taiwan Strait.
With the PRC as the Department's pacing challenge, Taiwan
is the pacing scenario, and we aim to deter and deny PRC
aggression through a combination of Taiwan's own defenses, its
partnership with the United States, and growing support from
like-minded democracies.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I would like to close by thanking
all of you for your strong, bipartisan support for the Indo-
Pacific. It is my firm belief that this bipartisanship is one
of our most powerful assets in rising to the China challenge
and should be nurtured and treated as such.
Thank you for your time and attention, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ratner can be found in the
Appendix on page 57.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Admiral Aquilino.

STATEMENT OF ADM JOHN C. AQUILINO, USN, COMMANDER, U.S. INDO-
PACIFIC COMMAND

Admiral Aquilino. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
and the distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
also allowing me to appear today and have a conversation, and I
really, truly appreciated our closed session yesterday. Thank
you for that.
I also would like to thank all of you for your dedicated
support to the Indo-Pacific Command, our service members, and
their families.
The People's Republic of China is the most consequential
strategic competitor that the United States has faced. They are
executing a dedicated campaign that utilizes all forms of
national power in an attempt to uproot the rules-based
international order to the benefit of themselves and at the
expense of all others.
Russia also presents some serious risks. As evident from
their unprovoked and unjustified attack on the Ukraine, Russia
has no regard for international law, its own commitments, or
any principles that uphold global peace.
Similarly, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the
DPRK, as well as violent extremist organizations, also pose
acute threats to peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific
region.
To address these threats, Secretary Austin has articulated
clear priorities: defend the homeland, deter our adversaries,
and strengthen our allies and partners. These priorities are
advanced through integrated deterrence, which is the
Department's approach to preventing conflict through the
synchronization of all elements of national power, coordinated
with the joint force across all domains, together with our
allies and partners.
INDOPACOM's mission is to prevent conflict through the
execution of integrated deterrence, and should deterrence fail,
we must be prepared to fight and win. ``Seize the Initiative''
describes INDOPACOM's approach to accomplishing these missions.
This approach requires the joint force to think, act, and
operate differently by realigning our posture, advancing our
warfighting capabilities, in order to provide the President and
the Secretary with options across the entire spectrum of
competition, crisis, or conflict.
Effective deterrence requires significant investment to
defend the homeland, protect the joint force, operate in
contested space, and provide all-domain battlespace awareness
with an integrated fires network that synchronizes the joint
force.
These initiatives are incorporated into the theater
campaign plan. They are facilitated and supported by agile
logistics, a robust experimentation program, as well as
exercises and constant collaboration with our allies and
partners to promote peace in the region.
We must take concerted efforts to increase our resilience
and strengthen our capabilities through sustained investments,
utilizing predictable budgets, a strong industrial base, and
reliable supply chains.
I am optimistic we will see a strategy-based FY23 budget
that takes the appropriate initial steps to address key
adversarial challenges and increase our warfighting advantages.
The resources we commit now and in the future will preserve a
free and open Indo-Pacific, strengthen our deterrence posture,
and provide us the ability to fight and win, should deterrence
fail.
Thanks to the committee, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Aquilino can be found in
the Appendix on page 67.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
General LaCamera.

STATEMENT OF GEN PAUL J. LaCAMERA, USA, COMMANDER, UNITED
NATIONS COMMAND; COMMANDER, UNITED STATES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA
COMBINED FORCES COMMAND; AND COMMANDER, U.S. FORCES KOREA

General LaCamera. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear with you today.
I appreciate your leadership and dedication in supporting
our total force and our families who work with our Korean
allies and United Nations Sending States in order to maintain a
stable and secure environment on the Korean Peninsula.
I would also like to thank President Biden, Secretary
Austin, and General Milley for their continued leadership and
support, along with Admiral Aquilino, the functional combatant
commanders who support us, my fellow component commanders, and
my interagency colleagues. It is easy to stand on freedom's
frontier with this tremendous support.
Finally, I want to thank our Korean hosts and their
professional military.
I am pleased to update you on the great work done by our
dedicated personnel who serve in the Republic of Korea. They
are professionally executing the missions of the United Nations
Command, Combined Forces Command, and the United States Forces
Korea.
The United States-Republic of Korea alliance was forged in
the crucible of battle. While the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea continues to pose multiple threats to the region and
international security, this alliance remains the linchpin of
regional stability and has prevented a resumption of the
hostilities that shredded peace on the Korean Peninsula some 72
years ago. It remains ironclad, and our service members, along
with the Republic of Korea military, are trained and ready to
respond to a provocation or crisis, if called upon.
Our three commands--United Nations Command, Combined Forces
Command, and the United States Forces Korea--must remain
vigilant, prepared, and ready. Under one commander, these three
commands are empowered to maintain a stabilized security
environment for the Republic of Korea, our regional allies, and
our partners.
We have international legitimacy through the United Nations
Command, whose mission is to enforce the 1953 Armistice
Agreement, coordinate U.N. [United Nations] Sending State
contributions, and execute assigned functions, directed by the
United States National Authorities through the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, to preserve peace and security on the Korean Peninsula.
We are proud of the combined teamwork of the U.S.-Korean
alliance. The Combined Forces Command is the combined
warfighting headquarters representing the U.S.-Korea Bilateral
Military Partnership. Formed in 1978, it is a unique entity
that takes policy direction and missions from the Combined
Military Committee, and is governed by, and subject to,
binational decisionmaking and consensus.
We maintain our strong U.S. commitment to Korea. U.S.
Forces Korea is the premier joint force committed to defending
the security of the Republic of Korea. It is disciplined,
trained, and ready to fight tonight, respond in crisis, and win
in conflict.
Central to meeting any threats is resourcing the
strengthening of our force and best possible care of our
families. I am grateful for your support and leadership in
these no-fail tasks.
I know you are aware of South Korea's powerful economic,
military, and technical standings. No doubt, you are aware of
their social impact. All of this is part of the hard work,
discipline, and dedication of the Korean people--all done under
the security umbrella of the U.S.-Korea alliance.
The Republic of Korea is an incredible ally, and it is a
privilege to move into the future together with them in the
Land of the Morning Calm. I am honored to command and serve
this dedicated multinational combined and joint force in one of
the most significant, dynamic regions of the world. Those who
serve there are committed, capable, and well-supported. The
force is postured to deter aggression, protect U.S. interests,
and, if needed, defeat any adversary.
As long as the threat persists, the U.S.-Korean alliance
remains vigilant, determined, and steadfast in defense of the
Korean Peninsula and across the region. As the commander of
these incredible service members, I appreciate this committee's
continued support to fully prepare them to fight and win on the
most dangerous piece of ground--the last 100 meters of land,
sea, and air.
Under one flag. Katchi kapshida, we go together. Fight
tonight.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide an opening
statement. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General LaCamera can be found in
the Appendix on page 101.]
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
One programming note before we get going with questions.
There are going to be votes at some point. It is my intention
to continue the hearing through the votes, because it would be
impossible if we had to take that delay. There is about a half-
hour, probably 40 minutes, between the two votes. So, we are
just going to rotate people in and out, and we will figure out
how we are going to do that. But we are going to keep going.
General LaCamera, so we talked a little bit about the
alliances and the different pieces out there. First of all, I
know South Korea has, I think, just completed their elections,
as we are sitting here, or in the middle of them at any rate.
So, curious how that is going, if you have heard.
But how do you see South Korea, not just in terms of North
Korea, though I want to hear about that as well, fitting into
the larger partnership? We have talked about the Quad that we
have developed with Japan, Australia, and India, and other
partners. How does South Korea view the competition with China
in the region? And how can we best use them as a partner and an
ally in the region for that?
And then, I would be curious to get your sort of latest
take on what North Korea is thinking with their latest missile
tests and how you evaluate that threat at the moment.
General LaCamera. Thank you, Chairman.
I think the challenge with the Republic of Korea is, you
know, the first thing they will tell you is their economic
partner is China; their security partner is the United States.
And that can be a little bit concerning because, as we go
forward, the concern is always, are they or the North Koreans--
and really, to your second question--are they trying to drive a
wedge between us, the United States, and the Republic of Korea,
as a way of winning without fighting?
THAAD [Terminal High Altitude Area Defense] was a perfect
example in 2017, where they put some economic pressure on the
Republic of Korea. We have seemed to come out of that. We have
that up and running, and we continue to move forward.
I look at the Republic of Korea and, quite frankly, the
United Nations Sending States and the ROK-U.S., or the
Australian alliance or Japanese alliance, as opportunities to
get the Koreans off the peninsula to do some additional
training, as training becomes a little bit restricted, but also
to expose them to other militaries.
When it comes to DPRK, I think he is focused solely
internally on protecting his regime, and that is what this
nuclear testing and the ROK--the missiles is really about
protecting his position in the world.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And, Dr. Ratner and Admiral Aquilino, when it comes to the
big question of how we present a legitimate deterrence to China
in the region, given what they have done in the last decade.
And I know it is no one thing. But if you could sort of sum up
how we need to change our military capability, in terms of
where we should spend our money, what programs we should put
the highest priority on, what are the capability or
capabilities that we most need to get better at and develop to
counter what China has done?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I will go first, if
it is okay with Dr. Ratner.
First of all, I think we must look through the PRC issue as
not just today, right? So, it is a short-term problem, it is a
medium-term problem, and it is a long-term problem.
So, I can tell you what we are doing today as it applies to
adjusting our posture. Both the places we operate from, the
amount and position of forces, where we put it is important.
That power in a place that matters with the right capabilities
today is the deterrent factor. Combine that with the exercising
operations with our allies and partners, presents a pretty good
deterrent force today.
On the capabilities side, in the mid and longer term, I
appreciate the Department's support for some of the asks. And I
highlighted a couple of them in my statement, right? So, the
ability to operate in contested space consistently and
survivably, as you highlighted in your statement. The ability
to have persistent battlespace awareness of all things going
on.
The Chairman. I guess we kind of know that part. The
question is, what does that mean? Okay? So, to do that, we need
to build this and not build that; we need to develop this
technology; we need to develop that technology. What is going
to survive in that environment? What do we need to put our
money in, so that that happens?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes. Integrated and resilient,
sustainable ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance] capabilities; a network that links all of that
together and displays it for all forces on the battlefield in a
consistent way; and then, ultimately, the ability to close
those kill chains with the correct weapons and fires.
The Chairman. Yes. Thank you.
Dr. Ratner.
Dr. Ratner. Mr. Chairman, the only thing I would add is, in
addition to the capabilities that Admiral Aquilino mentioned,
we are working to update operational concepts. As you know,
with the Joint Warfighting Concept, a more distributed force
posture, and then, building our allies and partners into our
deterrence frameworks as well.
The Chairman. So, basically, we need to make sure we don't
have a few big, rich targets? We need to have, you know, sort
of redundancy; spread-out, survivable systems. So that, no
matter what China does, we can continue to communicate and
continue to operate?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, I would say the characteristics of the
force that I described in my opening statement are the ones
that drive the capabilities investments--lethality, resilience,
sustainability, survivability, and being agile and responsive,
exactly as you describe, Mr. Chairman, in your opening
statement.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, I never did get the answer to the chairman's
question. Who won the election, or do we know the results?
General LaCamera. When I came in here, Congressman, it is
too close to call right now.
Mr. Rogers. Sounds familiar. We have had that problem
around here for a while.
You talked about the stepped-up testing by North Korea. How
does a maturing North Korean missile capability affect your
posture?
General LaCamera. Ballistic missile defense is a top
priority, protection, making sure that--Admiral Aquilino just
brought it up--on the ISR typically, we say ISR is one noun,
but, to me, it is three verbs, and making sure that we can see
into what he is doing. And can we get after a kill web to
interdict, prevent it from striking South Korea or striking any
U.S. interests in the region.
Mr. Rogers. Do you have adequate ISR, in your opinion?
General LaCamera. Currently, I do. The challenge right now
is placement and access, given the Comprehensive Military
Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the DPRK.
Mr. Rogers. When you look at your posture and your
responsibilities, what is the one thing that we could help you
most with in addressing capability issues? And one of the
things that I am always mindful of is the huge number of rocket
launchers he has near Seoul and how you would defend against
that onslaught.
General LaCamera. Yeah, there is two threats to that. There
is the conventional threat, his artillery, long-range artillery
that can range Seoul from the north; and then his theater
ballistic missile capability that he is developing.
So, it is the Patriot-THAAD and making sure that we have
the redundancy and the resiliency and the number of arrows. But
to me, it is more than just trading arrows for arrows. We have
got to make sure that we can get after the entire kill web, to
be able to get into his systems. And I can provide a much
better description of this in a secure environment.
Mr. Rogers. I understand. Well, we need to know because we
want to give you what you need. So, get it to us in whatever
fashion you need to.
Dr. Ratner, we need to convince our allies and partners
that we are in the Pacific for the long haul. I think that we
on this committee genuinely mean that. How can we build that
credibility in the region, in your view?
Dr. Ratner. Thank you, sir.
I think there are a few elements we can do to ensure that
the region believes that we are going to be there for the long
haul. Primarily, many of those occur outside the military
domain, and certainly the jurisdiction of the Defense
Department, in terms of active diplomacy and an active trade
and investment strategy and leadership in the region. That is
probably the most important thing we could do.
But from a military perspective, I think maintaining our
forward posture, continuing to invest in our alliances, and
working with partners on issues that are important to them, not
just issues that are important to us, is the right formula.
Mr. Rogers. Great.
And, Admiral, closing Red Hill is going to impact your
operations. Can you tell me, or tell this committee, how you
intend to address that closure?
Admiral Aquilino. Thank you, sir. Absolutely.
As we looked and developed options for senior leader
decisions with regard to Red Hill, again, we had three criteria
that we had to make sure we were getting right. No. 1, clean
water for the people of Hawaii, service members and their
families. No. 2, we had to be able to meet the war plan and the
warfighting requirements. And then, third, we obviously always
look at costs and ensure we are good stewards of the taxpayers'
money.
We developed a plan that actually goes in alignment with
how we talked about a more distributed plan, both forward and
land-based, combined with a sea-based component, to allow for a
more distributed, survivable, resilient network of fuels, as
well as meeting all the security and the strategic fuel reserve
requirements. So, as we looked at this, I think we are actually
going to be in a better place and we meet all three
requirements, as I laid out.
Mr. Rogers. What timeframe is going to be needed to make
this transition?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, I think we will go in
coordination with all of the members that are working this.
That is the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], the Hawaii
Department of Health, and the Department of Defense. We will go
as fast as safe allows. We have to make sure the facility is
safe to transfer that fuel into the places we are going to send
it, but we are certainly not waiting. As soon as we can get it
done, we will be ready to move, and as soon as we are able to
contract some of those other facilities, as well as the sea-
based option.
Mr. Rogers. So, you are not closing Red Hill until you have
this new capability in place?
Admiral Aquilino. We will close Red Hill, I think the
Secretary's announcement was within the year. And that just
allows us to be able to distribute that fuel with the contract
requirements, the sea-based requirements, and the need to put
it in the correct spots.
Mr. Rogers. That is my point, though. I want to make sure
that you are going to be able to fuel your OPLANs [operation
plans] when you close that place.
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, sir, we will be able to do it, and
we will be able to do it fairly quickly.
Mr. Rogers. Great.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman, sir.
The Chairman. Mr. Larsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks, Chair.
Admiral, earlier this year, the Army began developing and
testing a tactical cloud system that would be deployed in the
Indo-Pacific region. Can you in this setting explain why that
would be important for the Indo-Pacific?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, first of all, the ability to make sure that our data is
safe/secure in a cyber environment is critical. So, that is one
portion of it. Additionally, it is going to help to support one
of our primary initiatives called a Mission Partner
Environment, which is the ability in a cyber-safe environment
to share information with all of our partners; to be able to
coordinate events, operations, exercises through a single
communication mechanism. So, really, it kind of comes down to
the ability to defend our information and our data.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. So, I want to build out from that for Dr.
Ratner. Because this gets to the importance of the tyranny of
distance, but also closing that through secure communications
among friends and allies.
Building that, sort of using that hub-and-spoke model that
we used post-World War II to build out our friends and
alliances in the Pacific, how are we going to assess what
countries earn their way into this communication network, into
this one, as well as any others that we are trying to set up in
that region?
Dr. Ratner. Thank you, Congressman Larsen.
And Admiral Aquilino may want to say another word on some
of the communications networks that he is looking to build in
the region.
I will just say we are in careful analysis and consultation
with our partners on their information security, both assessing
them, helping them improve and clean up their networks, and
moving in ways that are deliberate and ensure that we are not
building that network so fast that it is going to be
compromised. So, this is something we take quite seriously. PRC
penetration of networks throughout the region is quite severe,
and it is something we need to manage.
Mr. Larsen. Admiral.
Admiral Aquilino. Yeah, thanks, sir.
So, we are, obviously, concerned about everyone's
networks--and our and all of our allies and partners. This
Mission Partner Environment allows us to work together with
them to be able to develop the maximum security that we have
access to, and then align it with all of our partners. So, it
is really kind of two wins here in this objective.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. Let me take one more step on this
conversation. Dr. Ratner alludes to it, what China, the PRC is
doing in the last several years--we have talked about this
earlier last year, perhaps on a call--to reorganize the PLA
[People's Liberation Army] to include their strategic support
forces [SSF], which are both networking and space, including
cyber and EW [electronic warfare], and a variety of other
things.
So, on this point, not to tell us what is in the budget,
because in 22 years I realize that would be a waste of time to
ask you before the budget got here. Could you generally say
perhaps that the budget investment reflects the need to be
responsive to the development of the SSF and what it is doing,
and how the PLA is using the strategic support forces, as well
as getting ahead of that? As well as doing the investments,
regardless of whether or not the SSF existed?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congressman.
Without getting into details about the budget, I can assure
you that the Department is very focused on these issues. We had
an opportunity earlier this week to do a tabletop exercise with
members of this committee, in which we focused specifically on
some of these areas, including space and cyber.
And you will see in the Secretary's concept of integrated
deterrence, which Admiral Aquilino mentioned, part of the
rationale there is that we, ourselves, need to be integrating
across domains, including space and cyber, as we think about
this competition.
Mr. Larsen. [Inaudible] there. Just a little time left. If
you can share this, given Putin's unprovoked invasion of
Ukraine, have you seen a change in Russian force posture in
their east?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, absolutely. In preparation, they pushed out 20 ships
and submarines, as we can count. They placed them in defensive
positions. They postured other forces to be able to defend
their eastern flank. So, we absolutely have seen a change, and
we continue to monitor those, like we do every day.
Mr. Larsen. All right. Thanks.
I will ask the question, and take it for the record, but it
has to do with India's ambivalent role right now relative to
U.S. security interests with regards to the Ukraine. And I will
develop something specific for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Turner is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, in your written comments, you reference the United
Kingdom and joint exercises that were held with both the United
States and others. And you also mentioned the F-35. I want to
read to you the provision that is here, and I have two
questions with you.
One is, could you tell us about the partner nations that
are outside INDOPACOM that are assisting in the area and, also,
the role of the F-35? You state that the U.K. [United Kingdom]
has ``demonstrated its immense capacity to project combat power
into the region . . . the Queen Elizabeth Carrier Strike Task
Group which included embarked U.K. and U.S. Marine Corps F-35Bs
. . .'' So, I am assuming we both had F-35s; that there were
escort ships from both the Netherlands and the United States.
And then, you also cite the acquisition by the Republic of
Korea for the F-35A. Could you tell us of your work with other
partner nations and the role of the F-35 in the area?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, the importance of the F-35 can't be overstated, right?
So, when we talked in the beginning, the PRC has developed a
set of systems of systems in an attempt to keep the United
States out of the Pacific. The F-35 from the air domain is
critical to be able to operate in that contested space. That
fifth-generation airplane with the highest technology
available----
Mr. Turner. You are referencing China's J-20?
Admiral Aquilino. I am referencing our F-35.
Mr. Turner. But, I mean, when you are talking about China,
also, as a peer threat in the area, that you are looking to
their equipment as an additional need for the F-35?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes. Absolutely, sir. So, they have just
begun production of their J-20, their first fifth-generation
airplane, which ups the ante. And again, with the technology
and the capability of the F-35, that is why it is so critical.
As it applies to being able to operate in that contested space,
the technologies that come with that airplane allow it to
happen.
Mr. Turner. And then, joint exercises, you reference the
U.K. and Netherlands.
Admiral Aquilino. So, when we talk about integrated
deterrence, that is a pretty good example of one operation that
we have done. The U.K., as you know, has built, and has now
deployed, one of their aircraft carrier strike groups. We did
an operation with seven nations, four big-deck ships--the
Japanese provided one of their large-deck DDHs [helicopter-
carrying destroyer]. The Queen Elizabeth was there and, as
well, was the Ronald Reagan and the USS Carl Vinson. That was
combined with all of our domain capabilities in the form of
bombers, ground forces, cyber capabilities, space capabilities,
and worked together with seven nations--the Netherlands,
Australians, Canadians.
Again, I think the friends and partners outside of the
region also understand the importance of the region, and we see
them operate with us, hopefully, more frequently. The French
come to the region. You most recently read about the Germans
deploying to the Pacific. I am hoping and working to get more
of that. And with those partners, we operate with them all the
time.
Mr. Turner. Well, my next question relates to exercises
and, also, with the Republic of Korea. General, you mentioned
trying to get people out of the area because of restrictions
with respect to exercises.
As part of our 2021 NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act], we required, as part of the Pacific deterrence, an actual
plan to be provided to us by your command, Admiral. And in it,
it listed exercises as one of the primary focus and goals. It
also, unfortunately, includes information that your funding was
cut for exercises in 2022.
I am aware that there have been, I believe, some
overconcerns about issues of provocation of exercises, when it
is one of your primary goals, of exercises, and we know our
partners that are in the region need exercises to be effective.
What are we doing to ensure that we are able to conduct
exercises in the region and that we are investing
appropriately, and we are ensuring that the Republic of Korea
has the ability to exercise without an overconcern of being
provocative in the region? And I will let all three of you
answer that one.
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, for the exercises, we do over 120 exercises every year.
COVID [coronavirus disease] has impacted some of those. We have
scaled some down. We have reduced or we have postponed some
because of the COVID piece. But bottom line is we haven't
reduced any of those exercises. As a matter of fact, when I met
with the chiefs of defense across the region most recently in
July, what we have agreed to is actually to try to expand those
into more mini----
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, do you have concerns about
exercises in the region?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I do share----
Mr. Larsen [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
If you can finish in about 10 seconds? Thank you.
Dr. Ratner. I would say I share Admiral Aquilino's view. I
do have concerns about the readiness of our forces on the
Korean Peninsula, and I know that is something we are working
on.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
The chair recognizes Representative Courtney for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Rick. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Ratner, David Ignatius, who has been sort of covering
foreign policy and military policy for quite a few years, made
the observation that, in terms of hard power, the AUKUS
alliance with Australia and Britain is the most important
strategic move in decades. And again, congratulations to the
administration for helping make that come together.
The response in Australia, as you and I have discussed, is
very positive; 60 percent approval in public opinion polls. The
government announced just a few days ago that they are moving
forward for an eastern--a navy base on the eastern side of
Australia to complement Stirling, which is on the western side
near Perth. So they clearly, it is all-in and that is a long-
term, that is a long-game commitment that is there.
And I know Admiral Caldwell at Naval Reactors is hard at
work with the transition. It's a big job to figure out the
industrial base challenge, which is huge. But in the meantime,
I mean, there is another piece of this, which is helping the
Australian navy sort of make this transformation. And it seems
to me, and a number of us, that having joint training at the
Nuclear Power School in South Carolina for Australian sailors
and officers would be--you know, we have to do it, and why
don't we start? I mean, it is a good, visible, tangible way to
really show our allies and the world that this is real, that it
is not just a press release back in September.
I don't know if--you are nodding, Admiral Aquilino. What
are your thoughts on that?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, it really is an important
step forward. I do concur with that. But I do want to remember
that the submarine piece is one portion of it, right? So, we
are cooperating in other domains to expand our capabilities and
capacities with the Australians and the Brits in the form of
space and cyber, in the form of being able to develop posture
and operate from there. And I am going to be in Australia the
week after next with really great partners, General Nakasone
and General Dickinson, to start on that space and cyber
improvement.
On the submarine piece, as you know, they are studying the
best way to go forward. Big decisions, and they want to go
about it methodically. I spoke to Admiral Caldwell last night.
We are on the same page. As soon as they are ready to start,
Admiral Caldwell is ready to support with regard to the start
of schooling, and then we have options to be able to bridge,
right? How do we operate together, Australians on U.S., British
submarines? We are going to work through that. Safety is
clearly a concern from Admiral Caldwell. But we are doing
everything possible to move this as fast as possible.
Mr. Courtney. Well, that is good to hear. And again, I
think, certainly, this committee is going to want to do
everything to enable the success of that in terms of whether
there are ITAR [International Traffic in Arms Regulations]
issues or whether there is, again, McMahon Act issues in terms
of just clearing any legal obstacles.
Admiral, you talked about, again, the pivot away from Red
Hill, and the at-sea component I think sort of spotlights the
importance of sealift. Again, in a few hours we are going to
vote on an omnibus which adds 10 U.S.-flag ships to the fleet,
bringing it about to 90. And again, these are not new
construction. These are used ships that are going to be U.S.
flagged and with a stipend enabled to do that. But, I mean, it
still seems like it is still a big enterprise to have that
disbursement, which I do think makes sense.
I mean, can you talk about sealift in terms of just--it is
sometimes overlooked in the grand strategy discussions.
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, sir. It is critical to the approach
and the position to be able to be more distributed in many
different locations, both ashore and at sea. You are talking
about the sea-based component of that.
And I thank the committee for the support for the TSP
[Tanker Security Program]. A great partner, General Van Ovost,
and her command identified in a previous study that there was
risk with regard to the number and access to U.S.-flag tankers.
This is a great step to start in that direction. And again, I
believe it will contribute to the result and the way forward on
Red Hill. So, it is really important across all sealift, not
just fuel.
Mr. Courtney. Can you comment on what sealift means in
terms of the North Korean Peninsula?
General LaCamera. Yes, Congressman.
In [inaudible], when I had this conversation, you know,
when does strategic movement become operational maneuver, and
at what point is he responsible for delivering to a certain
point, and then, I have got to secure it, bringing it in? You
know, there is tremendous capacity on the peninsula right now
for the Korean people, but we are going to rely on Japan to
bring supplies in and forces, and we are going to rely on
sealift and airlift to build our combat power for any crisis or
conflict.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Ratner, in the last NDAA, I offered language, and
the committee supported it, asking for a report on asymmetrical
defensive capabilities on the part of Taiwan--ground-based
anti-ship cruise missiles, ground-based cruise missiles, and
anti-ship mines. And I believe that that got caught up in a
larger report request that the Secretary is supposed to produce
for this committee. And is that coming along satisfactory?
Because the importance of these reports is so that we can make
sure our industry partners are producing these kinds of
armaments sufficiently and, secondly, that they are getting
into the hands of our Taiwanese partners and friends. So, will
that report be forthcoming soon?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I will have to check on the exact
timing of that report. As you know, I was before this committee
probably about 6 weeks ago and did an in-depth classified
briefing on Taiwan, in particular, and we discussed each of
these capabilities in-depth. The Department is extremely
focused on ensuring we can get these in the hands of the
Taiwans as quickly as possible, and I would be happy, in
advance of the report, to provide your office with any
additional information.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Fantastic. Thank you so much.
Admiral Aquilino, There is a lot of concern by many of us
about hypersonic weapons and how China, Russia, and even North
Korea, are doing what they can in this area. What are your
concerns about their progress, and what do we need to do better
on our part?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, the real concern is the speed and pace at which they
are showing up, as you articulated. So, that is the issue. We
have security challengers that are working towards capabilities
that are challenging. We are getting after it through--my
number one unfunded request, as articulated, was a defense of
Guam system to get right after this issue.
Now, it is complex. We are coordinating with the
Department. But we need to be able to defend both our people,
right?--defend the homeland is the Secretary's number one
priority--as well as the forces, and where we place them, to be
able to operate.
Mr. Lamborn. Now, you mentioned Guam. And you said in your
posture statement that Guam's strategic importance is difficult
to overstate. Can you elaborate on that, please?
Admiral Aquilino. Absolutely, Congressman.
The area in the Indo-Pacific is expansive, half the globe,
and a lot of it water. So, to be able to posture forces in
places that matter, with the right capabilities, we have
focused on Guam as a strategic hub, as you would expect.
Senator--or excuse me--Governor Guerrero is a wonderful
partner and a patriot. And as you know, it is about $11 billion
worth of construction, as we work through posturing of our
forces that will end up on Guam. So, we have to protect it.
Mr. Lamborn. And lastly, can you enlighten us regarding the
Department's progress--and this is for Secretary Ratner--the
Department's progress in prioritization of missile defense
funding for Guam?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congressman. The Department is currently
in the final stages of the Missile Defense Review, which will
lay out strategy and priorities. And that should be forthcoming
alongside the National Defense Strategy, hopefully in the
coming weeks.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
That is all I have for now, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back
to you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Keating is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Question: Just 2 days ago, U.K.'s Foreign Minister, Liz
Truss, said to Parliament there in London that the reason that
India abstained in the U.N. recently on the vote about Russian
aggression was both economic- and defense-oriented. Could you
enlighten any of us as to why, what areas of defense she could
have been alluding to? And what is your opinion on how India's
inability to vote at the U.N. in favor of condemning Russia for
the aggression, how that could be defense-oriented on their
part?
Dr. Ratner. Sure. Thank you, Congressman. I can start on
that. And there was a reference earlier to this issue as well.
What I would just start by saying is that, from the U.S.
perspective, I think India is an absolutely essential partner,
as we think about our strategy in the Indo-Pacific, both in
terms of how we are building coalition partners as well as
dealing with potential adversaries.
We recognize that India has a complicated history and
relationship with Russia, that the majority of their weapons
they buy from the Russians. The good news is that they are in a
multiyear process of diversifying their arms purchases away
from Russia. That is going to take some time, but they are
clearly committed to doing that, including increasing the
indigenization of their own defense industry. And that is
something we should support. So, I think in terms of the
overall relationship, and in terms of their relationship with
Russia, the trendlines are moving in the right direction.
Mr. Keating. All right. You know, China has mentioned its
investment, advancing their own technology. I am particularly
interested in unmanned underwater technology that they might
have. Can you talk to us about what they are doing, and what
you think we should be doing, to expand our footprints in this
kind of technology?
Admiral Aquilino. Thank you, Congressman.
As we have watched, this is the largest military buildup
that we have seen since World War II coming out of the PRC. And
that includes all domains. It also includes all types of
technologies. Congressman Moulton and I had a conversation
yesterday about some of those.
So, we shouldn't be surprised to see them advancing their
unmanned capabilities in all domains, and we continue to watch
it. We would have to have additional conversations at a
classified level.
Mr. Keating. But is it an area that we, ourselves, are
stepping up the game on?
Admiral Aquilino. We absolutely are. As you know, we have
been leading the path for unmanned. I think I saw the CNO
[Chief of Naval Operations] last week talked about a fleet that
includes both manned and unmanned. As you know, we already
operate Global Hawks, Predators, and other types of unmanned
domains. So, it is an opportunity for us that we have to
continue to explore and expand.
Mr. Keating. Okay. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for
having this important hearing, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for joining us today.
Admiral Aquilino, I want to go to you and go back a year
when Admiral Davidson was here, as your predecessor. And he
talked about the erosion of strategic deterrence in that region
and how incredibly important that is to make sure we keep the
Chinese at bay.
I know that you spoke about the battle force as it exists
today with a PLA Navy of approximately 350 ships and
submarines, and more than 130 of those are major surface
combatants. You also spoke about them having a fleet of 420
battleships by 2025, and I will add that DOD says that, by
2030, the PLA Navy probably has about 460 ships.
That is very, very different than the course that we are on
with the number of ships that we have. And it is not just the
number of ships that we are building, but it is also the ``A
sub o,'' as you know, operational availability for the ships
that we have. Many times, maintenance availability is extended
or time at sea extended. So, we are wearing our ships out
faster because we are double-pumping them on deployments.
From your perspective, if we are unable to accelerate the
fielding of new vessels and maintaining the vessels that we
have, to have a high level of A sub o, operational
availability, what do you think will be the primary risks going
forward in the next 5 years in INDOPACOM?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, you know, you highlight one of the challenges and
things we are watching very closely, is the expansion and
growth in both capability and capacity of the security
challengers in the region as it compares to ours.
So, let me start by saying, we still have the world's
greatest navy. We need to maintain and keep that advantage, and
there's a variety of ways that you can get to it. The CNO,
again, just the other day, talked about the unmanned capacity
and how does that plug in.
With regard to the A sub o, through the Global Force
Management system, we are operating through a supply-based
model. That supply-based accounts for the sustainability in the
near-, mid-, and long-term aspects. So, we have operated in
that construct, and we have to continue to watch the capability
and capacity differences.
Mr. Wittman. To take that a step further, not just U.S.
capability and capacity and presence in the Asia-Pacific, but
also the ability for us to leverage much more in-depth
relationships with friends and allies in the region. That is a
big place, lots of things to do. If we don't have friends that
can help us in certain ways, our risk calculus becomes much,
much more complex in order to place that risk on the Chinese.
Give me your perspective about what you think that we need
to be doing. And I would love to hear Dr. Ratner's thoughts on
this. But how we work with allies to a greater extent, like
Japan, like Vietnam, like Australia. And we know AUKUS, and you
talked about that agreement. But I wanted to get a sense about
how do we do that.
And then, how do we get to the point where we are not just
having that relationship on paper, but that has to be
manifested in how we operationalize that agreement. How do we
jointly not only operate, but train together at the highest
levels, so that if something does happen, it is not, well,
let's figure out how we communicate, and those sorts of things?
Give me your perspective on that.
Admiral Aquilino. I concur. So, you don't surge trust, and
you don't just come together and operate. But what we are
trying to do, again, over 120 exercises a year. And all of the
chiefs got together. In our discussions, the intent was, hey,
we need to increase complexity of these to be able to be
interoperable, interdependable.
Some examples. We just finished Keen Edge with the
Japanese. My partner, General Yamazaki, and I met every day for
10 days, in coordination with our forces. Really important,
very high end.
As we sit here today right now, the Army and the Marine
Corps are both on the ground in the Philippines and in Thailand
to do Cobra Gold and Balikatan. Those relationships are solid.
We are about to do RIMPAC [Rim of the Pacific] in a couple
of months, the largest maritime exercise on the planet. I think
over 27 nations coming together, and again, we have increased
the complexity every year of that. So, those are the big ones.
On the small front, every day we come together, if we come
in contact with our allies and partners, the direction I have
given the team is we are going to ensure we can quickly come
together, be instantly interoperable, and then, work together
at any point at anytime. That is the approach we have taken.
Mr. Wittman. Dr. Ratner.
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I will just say we obviously have
a very wide spectrum of partners, some of which we operate at a
very high level; others which have less----
The Chairman. And I do apologize. The gentleman's time has
expired. We try to move on. I should have said that upfront.
Even if you are still in the middle of a question, 5 minutes is
the limit, and we move on to the next member. So, we will have
to take that last piece of it for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 123.]
The Chairman. Mr. Kim is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ratner, I wanted to talk to you about allies and
partners. It is something that you have raised, all of you have
raised, in terms of the importance of what is happening in the
Indo-Pacific. We have seen in the European theater right now
what allies and partners means when it comes to response to
Ukraine. And I feel like it is an important moment to take a
step back and gauge what allies and partners means in the Indo-
Pacific, especially when it comes to a counterweight against
the PRC.
Dr. Ratner, you were just talking about India, for
instance. You talked about the Quad. You talked about some of
the challenges there when it comes to India's relationship with
Russia; that you feel like that is moving in a better
direction.
I guess I just want to point blank ask you, do you assess
that India is the reliable partner that we need? Is there any
concerns on your end about the Quad, about India moving forward
in terms of their actions when we would need them in the
future?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I perceive the U.S.-India defense
relationship is one with incredible momentum. We are going to
hold our highest, most senior-level engagement with them in
early April. That is a two plus two with Secretary Blinken,
Secretary Austin, and their counterparts. And that meeting will
discuss a number of activities that not only are unprecedented,
but are the kinds of things that would have been unimaginable
10 years ago or even 5 years ago.
So, obviously, there are challenges with the relationship
with India, but I think they are manageable, and we are moving
forward very rapidly in deepening the partnership.
Mr. Kim. Yes, I see those partnerships strengthening our
ability to communicate, have that dialog, do exercises. But I
guess what I would like to just get a sense of from you is,
what does it mean for the allies and partners under duress?
What does it mean to have this tested?
So, in the event of some type of conflict with China, I
wanted to ask you, what specifically are the objectives? What
would we want to see come to fruition when it comes to our
allies and partners? How do we test and assess what that would
look like under those types of strain that we see right now in
Europe?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, it is, obviously, a very context-
dependent question. In the case of India, we have seen a test
case of this in the last several years, when the Indians were
facing aggression from China on the Line of Actual Control,
where the United States rapidly provided capabilities and
intelligence. And in the context of trying to improve trust in
the nature of the defense relationship, that was a defining
moment. So, this is about them being ready to support our
efforts, but also us being ready to support theirs. And these
are exactly, precisely the kind of conversations that we are
having at a political-military level with a number of our
closest partners.
Mr. Kim. With the military, or with the arrangements that
we have when it comes to our partnerships in the Pacific--
AUKUS, Quad--am I correct that, and I just want to double-check
on this, that none of these have any military requirements in
the case that any of the other members get attacked, something
that would be more akin to what we have with NATO [North
Atlantic Treaty Organization]? Is that correct?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, neither the Quad nor AUKUS is a
mutual defense treaty, but we do have mutual defense treaties
bilaterally in the Indo-Pacific that are akin to NATO.
Mr. Kim. So, when we are talking about some of the
situations that may occur, the one that we have talked about
the most is about Chinese aggression upon Taiwan. I wanted to
just ask what your confidence level is that the partners and
the allies that we have in the Indo-Pacific, as of now, would
step up in the way that we would need?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, again, that varies from partner to
partner, but I am confident that some of our closest partners
would be with us in a Taiwan contingency.
Mr. Kim. So, in terms of the overall, I guess, trajectory
and the health of our partnerships in the region, how would you
grade it? I would like to just get a sense of your baseline
right now and where we are trying to get towards.
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, strengthening our alliance and
partnerships has been an absolute centerpiece of the Biden-
Harris administration. And in the Indo-Pacific, I think we have
made considerable strides, including building upon some of the
progress that was made during the Trump administration. And
again, when I look around the region, partner after partner
after partner, I see relationships that are stronger than they
have ever been and that are on an upward trajectory.
Mr. Kim. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Scott is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Dr. Ratner, I want to start with you. I mean, the
illegal fishing from China is not limited to the INDOPACOM. It
goes all the way around AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command]. General
Townsend has suggested that the illegal fishing in Africa was
going to lead to political unrest. Is their illegal fishing, is
that about money or is that because they need the fish to feed
their people?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I think it is both an industrial
interest as well as protein for their citizens.
Mr. Scott. Okay. I want to point out to you that--and I
hope the Biden administration is paying attention to this; I
hope we are all paying attention to this--Ukraine exports 50
million metric tons--50 million metric tons--of corn and wheat.
Over a fourth of that goes into the Indo-Pacific region and
Asia.
And I think that we need to be doing some type of analysis
on what the political and economic disruptions look like when
that food is no longer hitting the global supply. They would
normally be planting their crops right now. I think it is
unlikely, obviously, based on what Russia has done, that that
food supply comes to the global network, for lack of better
terminology. And I do think that all of our areas of
responsibility need to be looking at what a reduction in food
supply means for their particular areas.
There are two primary sources of belligerence in this world
right now. They are Russia and China. Admiral, at the end of
World War II, the Soviet Union claimed that they owned the
Kuril Islands. Those islands, my understanding is, belong to
Japan. This dispute has been going on for 77 years. It is not
one that is talked about much, but I do think it is important
that, as we try to resolve these issues on territories, that we
talk about all of them.
Can you speak to what the United States can do to assist
our Japanese ally, again, in that territory? Is this sovereign
Russian territory, as the Russians claim, or do these islands
belong to Japan?
Admiral Aquilino. Sir, I am going to defer that first part
to Secretary Ratner because I believe the United States doesn't
take a policy or a position on those, who owns what, right?
What we would like to do is ensure that any of those disputes
are taken peacefully and in accordance with international law.
But there are multiple disputes, as you highlighted. The
Kurils are only one. The Japanese are also worried about the
Senkaku Islands to the south. And there are hundreds of
disputes throughout the South China Sea. So, the position is to
ensure a peaceful resolution of those disputes, in accordance
with international law. I don't know if Secretary Ratner has
anything else.
Mr. Scott. Well, let me move to another area then. China is
responsible for the majority, if not an extremely significant
portion, of the fentanyl that is coming into the world. Dr.
Ratner, what is the Biden administration doing to stop the
Chinese in the fentanyl that is coming into the world that
seems to be unrestricted by the Chinese government?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, that is outside the purview of the
Defense Department, but I will be sure to get you an answer on
that question from the relevant departments and agencies.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 123.]
Mr. Scott. All right.
Germany and other countries have been resistant to
increasing their defense spending. Japan is one of our allies
that spends about 1.3 percent of its GDP [gross domestic
product] on defense. Are we seeing countries like Japan, based
on the recent aggression from Russia and the conduct of China,
are we seeing them move to increase their defense spending the
way we have seen Germany and others recognize the current
threats?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, we will see. I know there are
current discussions on that ongoing in Tokyo. These are,
obviously, sensitive issues for them, given some of their
constitutional issues, and otherwise. But, clearly, they are
seized of the mounting threat and challenge from the PRC.
Mr. Scott. I think as we see increased spending from those
that share our interests and our values, as Americans, I think
we need to make sure that we are coordinating with them, so
that we get the most for the dollars that are spent.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Khanna is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ratner, could you briefly describe the United States
role in the 1962 border conflict between China and India under
President Kennedy?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I will have to get back to you on
the precise history on that.
Mr. Khanna. The gist of it is that President Kennedy and
the United States supported India in that conflict.
And then, when there was the border conflict in June of
2020, when China violated the Line of Control, could you
briefly describe the United States role at that point?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congressman, I wasn't in the seat at the
time, but, as I recently mentioned, the United States did
rapidly provide certain intelligence and capabilities.
Mr. Khanna. Did Russia do anything to protect India when
China was violating the Line of Control, to your knowledge?
Dr. Ratner. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Khanna. And did Russia, to your knowledge, do anything
to protect India in 1962, when China violated the Line of
Control?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I would be happy to get back to
you on that.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Khanna. To my knowledge, they didn't. And so, both
times when there has been a border dispute with India and
China, it is the United States, actually, that has come to
India's defense.
And so, I guess I am perplexed why--and I say this as an
Indian-American--why India has abstained three times from the
Security Council and is unwilling to condemn Putin's unprovoked
aggression into Ukraine. Do you have a view on this? And has
this been raised at the highest levels with the Indian
government?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I know we have been engaging with
Indian leadership about this issue. And as I mentioned earlier
in response to a question, we are aware that India has a long
history and complicated economic and security partnership with
the Russians. They receive a majority of their weapons from
Russia, historically, and that is something they have been
working hard to wean themselves from. But I would defer to them
to speak on their own exact decisionmaking on this.
Mr. Khanna. So, there is 60 percent of weapons from Russia,
but I guess let me ask you this: Do you think the United States
or Russia are more likely to come to India's defense if the
Chinese were to invade beyond the Line of Control?
Dr. Ratner. The United States, Congressman.
Mr. Khanna. Has that point been made to India?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, we are in deep strategic
conversations about the future of our partnership with India.
Like I said, we have our most senior-level dialog with the
Indians next month, in which Secretary Austin and Secretary
Blinken will have an opportunity to speak with their
counterparts about these critical issues.
Mr. Khanna. What is the plan for India to get off the 60
percent reliance on Russian arms, and how fast can that happen,
if they wanted to switch to getting weapons from the United
States or European allies?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, again, this is obviously a
sovereign decision for the Indians. What we are encouraging
them to do is to purchase more American capabilities, as you
mentioned; work with other third parties, Europeans and others,
and improve their own indigenization of their own defense
sector. So, those trends together are already underway.
If you look over the last several years, I think the
trendlines are moving in the right direction.
Mr. Khanna. How quickly could----
Dr. Ratner. I don't have an answer for a particular day on
the calendar as to when they achieve a certain benchmark.
Mr. Khanna. But, putting aside what their own
decisionmaking is, how quickly could it happen if they said,
``We want to switch as fast as possible.'' I mean, what would
you say is a reasonable rate of reducing Russian dependence? I
mean, could we get that number down 10 percent every year? Or
what is a reasonable target, if they said they wanted to do it?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I would be happy to get you a more
precise answer to that question. I think it depends a lot on
the nature of the specific capability, from munitions all the
way up to much higher end capabilities.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 124.]
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that.
I will just conclude by saying that I think it is obvious
that the United States would stand against Chinese aggression
on the Line of Control, far more than Russia or Putin would;
and that we really need to press India to not be as dependent
on Russian defense and to be willing to condemn Putin's
aggression in Ukraine, just like we would condemn Chinese
aggression beyond the Line of Control.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. DesJarlais is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ratner, let's shift our attention to the tension
between the Chinese and Taiwan. As we know, the world is
watching Ukraine and Russia conflict as we speak. And last
October, President Biden made headlines when asked whether the
United States would come to Taiwan's defense if China attacked,
and the President replied in the affirmative and said that we
have a commitment to do that. Is this the Department's official
position on the perspective of the Taiwan-China conflict?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, the Department's position is that
the United States policies have not changed in terms of our One
China policy, the Taiwan Relations Act, the Three Joint
Communiques, and the Six Assurances, as the foundation of our
policy.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. A lot of people seem to have mixed
feelings about what exactly the United States should be doing
in Ukraine; what is our commitments there. Contrast our
response in Ukraine to what it would look like in China. As we
know, China has been unpredictable and probably expedited in
most of what we have predicted about their capabilities and
their advancement of their military forces.
So, with that in mind, if we see an unfortunate escalation
in that region, what would Americans expect to see in our
response there versus what they see in our response to Ukraine
at this point?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, we could spend all day talking
about the differences and similarities between Ukraine and
Taiwan, and there are some of both. What I will say is, when I
look at the conflict in Ukraine, the lessons that I draw,
number one, are the importance of Taiwan developing its own
capabilities and that's something--and its own defenses and
deterrence. And that is something we are working with them on.
The power of the unity of the West and the international
community coming together around this kind of aggression is an
important signal to potential aggressors in the Pacific and,
also, some of the economic measures that the United States and
others have been willing to take to raise costs on Russia in
this instance is also an important lesson.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Admiral, on that same line, what can
we do to learn from, if there were mistakes in Ukraine, what
can we learn from that? And how can we better prepare
deterrence to China from attacking Taiwan in terms of, what do
you need for defense and what can we do better?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, similar to what Secretary Ratner articulated, right,
this is a real wakeup. There was some surprise over in Europe.
I think that, number one, we have to look at this and say, hey,
this could happen. And I have a sense of urgency to execute the
missions the Secretary has assigned, which is to prevent this
conflict.
But it just goes back to what we talked about before. So,
there are some posture initiatives. We need to be more forward.
We need to be more robust. So, the posture, positioning, and
the credible capability forward is the best way today.
Dr. DesJarlais. Do we need to enhance their defense
capabilities now?
Admiral Aquilino. Absolutely, sir, in accordance with the
Taiwan Relations Act, and that is something that we are doing
at every opportunity,
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Admiral, let me finish with the
disturbing aspects of China's modernization, and specifically,
hypersonics. Going into the NDAA cycle, what do you need and
what should we be focusing on in terms of research and
development, in terms of us fielding both offensive and
defensive hypersonic weapons and capabilities?
Admiral Aquilino. So, the Guam defense system is the number
one priority, as I have put forward in my unfunded list most
recently, Congressman. That is on the defensive side.
But, to your point, right, in order to deter, there is both
a defensive component and an offensive component. So, some of
our long-range capabilities in the form of hypersonics are also
critical to ensure that we have both of those capabilities to
deter.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I have just a few seconds. I will
just note that my first question, Dr. Ratner, on what would it
look like didn't get answered. And I understand that is a
complicated question to answer, if a conflict did arise in
Taiwan. But just to prepare our country for what it will look
like, is the defense of Taiwan different than what we are doing
for Ukraine?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Mr. Congressman, I think it would be
different.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I will yield back.
Mr. Larsen [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
Before I recognize Representative Moulton, a reminder there
is a vote on the floor of the House; 4,000 people left to vote.
It is a motion to adjourn. We will just continue through the
vote, per the chair's instructions.
The chair recognizes Representative Moulton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Aquilino, do you agree with the Marine Corps
expeditionary basing strategy to maintain pressure on China in
the Pacific?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, Congressman, I do. So, as a part of
deterrence against that competitor, it will take the entire
joint force. I credit both the Commandant as well as the Chief
of Staff of the Army to adjust their form, so the Marine
littoral regiment concept to be able to be expeditionary,
forward, and provide support from the land component----
Mr. Moulton. Do you think the Navy has adequately resourced
it?
Admiral Aquilino. The Department of the Navy? I know the
Commandant is moving very quickly. There are some capabilities
we would like faster.
Mr. Moulton. The Marine Corps would disagree. The Marine
Corps feels that you don't have enough amphibious shipping
devoted to this. And the reason is because, when the Navy does
their planning for this, they have used a readiness factor of
80 percent availability. The Marine Corps looks at historic
operational availability, which is more like 63 percent. I
guess it has been about 43 percent, literally half the planning
number that you used in the past year. So, I am not sure how we
square the wheel here.
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
I will go back to the CNO and the Commandant and see where
they believe they are. The initial setup of the littoral or the
Marine littoral regiment is self-deployable via C-130 as they
work through the----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 123.]
Mr. Moulton. I understand, Admiral.
Dr. Ratner, how do you plan to help resolve this
disagreement? Because it is pretty fundamental. We don't need
to leave Marines stranded on Pacific Islands because we don't
have enough shipping.
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congressman, it is an important point. I
agree with Admiral Aquilino that these are important
capabilities. I know they are beginning to stand up the first--
--
Mr. Moulton. Yes, but my question is, how do you plan to
resolve the dispute? This seems like a pretty fundamental
disagreement if we don't have enough ships.
Dr. Ratner. I think, Congressman, I would be happy to get
back to you in the context of the FY23 budget and the
capabilities----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page123.]
Mr. Moulton. Okay.
Admiral Aquilino, just going back to you, 20 years ago,
China had the largest land army in the world. It was a Cold War
relic. And in fact, we barely paid it any mind because we
weren't concerned about its effectiveness, and we probably took
some solace in the fact that China was spending so much money
to maintain it.
In the last decade and a half, they have radically
transformed their military. And rather than making massive
investments in a land army, they actually cut it. They are
making massive investments in artificial intelligence, quantum
computing, drones. If your kids have drones, they were probably
invented and manufactured in China. They clearly lead us in a
lot of these areas.
Do you believe that the Navy is transforming itself quickly
enough to meet this rapidly transforming threat?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
As I articulated before, I have a sense of urgency, and we
absolutely need to move faster. I do believe the Navy has been
focused on the PRC as the primary challenger, but there are
some things that certainly could move faster.
Mr. Moulton. Well, Admiral, I sincerely appreciate that
answer, because I think there haven't been enough leaders like
yourself in the Navy who have acknowledged that you really do
need to move more quickly.
If the Chinese attack us with an AI [artificial
intelligence]-enabled force, an autonomous weapon system of
some sort, and we meet that with an American manned
alternative, who do you expect to win? I know this is a highly
theoretical question, but I am curious of your view on these--
--
Admiral Aquilino. My view is the United States.
Mr. Moulton. You are aware that, in a recent DARPA [Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency] simulation, an AI-enabled F-
16 beat one of the Air Force's top F-16 pilots five to nothing?
Now maybe Navy pilots are that much better, but that is not a
good statistic.
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, sir, I have heard of that, but I am
unfamiliar with the details of the scenario or as it applied.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I think we all need to be familiar with
these details because this is the fight of the future. And if
the Chinese beat us because they are more willing to invest in
autonomous capabilities, and it proves that the autonomous
capabilities are more effective than our manned force, as much
as we love our manned force, we are going to be on the losing
side of that equation.
Dr. Ratner, I am curious of your view on this situation,
this matter.
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congressman, I would just note that the
Department in the FY22 [fiscal year 2022] budget made its
largest ever investment in research and development and testing
and evaluation on these advanced capabilities.
Just last month, in this area----
Mr. Moulton. What percentage of the budget is that, Dr.
Ratner?
Dr. Ratner. I don't know the percentage off the top of my
head. I would be happy to get you that and----
Mr. Moulton. It would be interesting to compare it to the
percentage that China is investing in these capabilities, to
understand if we are, in fact, transforming our force quickly
enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
The chair recognizes for 5 minutes Representative Kelly of
Mississippi.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question--and I was dealing with an approps
[appropriations] bill today, and we are in March already--can
you guys tell me the true impacts that these continuing CRs
[continuing resolutions] that we do every time have had on your
ability to maintain readiness? And what equipment do you have
or don't have? Specifically, in this current fiscal year, what
deprivations has it caused you?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
So, in my statement I articulated the need for predictable
and sustained budgets. Again, with China being a near-, mid-,
and far-term problem, it is even more critical. There is a ton
of loss of buying power as it applies to the CRs. Those impacts
are well known.
From my perspective, though, it also prohibits any new
starts. So, when I talk about the Guam defense system, Mission
Partner Environment, and our ability to link our ranges, those
are three top priorities that we are just unable to start on,
based on that impact.
Mr. Kelly. And, General, real quickly?
General LaCamera. It is the same, sir. I mean, we have had
challenges with some maintenance issues, repair parts, and new
starts.
Mr. Kelly. I am going to keep stomping my foot until some
of these people around here listen to me and understand the
disastrous consequences it has for our Department of Defense,
especially, and all of our agencies, but especially the
Department of Defense.
I want to talk a little bit about fleet management, and
especially when we are talking about our merchant fleet and the
ability to resupply in that region. Having flown and gone to
that region, it is a long haul, which makes the logistical
chain really, really tough.
What things, if you could ask, what do we need in our
merchant fleet to get fuels, supplies, troops, equipment, all
those things, to make sure that we can have a steady flow of
equipment to maintain any type of defense, whether that be in
Korea or in Taiwan or Japan, or any of our allies in the
region?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
Again, the distributed nature of the posture we are talking
about, working with our allies and partners to be able to set
up places that provide for exercise and interoperability, as
well as logistic support, is critical across this broad area.
Additionally, on the airlift side, we need to ensure that
we can both sustain it, refuel it, and keep it deliverable.
Sealift, the TSP programs that Congressman Courtney talked
about before was really a good first step, looking at the
refueling piece. We need to look through that lens for all
logistics capabilities.
Mr. Kelly. I think we have a tendency to hand-wave getting
there, and a hand-wave--and, General, I am an Army guy. So, we
always forget that we have to [inaudible] in the assembly area
to get to the LD [line of departure], and we don't really plan
on that. And then, we miss the LD by 2 hours because we didn't
plan on that. And I think our logistical chain to that region
specifically, guys, we have got to pay attention on the left
side of war, not on the right side of war. Otherwise, we will
find out what the Russians are finding out, a very hard way
right now. People who win logistics win wars.
My next question is--and either of you all--do we have the
right ships, and types of ships and numbers of ships, to do an
Indo-Pacific plan? Do we have the right ships, combat ships, to
execute this?
Admiral Aquilino. As I said before, sir, absolutely. We
have the right ships, but I am concerned about the growing
capacity of the competitors in the region. So, we will have to
continue to look at that.
Mr. Kelly. And then, I guess my final thing is, just
double-tapping, Dr. Ratner, on Mr. Khanna, and we don't agree
on a lot, but we do agree on this. We are a much better ally
for India, and I hope the administration and everyone who is
working--and I know they are--will work as hard as we can to
convince them that we are their best ally, and we will be their
friend in a time of need. And so, whatever we can do to hurry
that along.
What other allies in the region, Admiral, are we not
exercising that we could exercise better, that we could make a
better ally? Whether that is Vietnam or the Philippines, that
we used to have great relationships, not so much right now,
what other countries in the region can we get some bang for?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, thanks.
You know, we engage with all of them. But, clearly, really,
we ought to focus or put specific focus on the five mutual
defense treaty alliances. We are doing a lot with those teams,
right? Those are relationships that are critically important,
as well as the other multinational relationships that are in a
region. So, we work with ASEAN, much trilateral relationship
with the U.S.-Japan-Korean is extremely important, as we have
identified the Quad and AUKUS. So, continuing to strengthen
those and looking for others.
Mr. Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Luria is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you.
I will start with Admiral Aquilino. My first series of
questions is really rapid-fire, short-answer questions, because
I want to be able to spend the most time on the last question.
So, yesterday, the Director of National Intelligence
testified that Russia does not want a direct conflict with the
United States. So, in your opinion, if Ukraine was a NATO
member, do you think Russia would have attacked Ukraine?
Admiral Aquilino. Congresswoman, again, I think that is a
better question for General Wolters, as it is out of my AOR
[area of responsibility].
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, then, this is not necessarily an
opinion question, but does the President have the authority to
put service members on the ground in Ukraine or establish a no-
fly zone without coming to Congress for authorization?
Admiral Aquilino. Again, Congressman, some of that is a
policy issue, but I would defer that to General Wolters.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. In your military opinion, is it easier to
repel or stop an invasion in progress, rather than to come back
later and try to expel an occupying force?
Admiral Aquilino. Boy, I wish I could give you a yes or no.
This one is really complex, right--the environment, the
adversary, the capabilities. I will tell you my opinion is it
would be very difficult to remove a force.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And do you think that China wants a
direct conflict with the United States?
Admiral Aquilino. Everything that has been articulated by
China is that they would prefer, or that they are working
towards, a peaceful resolution across the strait. That said, I
also believe they said they haven't ruled out the use of force.
And again, while I don't have the ability to inject their
calculus, my task has been to be ready, should they choose the
latter.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And so, with regards to Taiwan, does the
ability to act quickly to deter an invasion make a difference
to you, as the combatant commander?
Admiral Aquilino. It absolutely does, which is why the
posture that we have talked about is so important for forces in
the region.
Mrs. Luria. So, if China invaded Taiwan, how long do you
think Congress would take to authorize the use of military
force? And put that in the context of it is 140 nautical miles
across the strait. Do you think they could do it within the
time necessary for you to react?
Admiral Aquilino. Congresswoman, again, I never would
volley a question to the chairman. But, based on that question,
on how fast Congress would react, I----
Mrs. Luria. Okay. In my estimate, in my 3-plus years here,
I think we could not act that quickly.
So, do you think China believes that the United States will
defend Taiwan with U.S. forces, if they were to use force
against Taiwan?
Admiral Aquilino. I think I would take that for a
classified conversation.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, under the Taiwan Relations Act and
the War Powers Act, does the President have the authority to
intervene with U.S. forces, if it happened today, during an
invasion of Taiwan, without seeking the authorization of
Congress?
Admiral Aquilino. I am going to defer that one as a policy
question to Secretary Ratner.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 124.]
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, perhaps we can follow up on that
because I wanted to get to sort of the last part of this.
So, this has been a debate that I think has been elevated
recently. So, if the United States changed its policy of
strategic ambiguity towards Taiwan to a policy of strategic
clarity, and guaranteed that it would come to the defense of
Taiwan to maintain the status quo, would this be a deterrent to
China?
Admiral Aquilino. I think, as this conversation continues,
if I were to look at the alternative between strategic
ambiguity and strategic clarity, there are some who believe it
would be a deterrent and there are some that will believe it
would be an accelerant. I think it is worthwhile of a deep,
thoughtful conversation, as we look at that option. I think
there are pros and cons to both, but we ought to look very
closely.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And then, I know you didn't fully answer
the earlier question, and this was the part I wanted to get to.
If China thinks that the United States will come to the defense
of Taiwan--and you described there are sort of two camps in the
strategic clarity/strategic ambiguity--can you explain like why
would it be viewed as a provocative act for us to just be
clear, to provide clarity, to say that the United States will
come to the defense of Taiwan to maintain the status quo? Can
you explain the people who would see it as provocative, that
camp and their thought process?
Admiral Aquilino. I would say that, based on the One China
policy, and the PRC's articulation of the importance, in the
academic world, any movement towards the independence of Taiwan
would be viewed very strongly by the PRC.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, I just want to reiterate in my last
few seconds I think this is a very important debate. I think it
is a debate that we need to be having now, because, as I
highlighted, the shortness of distance----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Gallagher is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Admiral Aquilino, if the President came to
you and said, ``You know, [inaudible], my top national security
concern is preventing a PLA invasion of Taiwan, and I think it
is going to happen in the next 5 years, but I am having trouble
understanding how and whether the bureaucracy is executing my
top priority. So, I need your help developing some metrics to
help me understand if we are making progress, things that I
could ask every morning when I get the PDB [President's Daily
Brief], whether we are doing X, Y, and Z,'' what would those
top measurable metrics be? What would you recommend the
President do in that scenario?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, thanks. Boy, that is really
complex and we try to do it all the time, right? The assessment
of where you sit is really complex, and there is a ton of
variables.
First, I would articulate, are we postured in the right
places with the right credible force to be able to respond
quickly, and then, to dominate in all those domains? So, I
would kind of do that type of measurement.
Mr. Gallagher. But things we can measure. I mean, I am
talking--it doesn't need to be complex. It could be missiles;
it could be ships; it could be Taiwan's own investments. What
are the most important things the President needs to be
tracking to gauge our progress on deterring a PLA invasion of
Taiwan?
Admiral Aquilino. Again, I don't want to make it--well,
first of all, it is really complex, as I see it, right? I just
can't say, ``X missiles compared to Y missiles, and we are
good,'' right? It is the capability of those missiles. It is
the survivability. It is the ability to get to where they need
to go to launch. It is the ability to understand the target
sets that you are going after.
So, that is why I go back to, it would be a comparison of
how do I execute compared to the challenge in each domain would
give me a decent sense, and we try to do that all the time.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, you mentioned, your first response was
basing or access. Could you talk, then, a little bit about it?
I mean, as I look at your AOR, I see a lot of U.S.-flag
possessions--Midway, Wake, territories of American Samoa,
Northern Marianas. If we were to invest in hardening these
possessions and territories, how would that contribute to your
ability to deter a PLA invasion of Taiwan?
Admiral Aquilino. Yeah, it would absolutely allow us to
both move further forward, right, west of the International
Date Line--I have to be in place with the right capabilities to
be effective. Second, it gets to the agile logistics piece that
many of the members brought up, right--the ability to sustain
forward such a long way from home.
And it is one of our asymmetric advantages. We are seeing
it play in the Ukraine, right? There is nobody else in the
world that can do what we have done. If you look at what would
happen in the Middle East, it is a critical advantage, and we
have to continue to mold it. That posture directly contributes
to that.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, you see, we started to simplify a
complex reality. Because, presumably, we in DOD and the
President could measure the extent to which we are hardening
our existing possessions or getting access agreements where we
don't currently have them. And in terms of that latter issue,
what is at the top of your priority list in terms of where you
need access that we don't currently have?
Admiral Aquilino. It is not necessarily where we don't
have; it is where we might want to expand. Again, I start with
the five treaty allies, which are critically important. So,
Japan, we are in a very good place with Japan, and we have to
maintain those places. The Philippines, critically strategic
terrain, and we need to expand in the Philippines. We are
expanding in Australia, as Secretary Ratner talked about.
Thailand, also important; we have logistic support there from
our ally.
New places. India, we are working towards logistic support
in India and additional cooperation that has been articulated.
Singapore, we have three ships there and a logistics site. So,
to continue to sustain those and expand is the focus.
Mr. Gallagher. I think another thing we could measure,
quite easily actually, is what the Taiwans are buying and
investing in. We talked a little bit about asymmetric defense.
Two questions: What do you want them to buy, and would a
security assistance program, similar to what we have in
Ukraine, beyond foreign military sales, help you accomplish
your mission of defending Taiwan from a PLA invasion?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, sir. And, first, I left out Korea
before--only because I don't want to step on my buddy General
LaCamera's toes, but a critical treaty ally.
On the capability piece, I'm truly encouraged, right? The
people of Taiwan bought 100 Harpoon systems. The focus there,
we need to get them there quickly.
The other capabilities that Secretary Ratner talked about,
we need to make sure we have programs and ability. Whatever
mechanisms that can be delivered to produce those and deliver
them more quickly under the current environment would be
helpful.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Kahele is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Mr. Chairman, and Dr. Ratner, Admiral
Aquilino, General LaCamera, for appearing here today.
I would like to thank, personally, Admiral Aquilino for
calling me 2 days ago to share the decision by Secretary Austin
to defuel and permanently shut down the Red Hill Bulk Fuel
Storage Facility in Hawaii.
Admiral Aquilino, real simple, do I have your commitment to
work with myself and the Hawaii congressional delegation to
ensure that Red Hill is safely defueled within the timeline set
forth by Secretary Austin?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Kahele. Thank you for that commitment.
I would like to jump now, Admiral Aquilino, to your
testimony, specifically, developing regional partnerships. You
just answered a question from my colleague about sustaining
that posture forward. And I understand you were just in Palau
earlier this year. As you know, Compact negotiations with Palau
and our other Freely Associated States and our allies there
have stagnated. These nations are a critical part of U.S.
national security policy, and our Compacts with them address
economic assistance very important to these nations. Continuing
that assistance is not only important as a national security
matter, in light of the region's competing geopolitical
realities, but also as a moral matter, in light of our shared
history and the continued role that these nations continue to
play in our national defense.
So, Admiral Aquilino, given Palau's strategic importance to
our country, how important is it that these agreements are
expeditiously completed before they expire? And secondly, what
is the DOD's position on investing in their critical
infrastructure, such as the Compact Road, which has fallen into
disrepair?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
As you and I have talked about before, the agreement or the
Compact of the free association team is really important. I do
want to highlight that the lead for that event is the State
Department, and supported by Department of the Interior. It has
got a DOD representative on it.
But it is critical. These are areas that we have deep
people-to-people ties, and we are responsible for the defense
of those nations. So, we need to work through these. They
become--renegotiation needs to be done in 2023. DOD is
supporting that event, but it would be critical to get those
agreements worked through as soon as possible.
Mr. Kahele. Any thoughts on the investment in critical
infrastructure? Is it advisable to improve runways in Palau, in
Peleliu, in Angaur, as well as their very, very important
deepwater seaport for the U.S. military?
Admiral Aquilino. Absolutely. And as a part of the posture
improvements and distribution we have talked about, there are
many of those that are on our list. Matter of fact, the Marine
Corps, along with the Navy Seabees, actually extended one of
runways in Palau, based on our own capabilities to start some
of that work. So, some of it is in MILCON [military
construction]; others we can do with other funds appropriated.
And we continue to work to improve those places.
Mr. Kahele. Thank you for that answer.
Dr. Ratner, the White House's 2022 Indo-Pacific Strategy
document highlights the importance of building connections
within and beyond the region through people-to-people
exchanges. What are some of the soft power support systems and
institutions that can help support this INDOPACOM national
security requirement?
Dr. Ratner. Thank you, Congressman.
I would defer to the State Department and other agencies on
specific programs, but we are certainly looking to build
economic linkages, people-to-people linkages, youth exchanges,
and other areas.
Mr. Kahele. You know, in Hawaii, Dr. Ratner, the East-West
Center is uniquely postured to expand exactly what you talked
about, the people-to-people exchanges that are necessary to
build capacity and expertise in the region and its challenges.
Do you believe that the DOD can dedicate more resources to
these types of professional exchanges, and that within the
Pacific Island region, that this would be warranted?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I would be happy to get back to
you specifically on the resourcing question. But, as a matter
of policy and strategy, it is certainly in our interest to
strengthen and maintain those types of relationships.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 124.]
Mr. Kahele. All right. Thank you and mahalo.
Chair, I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And everyone, thank you for your service and dedication.
Dr. Ratner, I am very concerned as a friend of India. India
is the world's largest democracy. America is the oldest
democracy. My father served there in the Flying Tigers during
World War II. So, I developed a great fondness for the people
of India, the success of Indian-Americans. And so, it has
become shocking that such a great country has abstained on the
issues of the mass murder in Ukraine.
And I am concerned. A lot of this is because of foreign
military sales and the different technicalities and whatever.
What is being done to address issues to make sure, as has
already been previously brought up by Democrats and Republicans
of their fondness for India, that we are not their main support
of military, which is in the interest of the people of India
and the people of the Indo-Pacific.
Dr. Ratner. Congressman Wilson, we have had a chance to
talk about this a little bit this morning. My response would be
that I share your view of the importance of the U.S.-India
relationship 100 percent. And we understand and recognize that
they have a long, complicated history and security partnership
with the Russians, but that they have been systematically
diversifying away from that. And we have been engaging with
them on that question, looking for them to purchase more U.S.
systems, more European systems, and develop their own
indigenous capabilities as well. And I think the trendlines are
moving in the right direction.
Mr. Wilson. And it just seems so unnatural. The
relationship with Prime Minister Narendra Modi should be with
the United States, not in any way associated by way of
abstention with a megalomaniac, Putin, in Putin's war. Again, I
saw our colleagues, Democrats and Republicans, appalled that
there would be abstention by the great country of India.
Additionally, I appreciate the questions from Congressman
Gallagher concerning the defense of Taiwan. My father served,
Flying Tigers, in Kunming, Chengdu, Zhejiang, and had a great
affection for the people of China. And out of that, I have such
an appreciation. And my concern is for Chinese lives, Taiwanese
lives. We have got to build up the defenses. I like the concept
of a porcupine--that it would just be not in the interest of
the CCP [Chinese Communist Party] to attack Taiwan.
And he was talking about the different levels of equipment,
and you did, too. And I appreciate that which is being
purchased. Should we also look into a lend-lease, just as
America provided lend-lease to stop the Nazis' siege of
Leningrad, which was successful for the people of Russia--that
some of them have forgotten--but a lend-lease, as being
proposed for Ukraine to defend Kyiv from Russian or Putin
aggression? Should we look for lend-lease to expedite the
providing of military equipment to Taiwan?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, we are currently in the process of
evaluating all tools and authorities possible to expedite the
provision of the necessary asymmetric capabilities to the
Taiwans, precisely to reinforce the kind of deterrence that you
are talking about.
Mr. Wilson. And, General LaCamera, I had the extraordinary
opportunity, due to Congressman Curt Weldon, in 2003. I am the
only person left who had been on that delegation to DPRK, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, North Korea, to
Pyongyang.
And the comparison of Seoul, if you ever want the greatest
comparison between free market capitalism and socialist
totalitarianism, obviously, it is the Korean Peninsula. Gosh,
the success of South Korea. But I saw the Potemkin village,
sadly, the horror of people subject to totalitarianism. And, of
course, this is a dictatorship that had been set up for the Kim
family by Joseph Stalin, and now we are in the third
generation.
I share the concern of Congressman Turner and others about
the artillery capability, particularly against Seoul. And how
could this be addressed?
General LaCamera. Well, thanks, Congressman.
Part of it will be addressed in close air support, if the
fight kicks off, and how we would strike against it. But he has
not just got the long-range artillery; he is developing other
capabilities that give them really a 360-threat to the
peninsula right now, which is concerning.
Mr. Wilson. And I share the concern about the great
territory of Guam. So, please, every way you can----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallego is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses for joining us today.
My question is for Mr. Ratner--Dr. Ratner, I should say. In
your written remarks, you largely touch on the conventional
capabilities that China is developing. But I have increasing
concern about the threat in the gray zone. If we draw any
lessons from the ongoing war in Ukraine, it is that we need to
ensure allies and partners are too prickly for an adversary or
competitor to swallow. And I would kind of discuss this about
irregular warfare, and I think it is very crucial training.
Do you believe the Department has the authorities, though,
it needs for special operations forces to collaborate with
allies and partners in irregular warfare? And where can we
further deepen or expand irregular warfare programs with allied
partners and forces in the Indo-Pacific?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, maybe I will defer to Admiral
Aquilino to talk a little bit about some of the work we are
doing with partners currently in the region.
Admiral Aquilino. Yeah. Thanks, Congressman.
As you know, we do many JCETs [Joint Combined Exchange
Trainings]. The Special Operations Command is extremely
valuable. The SOCPAC [Special Operations Command Pacific]
commander is in many, many countries working to improve
training capability and to support their special operations
forces. At this point, I don't believe I need additional
authorities.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. So, you don't believe you need
additional authorities? Well, just to be more specific, do we
have the authority or the capability for us to do joint
training with Vietnam, for example?
Admiral Aquilino. We do, to do our JCETs exercises and
training, absolutely.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Admiral, you describe the Seize the
Initiative as the first step in building enduring advantages.
And I would argue the maintaining of robust defense
intelligence posture in the Indo-Pacific region must be one of
those priorities. I look forward to leading a CODEL
[congressional delegation] to the region next month to conduct
oversight of defense intelligence equities. To the extent that
you can share your perspective in this unclassified forum, what
do you see as the biggest intelligence gaps in the region? And
what steps should we take to deepen intelligence cooperation
with allies and partners from Northeast Asia to the Freely
Associated States?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman. I hope you will come
through Hawaii on your travel, and I look forward to meeting
you and hosting you in person.
Obviously, as I talked about before, this persistent
battlespace awareness is enabled by an all-domain ISR. And from
what we have watched over the past 20 years, we never have
enough. So, any capabilities--whether they be current,
terrestrial, undersea, on the sea, above the sea, in space, or
cyberspace--that delivers that persistent battlespace awareness
are desirable.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Thank you, Admiral.
And then, General, I wanted to ask you about the Pacific
Deterrence Initiative. As you know, this effort is designed to
strengthen our presence in a region, our infrastructure, and
our logistics and maintenance capabilities. It also is meant to
enhance our exercise and security cooperation. How do you
envision United States Forces Korea contributing to this
initiative? And what role do you think the Republic of Korea
itself can play in furthering the goals of PDI?
General LaCamera. Thank you, Congressman.
Our contribution or the PDI for the defense of the Korean
Peninsula, for me, is our ability to train with allies and
partners. We have talked about Cobra Gold, Balikatan, Talisman
Sabre, RIMPAC, and our ability or my ability to get Korean
forces and U.S. forces integrated as a combined element working
with our allies and partners in the region.
Mr. Gallego. Excellent. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Mr. Waltz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to submit for the record a letter from the
committee noting its concern about the lack of progress in the
negotiations with Micronesia, Marshall Islands, the Republic of
Palau, and the renewal of the Compacts of Free Association,
particularly that there has not been a negotiator named yet.
And we have had a lot of discussion about how critical that is
to you, Admiral Aquilino and Dr. Ratner. But where is the
negotiator? This is, obviously, a joint effort with Commerce
and Interior and the Department. This is a letter to the White
House, to the President, I would like to submit for the record,
Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 117.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
General LaCamera, let me just--we have had a lot of
discussion about allies, and I think we are moving in the right
direction; I am worried we are not moving in the right
direction fast enough.
The threat briefs in terms of what China is prepared to do,
and overlaid with our pathway to get there to deter it, are off
in terms of the timeline. But, in the event of a conflict,
General, what is the government of South Korea--and I
understand the votes are being counted, but, generally
speaking, they have had a common position--is the government of
South Korea prepared to allow U.S. forces to operate from South
Korean territory in the defense of Taiwan, in your opinion?
General LaCamera. I think it would depend on if there was a
threat to the Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Waltz. So, minus a threat to the Korean Peninsula, a
threat to Taiwan, which would probably necessitate, from the
Chinese perspective, attacks on Japan, are we going to be able
to use those forces, 30,000 that are there, plus the associated
air assets, from South Korean territory?
General LaCamera. Well, Congressman, my best military
advice would be, what is the threat to the Korean Peninsula and
what can we afford? You know, we still require combat power to
secure the peninsula. So, I think it would be a discussion with
the South Korean government, with Admiral Aquilino, with the
Secretary of Defense, on what our obligations are on the
peninsula and what is needed for the Taiwan fight.
Mr. Waltz. It sounds like a non-answer, General.
General LaCamera. To me, it is a hypothetical. I don't know
the incoming government, what----
Mr. Waltz. Are we incorporating into our planning use of
those forces, potentially, obviously with the acquiesce of the
South Korean government?
General LaCamera. Are we?
Mr. Waltz. Uh-hum.
General LaCamera. I have not been told----
Mr. Waltz. Can Admiral Aquilino count on your forces in the
case of that fight, when we are talking about forces forward?
General LaCamera. Admiral Aquilino can count on me to
execute my mission of protecting the Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Waltz. Yes.
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I would recommend taking this into
a classified setting. I think we could give you a more fulsome
answer to that question.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. That would be great, and I wish we could
have talked about that yesterday. However, I do think that we
do need to take a public posture and with the new South Korean
government on what we are prepared to do, and what they are
prepared to do.
And an associated question there is, is China going to lean
on the North Korean government to ramp up tensions and to tie
those forces down in a Taiwan Strait scenario?
Dr. Ratner, we talked about Harpoons, and currently, the
Harpoons are due to be delivered 2025, I believe. Is that
sufficient? I mean, by the time they are delivered, and then,
they actually have the training and the operational capability,
we are looking at 2026, 2027 to have a full capability? Is that
sufficient? And what is the Department going to do to
accelerate that timeline?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I wish they were arriving there
yesterday. So, I think as soon as we could get them there is
better. And I can assure you we are turning over every rock to
see how we can accelerate the provision of these capabilities.
Mr. Waltz. Okay.
Dr. Ratner. We have dedicated personnel working across the
Department, across the Security Cooperation department, and in
discussions with partners about how we might be able to do
that.
Mr. Waltz. How can this committee help you do that?
Dr. Ratner. I will get back to you on that, Congressman.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. Taiwanese need Harpoons.
Dr. Ratner. Yes.
Mr. Waltz. As you said, yesterday, I agree. The Ukrainians
needed Harpoons. That would have made a big difference in the
defense of Odessa and Mariupol right now. We didn't, I don't
think, do what we could to get those to them, and we are seeing
the ramifications of that. I would hate to be having this
conversation in 2025 or 2026----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Slotkin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Great.
Thank you, gentlemen. And sorry that we have been coming in
and out with votes.
You know, I was in Taiwan over Thanksgiving. You guys have
sponsored some really useful classified briefings and tabletop
exercises that I have participated in. And it just keeps coming
to me clearer and clearer that, while we have military options,
and it is our job to prepare to counter China when, and if, we
ever, God forbid, have a conflict, that we are just not using
the other levers of American power; namely, economic power, our
cultural power, just a whole bunch of other things.
And I don't want the Pentagon to feel like they are the
lead foot in the debate and the engagement with China. So, tell
me, when are we going to have a strategy that you all can fit
under?
Dr. Ratner, help us understand how we are going to leverage
the other things. Because, as you have seen, we are watching
things play out with Russia right now in Ukraine. No one wants
to see Taiwan be the next Ukraine, but it is not just about you
all and the stick. So, what is the plan and the strategy?
Dr. Ratner. Yes, Congresswoman, I fully agree with you that
this needs to be a whole-of-government approach. And I think,
as Beijing is looking at the crisis in Ukraine, the conflict in
Ukraine, it is important that they are seeing the kinds of
economic measures that the United States is taking and the
degree to which our diplomatic and economic and military
actions are being done in concert with such a large group of
countries from around the world. So, I fully agree that the
full toolkit should be brought to bear here.
Ms. Slotkin. But we are going to see it, we're going to see
the strategy and it is going to lay it out, and it is going to
be--I mean, we had a whole strategy around the Soviet Union,
right? Containment was our whole-of-government strategy, and
the Defense Department was part of it, but it wasn't the only
part. I am looking for that equivalent strategy on China. The
country is looking for that equivalent strategy on China. I
represent autoworkers that have been laid off for the better
part of the last year because of a 14 cent microchip that they
can't get. So, when are we going to see the global strategy
that we are going to understand, simple, about what our plan is
vis-a-vis China?
Dr. Ratner. So, my hope, Congresswoman Slotkin, is that the
National Security Strategy will be out before too long. That
is, obviously, not something that the Defense Department can
control, and the National Defense Strategy as well will provide
both the public and a classified version of how we are getting
after this particular challenge.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay.
Dr. Ratner. There are other efforts underway along the
lines of what you are describing that are currently classified,
and we can speak about in a different setting.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. Yeah, I would just say that the public
strategy--the public needs to understand this issue, right?
They are watching what is going on in Russia-Ukraine and
wondering when is the next shoe going to drop with China and
are we prepared.
To that end, we know that cyberattacks, attacks on our
infrastructure, that those kinds of sort of short-of-
traditional-conventional-war steps are things that we just have
to assume the Chinese are thinking about, if we get into
conflict. And the average American has been on the receiving
end of some kind of ransomware attack, cyberattack, and they
don't understand what the government is doing to protect them.
I know that is largely Homeland Security, but can you talk
about cyber threats from China and what we are doing, in an
unclassified setting, I know, to show the American people that
we are protecting them when they are on the front lines?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congresswoman.
So, that responsibility, as it applies to DOD, is in
CYBERCOM [Cyber Command] Commander General Nakasone, and he is
a great partner that we coordinate with all the time. So, for
the DOD critical infrastructure, he is taking steps and he has
got teams every day watching the defense of the global
information grid and to ensure militarily. And as you
articulated, the civilian aspect of that is done via Homeland
Security.
Ms. Slotkin. Right. So, I would offer--because I understand
that is not your mission, right? But it is going to be part of
warfare; it is already part of warfare. And we are the Defense
Department here. We are the Armed Services Committee. So, I
would offer I would love to see a briefing on this, classified
or unclassified, with the Department of Homeland Security
sitting right next to you all. It probably wouldn't hurt to get
the State Department in there. But something that shows the
American people that, while we know we are the best fighting
force in the world and we are going to kick some butt abroad,
we are also coordinated when it comes to protecting back home.
Just a gratuitous comment.
But, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Banks is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I apologize, I had to step out to go cast a procedural
vote. So, I missed a little bit of the testimony so far today.
But I did want to ask, immediately, Dr. Ratner, it seems
that we have established today that the threat of a Chinese
invasion into Taiwan is more than ever before. I mean, is that
fair to say?
Dr. Ratner. I think there is a mounting threat of
aggression from the PRC.
Mr. Banks. More than before? More than ever before?
Dr. Ratner. With the capability that they have today, yes.
Mr. Banks. Yes, that is the message today, more than ever--
--
Dr. Ratner. They have conducted acts of aggression in the
past. So, I wouldn't say, ``more than ever before.''
Mr. Banks. More than in recent years?
Dr. Ratner. Yes.
Mr. Banks. Okay.
Dr. Ratner. The threat is----
Mr. Banks. Fair enough.
Admiral, would you say that Taiwan is safer in 2022 than,
say, just pulling something out of the hat, summer of 2019?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, thanks.
I think they are seeing exactly what we are seeing, which
is this increased aggression. I don't know how to measure
whether they are safer or not. I think there is a growing
concern, based on what they have watched the PRC execute over
the last number of years.
Mr. Banks. But we are here today because this increased
aggression has--it is increasing; it is growing. It is more of
a threat than it was before.
In August 2019, Jake Sullivan debated Michael Pillsbury
from the Hudson Institute and he said, quote, ``When it comes
to the issue of Taiwan, 30 months into the Trump
administration, it is more likely for the U.S. to be dragged
into a war with China than 30 months ago. The Trump policy
toward China is fundamentally not productive.'' End quote.
Today, coincidentally, we are 14 months into the Biden
administration, of which Mr. Sullivan is acting as President
Biden's National Security Advisor. Admiral, are we less likely
today to be dragged into a war with China over Taiwan as
compared to 2019?
Admiral Aquilino. Sir, once again, I see increasing desire
to build up and continue to grow their military capabilities.
President Xi Jinping, in a public statement, said he wanted his
forces modernized by 2027, but he didn't articulate what he
would do with them or when he would do it. But, from where I
sit, my responsibility is to ensure we are ready, should that
occur.
Mr. Banks. So, Dr. Ratner, what has changed? What has
changed between the summer of 2019 and where we sit today? What
is the fundamental difference in our foreign policy today that
has led to an increased aggression, as the Admiral defined it,
in China's posture toward Taiwan? What is different? Why now?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, I don't attribute Xi Jinping's
growing aggression and assertiveness to the United States.
Mr. Banks. You don't? Okay. Well, what has changed? What
has changed? Why now? Why not then, if it doesn't have anything
to do with the United States?
Dr. Ratner. I would be happy to share that assessment in a
classified setting. His capabilities are growing and his
patience seems to be decreasing.
Mr. Banks. But you don't have an explanation for the
American people about why?
Admiral Aquilino. Well, if I could jump in, Congressman?
Mr. Banks. Admiral, please.
Admiral Aquilino. So, again, this is about what the PRC has
done, not what anyone else has done, right? They have taken
lives on the Indian Line of Actual Control. They have
discounted their agreement as it applied to Hong Kong. They
have locked up a million Muslims in Xinjiang. So, their
actions, the PRC actions--not U.S. actions, not any other
nation's actions--are the things that give us concern. I think
that is what you were getting to.
Mr. Banks. What I am getting at is that Jake Sullivan said
that this was more likely to happen on Donald Trump's watch
because of Donald Trump's foreign policy. But, instead, Dr.
Ratner, you conceded that the threat is more real today than it
has been at any point in recent years.
Let me move on.
Dr. Ratner. And it will be, it will be, regardless of----
Mr. Banks. Let me move on. North Korea restarted missile
tests in 2021 after a 4-year pause in testing. In 2022, North
Korea conducted a record number of missile tests. Last
Saturday, it conducted the ninth missile test this year. In
addition, recent satellite images have shown North Korea seems
to be building up nuclear testing. General, what factors do you
think led North Korea to resume these provocative behaviors
since 2021, after a rather long hiatus?
General LaCamera. KJU [Kim Jong-un] claims it is because of
sanctions and that we haven't come to the table. I think it is
more internal for him. I think it is fairly complicated when
you think of the Moon administration is on a transition. And I
think, as we just talked about with China, I think he defers to
China, but he is also looking for it to be autonomous. So,
while this threat is to the south and to the U.S.----
[The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
The Chairman. I am sorry, but the gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Panetta is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Gentlemen, obviously, thanks to all three of you for being
here and appreciate your patience, as well as your testimony
and the information you are providing us.
The other night I had a good conversation with a
representative of Taiwan. And obviously, we were talking about
Ukraine, and we were talking about how inspired we are by the
Ukrainian people and how their population is all in on this,
obviously.
Obviously, then, that pivoted to the people of Taiwan and
talking about the national guard and the conscription services
that they have there. Obviously, that is something that I think
is going to play an important part, if there is any sort of
invasion by the PRC.
That being said, is there anything that we can do, is there
anything that the Taiwanese should do, in order to increase the
capacity, increase the will of the national guard or those who
are under conscription service in regards to what they can do
to be more involved in their service or in their will to
respond to a PRC attack?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
I believe--well, I know for a fact--that this is an
initiative that is being developed and implemented to ensure
that there is a robust, whether you want to call it national
guard, reserve force, or capability outside of the uniformed
service to be able to defend their nation. So, it is very
important, and they are working diligently to develop that
system.
Mr. Panetta. Are we involved in any way in helping them in
that?
Admiral Aquilino. As a part of the Taiwan Relations Act, we
contribute to the support of their defense, and that includes
both weapons, via FMS [foreign military sales] capabilities
that we've talked about, but also through services and
training, yes.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you.
And, Admiral, you talked about--and I think it was in your
questioning, in the question and answers to the chairman--you
said, number one, we need a more integrated and sustainable
ISR. Go into that a little bit, please. And how can we create a
more robust exchange of our ISR with our allies?
Admiral Aquilino. Yeah, thanks, Congressman.
Again, this persistent understanding in real time of the
battlespace is critical, via contributions from all domains,
with the ability to share it with our allies and partners
through what I articulated through this Mission Partners
Environment. My number two funding priority, as you should have
seen in my unfunded list. When you combine those together,
those deliver a very strong capability, as it applies to both
deterrence, and then, should deterrence fail, to be able to
fight and win.
Mr. Panetta. Dr. Ratner, anything to say on that?
Dr. Ratner. Nothing to add. I support exactly what Admiral
Aquilino articulated.
Mr. Panetta. [Inaudible].
Gentlemen, moving on to the violent extremist [VE] threat
in the Philippines and in Indonesia, after our withdrawal from
Afghanistan, did we see any uptick in either rhetoric or in
capabilities by any VE groups in that area? And then,
subsequent to that, can you give an assessment of the VE groups
at this point?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congressman.
As you articulated, specifically, in the southern
Philippines, where we have helped our partner nation there to
ensure they don't have a terrorist problem, those efforts
continue, but I have not seen an uptick since the recent
decision to depart Afghanistan.
That said, we are concerned about foreign fighter flow. The
SOCPAC Commander has been tasked to ensure that we maintain
vigilance, but I haven't seen a change as of now.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you. And in Indonesia, anything,
Admiral?
Admiral Aquilino. Again, it is the area; we are always
concerned about any increase in violent extremist
organizations, and we continue to work with the Indonesians and
support them, as they also watch this issue.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you. Gentlemen, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Houlahan [presiding]. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Johnson for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you all for being here.
In 2019, the U.S. Transportation Command conducted a no-
notice readiness exercise to test the organic surge fleet
capacity to quickly mobilize for war. Out of 61 ships, just 27
were ready for sea after 120 hours. These vessels are over 40
years old and readiness rates are likely declining further as
they age, obviously.
Previously, the Department has indicated that it plans to
rely on contract shipping to supplement logistics needs. So,
the question is, do you think that international shipping
companies now will risk access to the Chinese market to support
the United States in a conflict? I suppose that is for Dr.
Ratner.
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, this is Admiral Aquilino. If
I could throw in here first.
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Admiral Aquilino. First of all, I thanked Congressman
Courtney and the committee for the support to the TSP program.
Completely effective.
I also endorse General Van Ovost's and Admiral Mewbourne's
ability to go ahead and prove to us whether or not the system
can respond. I think we highlighted some challenges that we
have to fix. In my conversations with the CNO, he is working
towards increased sealift, the sustainability of the readiness.
But all of those that come together help us to realize the
distributed nature and the agile logistics that we need.
So, I don't know if I want to go hypothetically at your
question. What I would say is we are doing the right things to
ensure that those capabilities are ready/available when we need
them.
Mr. Johnson. That is good.
Dr. Ratner, would you add anything to that?
Dr. Ratner. I would just say, Congressman, we have received
a number of questions during the hearing today, and yesterday
in the classified setting, about these questions of logistics
and contested logistics. It is an area of focus for the
Department and one that you will be seeing reflected in both
the National Defense Strategy and the FY23 budget.
Mr. Johnson. Very good.
Let me move on to something else. And I suppose any of the
three of you could respond to this.
But each of us, we all regularly see now the condemnation
of Putin by Western governments in the media certainly now, but
our exposure to the perspectives of the Indo-Pacific nations is
more limited here. So, do you have insights for us on how
Putin's invasion of Ukraine has affected Indo-Pacific
perspectives on the American-led international order and the
West's resolve to confront aggression in the Pacific? And I am
chiefly interested in the nations of India, Thailand, Vietnam,
and other developing partners, but, also, obviously, would love
to hear about our treaty allies, South Korea and the
Philippines.
And I apologize if you all tread some of this ground
already. Many of us have multiple hearings this morning. So, we
are bouncing in and out.
But would any of you want to jump in on that?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, Congressman, I would.
Again, I can't tell you at this point what the PRC has
learned from watching the European issue. But what I would say
is, I think I am seeing the right lessons that we would like to
learn. Number one, you know, the investment of blood in order
to prosecute this illegal event. Second, the international
condemnation and the unwillingness to accept it. And third, the
drastic economic impacts to the people. Those are the right
lessons, should this switch over to the Indo-Pacific region.
And I think I would leave it there.
General LaCamera. Yes, Congressman, General LaCamera.
I can tell you that Ukraine asked the ROK for military and
non-combat items, and they are providing $10 million in
humanitarian assistance. And this economic impact is calling
the Russians now an unfriendly nation; the ROK is. So, there is
$12.5 billion in energy resources from Russia to the Republic
of Korea. So, it is having an impact on Korea.
Mr. Johnson. Let me ask one more question. And I will
direct this to Dr. Ratner. I am not sure how much time I have
left.
But I am just curious--and I guess we all are interested in
knowing--what investments we need to make in our allies and
partners to protect against vulnerabilities that China may
exploit in an effort to prevent them from offering us support
in a conflict. And what specific investments in our defense
industrial base, for example, can we make that would
simultaneously reduce the dependence of our allies and partners
on Chinese technology and manufacturing and finance, and also
enhance our readiness?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, time is running out here before
the chairman cuts me off. I will just say we are engaged in
multiple discussions with allies and partners specifically on
the types of asymmetric capabilities that we think they need to
best deter and deny PRC coercion and aggression.
Mr. Johnson. Very good.
I will yield back. Appreciate it.
The Chairman [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Houlahan is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, gentlemen. I really appreciate the chance to
ask a couple of questions.
One of my questions has to do with Sino-Russian
relationships, and just in my brief reading, understanding that
there have been multiple statements made between the two
states, multiple exercises, and cooperation of various forms,
but that the large, and sort of the short, of it is that we
don't see a real formal alliance, so to speak, at this point in
time. What would it look like if we were seeing a more formal
alliance gel? What sort of signals or indications would we be
seeing that could or should alarm us?
Admiral, I was hoping you might be able to comment on that.
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congresswoman.
It has previously been described as a marriage of
convenience. There are issues on both sides as to whether or
not they trust each other. But we need to look very closely at
what is happening right now and see if that has changed at all.
That would be very concerning if those two authoritarian
nations delivered or developed or went into something that
looked like a treaty alliance.
So, we are watching it very closely. Again, we are on day
14 of this thing in Europe, and we are watching it to try to
understand what does that translate into.
Ms. Houlahan. And, Dr. Ratner, you were shaking your head.
What does that mean, would translate into? What are we looking
for? Are there formal treaties or something else?
Dr. Ratner. I think probably not a formal treaty in the
short term, but, as Admiral Aquilino said, we are watching very
closely. At a minimum, I think we have seen Beijing's tacit
support for Russian aggression in Ukraine. We have seen
diplomatic support that they are providing. At home, they are
censoring criticism of Vladimir Putin and support for Ukraine.
So, we see what they are doing domestically politically.
In terms of the questions you had about what it would look
like at an enhanced level, I think if we saw China taking steps
to support or try to route around some of the sanctions or give
economic support to Russia, as the rest of the international
community was trying to apply pressure, that would be extremely
concerning. And if they provided any military support in
capabilities or otherwise, that would be extremely concerning.
Ms. Houlahan. Uh-hum. And, General, anything to add there?
General LaCamera. Yes. What I call it is third-party
intervention and influence on the Korean Peninsula. So, I don't
separate Korea, DPRK, China, Russia; I think there will be some
kind of impact in any kind of hostilities on the peninsula that
we are paying attention to.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
And my next question is somewhat related. The DOD has been
trying over time to rebalance the global allocation of
intelligence and surveillance and reconnaissance assets to
USINDOPACOM. How is that going and what are the gaps that still
exist? If you, Admiral, might be able to elaborate on that?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congresswoman.
So, the theme that we have watched over the last 20 years
is there is never enough ISR. The globe is a big place, and we
have multiple areas that we keep tracks on.
What I would say is, as we shift towards a focus to the
Indo-Pacific, some of those resources have come to the Indo-
Pacific, but we are still not meeting the total requirement. We
are not meeting the total requirement anywhere.
What I will tell you is the Secretary has not pulled any
assets from the Indo-Pacific, based on what is needed into
Ukraine. So, again, the Department's focus in the right
theater, but, boy, it is a complex world.
Ms. Houlahan. Uh-hum. And, General, in your area, is there
any gaps still in ISR that you would like to talk about?
[Laughter.]
General LaCamera. Most of it is in placement and access,
given the comprehensive military agreement between the North
and the South, and just our ability to collect over DPRK. We
cannot fly our eyes directly over. So, we rely on the other the
ends to develop the intelligence picture.
Ms. Houlahan. And with my last minute, my question regards
the Philippines and the strategic importance of the Philippines
amidst a lot of political uncertainty that you all mentioned
yesterday. How are you viewing that, and what can we be doing
to, I guess, firm up our relationship with the Philippines in
the face of uncertainty?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congresswoman.
Again, the Secretary went to the Philippines not long ago.
And as you know, we were having issues with the visiting force
agreement, and he got that problem corrected. So, the trend is
in the right direction. We are doing more with them. We can
continue to develop that posture there through our EDCA
[Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement] sites. We are building
out Basa Air Base to practice training with them; Fort
Magsaysay. So, it is on the right trend. We need to continue
and expand those initiatives.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to
everybody.
You know, this late in the hearing, pretty much most of the
questions have been asked. So, rather than duplicate that just
for the sake of saying it has not been said until I have said
it, I would like to kind of dig down a little deeper on the ISR
piece that Representative Houlahan just indicated.
Do you--``you'' as in the Department of Defense--are you
truly taking advantage of all of the capabilities that are out
there, let's say, in, well, we use the term COTS, commercial-
off-the-shelf? Are there any opportunities for increased
robustness in ISR using things like, you know, again, already
existing systems?
I will give you one example. Like SeaGuardian MQ-9B, that
is just one example. Because we have got a lot of challenges,
and you cannot have too much visibility. Any comments?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, Congressman.
We are certainly experimenting with anything that could
provide additional capability. I will give you an example of a
Saildrone with an ISR suite. So, through our experimentation
program, we are working to deliver those maybe capabilities
that haven't been applied militarily and figuring out how they
deliver a warfighting outcome, those that are promising, we
will work to accelerate and get in.
But, on the ISR side, it is all domains, whether it be
undersea, on the sea, above the sea, space, and cyberspace. But
we are trying to do that and take those opportunities to
deliver an advantage.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, I think, if you will, for the
safety and security of not only the American people, but all of
our allies around the world, we cannot waste time and money
through our research labs trying to get just a little bit extra
edge, when something that already exists will be good enough.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back the
remainder of my time. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5 minutes. Are you with us
there, Jim? Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Yes, I am, Mr. Chairman. Sorry about that.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate your
testimony here today.
If I could start with Admiral Aquilino, can you talk about
the role of information operations in INDOPACOM? It seems that
there are a variety of information-related capabilities that
are critical to our ability to compete in the region. How is
INDOPACOM doing in the information domain, and how could
Congress help?
Admiral Aquilino. Congressman, thanks.
So, as part of the Seize the Initiative objectives that we
have talked about, and through this lens of ``think, act, and
operate differently,'' it is certainly an area we have to get
better at. Through the processes we developed, all of our
operations are now integrated with the information space to
ensure that we have the correct messaging--what we want to say
when we want to say it, or whether we don't want to say
something. So, we agree with you with regard to the importance,
and we are working to try to strengthen that.
Additionally, on the special operations side, there are
certain components that have, I would articulate, increased
capabilities, and we are working to pull those in.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
General LaCamera, so there is, clearly, a crisis unfolding
across the world daily, it seems. And I am conscious of the
fact that our ongoing focus on the invasion of Ukraine may pull
our attention from North Korea. But, General, can you please
take a few minutes or so and discuss with us the most pressing
needs on the Korean Peninsula that we simply cannot ignore?
General LaCamera. Yes, thanks, Congressman.
For me, the top priority is maintaining the alliance with
the Republic of Korea. And then, combat readiness is number
two.
We have got an exercise program with focus mainly on
command post exercises, but we need to make sure that we are
training at the tactical level all the way up through the
operational level. Based on the changes in the terrain, based
on the changes of the enemy, and based on the changes of
friendly capabilities, we're in the process of rewriting our op
[operational] plan for the defense of the peninsula.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
And let me turn to Dr. Ratner. In your posture statement,
you mentioned that we are growing our cooperation in cyberspace
with India and the Quad. Can you expand on this work more
specifically? And has this cooperation been successful, and
have there been any roadblocks to getting it done?
Dr. Ratner. Congressman, the vast majority of that work is
classified. But I will just say we are working with the
Indians, both to ensure that we are able to communicate better
in classified settings and information related to space, cyber,
and intelligence, and we are also working with them to help
them better defend their own networks.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. And, Admiral Aquilino, can you
highlight some of the initiatives to advance cyber with our
partners and allies in the Indo-Pacific region?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, Congressman.
As a part of the AUKUS agreement, again, if we look at
that, everybody wants to talk about submarines, but it is
really about advancing or improving our advanced capabilities.
Cyber and space are clearly two of those.
We are working directly with Australia. And next week,
again, I will be going there with General Nakasone and General
Dickinson, along with the Chief of Defense, General Campbell,
to frame and continue to move our capabilities forward. And we
do that wherever we can safely and securely with our high-end
allies and partners.
Mr. Langevin. Thanks.
Then, Dr. Ratner and Admiral Aquilino, China plans to
complete their modernization goals by 2035, and they continue
to develop their capabilities across space, cyber, and nuclear
domains. In this unclassified setting, can you generally
explain how these modernization efforts compare to our own?
Admiral Aquilino. Again, thanks, Congressman.
One update. So, President Xi Jinping has accelerated that
timeline for his forces, and he has asked for modernization by
2027. That is concerning. Again, we still have the greatest
military on the planet. We need to understand his acceleration,
the capabilities he is developing, and not only stay on par,
but exceed and generate overmatch in all those areas.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. McClain is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today.
Historically, India has had significant ties economically
with Russia. New Delhi has been an expansive market for Russian
oil and gas sales, and last year, Russia delivered the S-400
air defense system to India. In December 2021, the two plus two
meeting between India and Russia, India made it clear that the
future of the relationship was dependent on Russian investing
in ``Make in India'' projects.
My questions for the admiral and doctor is, India clearly
wanted to maintain its relationship with Russia, by its
actions. However, now that Russia has invaded Ukraine, do you
see the scenario where India will have to take a side in that
conflict and distance itself from Moscow, and become more
aligned with the Quad nations? Or do you see maybe India
attempt to stay neutral? I am just curious on your thoughts on
that.
Dr. Ratner. Yes, I would say, Congresswoman, a few of the
other members of the committee have asked similar questions. I
think we recognize that India has a long and complicated
economic and security relationship with Russia. The majority of
their weapon purchases come from Russia. But they have also
been systematically diversifying away from Russian systems for
years now in a way that we view as a positive trajectory.
I would also note that, at that December summit that you
cited, there were very few announcements on new purchases. That
was quite notable. And just last week, Prime Minister Modi
joined the leaders of the Quad summit, including President
Biden, for a leaders' call to talk about some of their shared
priorities.
So, I agree it is complicated, but the trendlines are
moving in the right direction.
Mrs. McClain. Yes, don't you wish it was easy sometimes?
So, you are confident in your opinion that you see it
scaling back, the dependency in the relationship?
Dr. Ratner. India, on its own accord, as a sovereign
decision, has been diversifying its arms purchases and
development, including their own digitization and making some
substantial purchases from the United States as well. So, I
think the trendlines are in the right direction. And the
importance of this relationship I think could not be
overstated, and we ought to keep our eyes on that important
fact.
Mrs. McClain. Agreed.
Sir.
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, ma'am. Again, we are seeing the
right actions with regard to foreign military sales, the
capabilities that they desire, and the leaning towards the
United States, as Secretary Ratner said. That is key.
Military to military, we operate together much more
frequently. They have asked for capabilities support and help
in areas that they haven't before, based on what I believe is a
common security challenge in the form of the PRC.
So, as this plays out, again, India gets to make its own
decisions, but I would articulate the same; that from my lane
in the mil-to-mil [military-to-military] piece, it is going in
the right direction.
Mrs. McClain. Wonderful. Thank you, sir.
With that, I will yield my time back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses.
The good news is I believe I may be the last Rep
[Representative] to question.
[Laughter.]
So, first of all, I want to say that I appreciated Mr.
Langevin's comments and focus on cyber. As a member of the CITI
[Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and Information Systems]
Subcommittee, I think that that is something that we are
looking at. I want to make sure that you all are engaging with
CYBERCOM on a regular basis to foster a relationship there,
because it will become more and more, I think, important, as we
move forward.
My question is somewhat specific to my congressional
district, which is the Oklahoma City Metro Area, and
specifically, close to Tinker Air Force Base. And this is
really directed at the admiral. A significant share of
investment in weapon systems acquisition and modernization is
now focused on deterring China, which makes your input in
operational threats and capability especially important. I do
understand that JROC [Joint Requirements Oversight Council] is
in the process of reviewing the requirements for a number of
programs, including the next arterial refueler, KC-Y. Can you
tell me a little bit about INDOPACOM's engagement and possible
input into the process?
Admiral Aquilino. Thanks, Congresswoman.
So, as it applies to the continued assessment of being able
to execute our mission, air-to-air refueling is identified in
every event as critical, not only in INDOPACOM, across all the
combatant commanders, to include the strategic commander,
especially with all the things that are in Tinker that are
under his realm.
So, we identify the requirements. We have to continue to
ensure we have the capacity to execute all of our war plans.
So, I do have input and it is a critical focus area.
Mrs. Bice. Excellent.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
At this point, we have nobody else here in line to ask
questions. So, that is a fancy way of saying we are done.
I do want to thank the gentlemen for their testimony.
This is going to be a huge year, FY23. As we have seen, the
world has clearly changed and our national security is going to
be even more complicated than it was before. So, I look forward
to working with all of you to make sure you have the tools you
need to defend our interests.
And I thank you very much for your testimony.
And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 9, 2022

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 9, 2022

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 9, 2022

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 9, 2022

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN

Dr. Ratner. Australia and the United States have forged a strong
military-to-military relationship through shared experiences in peace
and combat that extends over 100 years and includes operations most
recently in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria.
Australia and the United States already train and operate at high
levels through current U.S deployments like Marine Rotational Force
Darwin (MRF-D) and Enhanced Air Cooperation (EAC), and major exercises
such as TALISMAN SABRE, RIM OF THE PACIFIC, and LARGE SCALE EXERCISE.
Additionally, Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States
have personnel exchange programs that embed highly qualified personnel
in host nation tactical units and headquarters. These exchanges provide
the personnel and their militaries with improved understanding of each
others' services and cultures, build partnerships and relationships
that strengthen our alliances, and improve coalition operations.
AUKUS is the next step to continue enhancing our ability to operate
at the highest levels through the development of the Royal Australian
Navy's nuclear powered submarine program and the trilateral development
of advanced capabilities.   [See page 21.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Dr. Ratner. Since the People's Republic of China (PRC) controlled
fentanyl-related substances as a class in 2019, the primary source
country of fentanyl entering the United States is Mexico. However, the
majority of the precursor chemicals used in the synthesis of fentanyl
come from the PRC. We continue to press the PRC at the highest levels
to enhance oversight of its chemical industry, improve information
sharing, strengthen customs enforcement, and implement and enforce
``know your customer'' standards to restrict sales of narcotics-related
precursor chemicals. We are also working closely with our international
partners to echo these requests in their engagements with the PRC and
to support U.S. proposals for addressing diversion of precursor
chemicals in multilateral forums. In March, members of the United
Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs, including the PRC, voted to
support a U.S. proposal to internationally control three fentanyl
precursor chemicals, and adopted by consensus a U.S.-sponsored
resolution on addressing the diversion of uncontrolled chemicals and
designer precursors. The Department of State provides funding for the
International Narcotics Control Board's (INCB) Databank on Precursor
Chemicals, which supports real-time international law enforcement
cooperation to prevent diversion and illicit manufacture of precursor
chemicals and remains an important tool in helping meaningfully disrupt
narcotics flows.   [See page 24.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON
Dr. Ratner. DOD's President's Budget request for Fiscal Year (FY)
2023 includes $1.1 billion for one America class amphibious assault
ship (LHA) and $1.7 billion for one Flight II San Antonio class
amphibious transport dock (LPD). These ships will sustain the ability
of amphibious forces to conduct expeditionary warfare. These
investments form part of the $27.9 billion shipbuilding request in
DOD's FY 2023 President's budget request, which procures the mix of
surface and subsurface ships with the capabilities required to respond
to a range of contingencies from strategic deterrence to crisis
response.   [See page 28.]
Admiral Aquilino. As the Geographic Combatant Commander, I
establish the requirements to support Operational Plans. The services
take my requirements and ensure their forces are trained and equipped
to meet my operational requirements. I am confident in the Navy's and
Marine Corp's abilities to meet my requirements. For the actual
readiness rates, I defer to the services, mainly the Chief of Naval
Operations and Commandant of the Marine Corps to discuss specific
details regarding readiness and availability of the fleet.   [See page
28.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. KHANNA
Dr. Ratner. We remain encouraged by India's diversification of
defense equipment over the past decade, including the more than $20
billion of U.S.-origin defense equipment it has purchased since 2008.
We also are strengthening U.S.-India defense cooperation across a range
of domains. This includes working closely with India to deepen our
bilateral industrial cooperation on co-production and co-development of
defense articles, through projects such as the Defense Trade and
Technology Initiative (DTTI). This will need to be a prolonged,
deliberate effort that cannot happen overnight. As India ramps up its
domestic defense industry, it will be able to phase out legacy Russian
systems with equipment made in India or purchased from partners and
allies.   [See page 26.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. LURIA
Dr. Ratner. The Taiwan Relations Act provision relating to
consultation with Congress reflects the constitutional processes that
would be involved in the introduction of U.S. armed forces by the
President into an armed conflict.
These same constitutional processes are reflected in our mutual
defense treaties with allies in the region that provide for the United
States acting with allies to meet a common danger ``in accordance with
our constitutional provisions and processes.''
A U.S. response to a conflict in Taiwan would involve engagement
between the President and Congress, which could take place when the
facts of the situation are known and, in this respect, would be no
different than the involvement of U.S. armed forces in a conflict
anywhere in the world.   [See page 32.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. KAHELE
Dr. Ratner. People-to-people exchanges are a critical part of the
Department and U.S. government's toolkit for engaging the Indo-Pacific
region. The Daniel K. Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies
is a particularly valuable soft power resource for the Department,
which facilitates training, education, and the development of strong
networks between defense professionals in the Indo-Pacific region. We
also work closely with the Department of State in leveraging the U.S.
Government's full suite of tools--including the International Military
Education and Training (IMET) program--to build people-to-people ties
and professional development between the U.S. Department of Defense and
our allies and partners.   [See page 36.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 9, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Langevin. The National Guard possess a unique international
engagement capability they can leverage with the dual professions of
its members as well as access to state resources. For example, in the
State of Rhode Island our National Guard was paired with Timor-Leste in
2020 under the National Guard State Partnership Program. As you
mentioned in your written statement, Timor-Leste is an emerging
partner. The State Partnership Program continues to grow in strategic
relevance because it provides a low cost-efficient way to build
stronger, enduring relationships, and military capacity with partner
nations. What is your vision for incorporating the State Partnership
Program into your Operations, Activities, and Investments (OAIs)
strategy?
Admiral Aquilino. The State Partnership Program (SPP) provides a
unique opportunity to expand cooperation with countries that share
common interests with the U.S. and support their capacity across a
range of activities, including humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief. The relationships cultivated through the SPP typically last for
decades. SPP engagements are developed in coordination with my country
directors and the Security Cooperation Office.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. Admiral Aquilino, in your testimony before the
committee you stated ``The resources we commit now and in the future
will preserve a free and open Indo-pacific and strengthen our posture
and provide us with the ability to fight and win should deterrence
fail.''
How does this administration's continued inaction on renegotiating
the Compacts of Free Association with the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau
impact your ability to fight today should deterrence fail?
If an agreement was signed tomorrow, as opposed to 2 or 3 years
from now, would INDOPACOM be in a better position? If so, please
explain how our collective defense would benefit if this open question
was resolved.
Admiral Aquilino. These important agreements strengthen our
security relationships throughout the Pacific and mitigate competitors'
influence. However, as a Combatant Commander, the status of the compact
negotiations does not impact my readiness or ability to plan. The
historically good relationships we've enjoyed with these nations have
allowed us to maintain a credible forward military presence that
continues to this day and promotes regional stability.
I support interagency efforts to speedily conclude the negotiation
of the Compact Agreements.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. Secretary Austin has stated that one of his top
priorities is to strengthen our allies and partners. In order to deter
Chinese aggression, Taiwan requires a variety of capabilities including
anti-ship missiles, anti-ship mines, and torpedoes. How dependent is
Taiwan on U.S. armaments, and how are we increasing our efforts to
provide them with additional equipment? Does Taiwan have any research
and development or procurement efforts to self-develop these kinds of
defensive weapons?
Dr. Ratner. Taiwan maintains its own indigenous defense industry
which produces a number of capabilities employed by the Taiwan Armed
Forces. As part of the U.S. Government's provision of defense articles
and services to Taiwan, DOD is examining additional ways to expand
cooperation. Acquisition and Sustainment (A&S), for example, is working
to identify areas of mutual interest where the United States and Taiwan
can expand technical cooperation on critical defense capabilities,
including under the very recently signed Agreement Between the American
Institute in Taiwan and the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative
Office in the United States for Research, Development, Test, and
Evaluation Projects. Moreover, relevant U.S. departments and agencies
are working with industry to identify means of partnering with Taiwan's
domestic defense industry in mutually beneficial ways.
Mr. Lamborn. Secretary Austin has stated that one of his top
priorities is to strengthen our allies and partners. In order to deter
Chinese aggression, Taiwan requires a variety of capabilities including
anti-ship missiles, anti-ship mines, and torpedoes. How dependent is
Taiwan on U.S. armaments, and how are we increasing our efforts to
provide them with additional equipment? Does Taiwan have any research
and development or procurement efforts to self-develop these kinds of
defensive weapons?
Admiral Aquilino. Defensive armaments enhance the ability of the
Taiwan Armed Forces to deter, delay, or deny military aggression,
including assistance provided by the United States consistent with the
Taiwan Relations Act. This requires a balanced mix of both Foreign
Military Sales (FMS) and capabilities indigenously developed by Taiwan.
To enable deterrence, it is imperative for the U.S. Government to
deliver FMS cases to Taiwan on schedule. For its part, Taiwan must
prepare through a well-resourced and thoughtfully executed budget that
focuses on the right investments, including research and development,
to prepare for contingency operations.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. COURTNEY
Mr. Courtney. In line with your concept of distributed logistics,
and especially in light of the Red Hill closure, do you believe that
the 10 vessels authorized under the Tanker Security Program will be
enough? If you require greater sealift capacity in the INDOPACOM AOR,
how many additional vessels do you need?
Admiral Aquilino. The Tanker Security Program (TSP) provides
assured access to U.S.-Flag Tankers but does not eliminate the risk
associated with the U.S.-Flag tanker gap. We believe 10 TSP vessels
that can be available at a moment's notice to provide support to our
mobile logistics fleet is a good start. However, I concur with the FY20
NDAA tanker study which states an additional 10 TSP vessels would
mitigate risk in the contested environment.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Admiral Aquilino, I have long been concerned by
crushing OPTEMPO and its impact on service members and their families.
At a recent hearing on suicide prevention in the military, witnesses
testified that stress related to excessive OPTEMPO is a key
environmental factor that contributes to servicemember suicide. A
February GAO report included focus groups with sailors who were working
80-100 hour weeks and losing colleagues to behavioral health issues
related to the stress of overwork. Last year, Chairman Milley testified
to this committee that he agreed that OPTEMPO has been too high, and
that he was making changes to the Global Force Management and Request
For Forces processes to reduce OPTEMPO. What have been the results of
these changes in the INDOPACOM area of responsibility, and what efforts
have you made to reduce OPTEMPO to sustainable levels and ensure that
deployments are for truly high priority needs and not ``nice-to-do''
missions?
Admiral Aquilino. I take this matter seriously and am working to
balance OPTEMPO--for the well-being of our service members and their
families--with the need to safeguard national security. Any deployments
that will result in Service ``redline'' breaks or violations to the
SecDef's Deployment to Dwell (D2D) Policies are highlighted in the
SecDef Orders Book prior to any deployment decision. The Directed
Readiness Tables have controlled OPTEMPO significantly by creating bins
that ``fence'' force deployment availability to ensure there are forces
available to respond to crisis. Within USINDOPACOM, historical data
analysis shows we are diligent about abiding by Service ``redlines'',
the SecDef's D2D ratios, and the Directed Readiness effort.
Ms. Speier. General LaCamera, I am alarmed by the increase in
suicides by service members, particularly at remote installations like
Alaska, where twice as many soldiers died by suicide in 2021 compared
to the previous year. A major problem is insufficient behavioral health
providers. Soldiers in Alaska told me that they wait 2 months for an
appointment. I have learned that Korea has the same problem with
inadequate staffing for behavioral health across the board, and
particularly for substance misuse counselors. What are you doing to
increase access to behavioral health care for service members in Korea?
How will you increase the number of providers? What are you doing to
leverage telehealth to fill the unmet need? And what resources or
authorities do you need from Congress to address this behavioral health
crisis?
General LaCamera. Behavioral health (BH) resources currently do not
meet requirements for Service Members or their families in Korea.
Shortfalls are largely the result of BH provider availability, position
fill rates, and laws and policies concerning alternative resources such
as tele-behavioral health. The entire health care team in the Pacific
are pursuing several avenues of approach to improve access to care. Due
to the assessed deficit in behavioral health care, we are attempting to
close the gap through multiple means. Some initiatives in Korea include

The Military and Family Life Counseling (MFLC) Program,
which is managed through DOD Military Community and Family Policy,
supports both 7th Air Force and 8th Army Service Members and their
families with non-medical counseling. MFLCs are integrated into
behavioral health clinics as augmenting resources to improve access and
non-clinical options, particularly for Service Members seeking care for
life related stressors that do not meet criteria for a behavioral
health diagnosis. Since June 2021, MFLC staffing has increased by 14
personnel (13/31 in JUN 21 to 27/34 in FEB 22) increasing overall
staffing by more than 50%. This increase in MFLCs has increased our
capacity but does not fill all our needs.

We are also educating leaders and Soldiers of the
availability of other support counseling services to include the Army
Wellness Center and established remote services such as Military
OneSource to provide 24/7 virtual assistance.

Additionally, we are adding options for service members
to receive treatment from local behavioral health facilities in the
Tricare network. Although limited, there are civilian behavioral health
clinics in the community that are Tricare affiliated and can generally
provide care within 7 days for conditions requiring individual and
family therapy. Services providing medication management is limited in
the community.

Finally, we are in the initial discussions with civilian
mental health organizations for the establishment of an on-post
Behavioral Health care clinic to provide accessible mental health care
for Tricare beneficiaries and active-duty service members.
These measures are helping to meet some of the need; however, BH
provider availability and position fill rates continue to be a concern.
The difficulties with recruiting qualified applicants overseas have
contributed to unfilled requirements and open positions.
Tele-behavioral health (TBH) is a bridging strategy to increase
access to care, however, TBH services are currently limited here in
Korea. Due to contractual rules with the Tricare Overseas contract, we
are unable to use civilian TBH options that are located outside of the
Republic of Korea. Routine scheduled TBH appointments from military
Medical Treatment Facilities such as Tripler Army Medical Center and
Madigan Army Medical Center are limited, and appointment wait time is
approximately 2 weeks.
Discussions with MEDCOM are ongoing to increase availability of BH
care and mitigate provider shortages in Korea. Areas of focus are:

TRICARE Overseas Program policies surrounding
opportunities for TBH as well as the ones related to on-installation
civilian care;

Options to enable Tricare beneficiaries to receive TBH
services from TBH providers located in CONUS;

Options to enable on-installation civilian behavioral
health clinics staffed by providers from the U.S.; and

The feasibility of using government contracted behavioral
health providers to mitigate provider gaps due to challenges filling DA
civilian BH provider hiring actions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. Do you require American conventional hypersonic weapons
to close warfighting operational gaps not covered by existing
conventional weapons? If so, what operational gaps, in priority order,
must hypersonic weapons be able to close?
In the operational capability gaps you identify, what technologies
or capabilities must hypersonic weapons possess to close those gaps?
Admiral Aquilino. Hypersonic weapons are required to close
warfighting operational gaps, especially well-defended targets that
would require large amounts of existing conventional weapons to target.
Hypersonics enable a ``kick down the door'' strategy that makes other
less-exquisite weapons more effective. I need hypersonics to engage:
(1) rapidly relocatable systems, such as Integrated Air Defense Systems
(2) heavily defended deep targets; and (3) highly capable surface
combatants. Hypersonic weapons require an in-flight target update
capability, seekers to engage mobile targets, and warheads suitable for
maritime targets.
Mr. Scott. Are you concerned with the pace of American hypersonic
development and technology demonstrations to date?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, I am concerned about the pace of hypersonic
weapons development, technology demonstrations, and fielding timelines.
Our adversaries continue to aggressively pursue these weapons which
place our forces and facilities at risk. We need to focus on
capabilities that give us an asymmetric and qualitative advantage
against our adversaries along with sufficient, demonstrated quantities
to serve as a meaningful deterrence to aggression.
Mr. Scott. What would you like to see from the S&T and acquisition
communities to accelerate advanced capability development and
transition to the forces operating in your AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. Rapid acquisition funding to resource limited
numbers of prototypes in sufficient quantities would assist in
providing an immediate operational capability in the Indo-Pacific AOR.
Mr. Scott. Given the current and forecasted threat environment, has
the Department programmed the appropriate number of rounds to meet
INDOPACOM requirements? If not, what is the appropriate number and what
is limiting the total rounds currently planned (technical maturity,
unit cost, number of launchers, etc.)?
Admiral Aquilino. No, it does not meet our requirements; however,
the theater requirements are classified. That information is detailed
in INDOPACOM's Sec. 1242 Independent Assessment as required by the FY22
NDAA, and in the provided Anti-Surface munitions brief mandated by
House Report 117-118 accompanying the FY22 NDAA.
Mr. Scott. Given the unique potential ranging capabilities of the
Navy Conventional Prompt Strike (CPS) and Army Long Range Hypersonic
Weapon (LRHW) compared to other DOD hypersonic efforts, what
operational or technical capabilities do you require from those
weapons?
Admiral Aquilino. CPS and LRHW provide essential strike capability
against long-range and defended targets, however we need to consider
the optimal mix of capabilities (i.e. ARRW, HACM, SM-6) that takes
advantage of employment diversity to enable the Joint Force Commander
to mass fires for movement and maneuver. The optimal mix of
capabilities must be able to engage threats to U.S. territory and have
a range greater than adversary long range fires. Technical capabilities
must include a resilient Beyond Line of Sight data link for in-flight
updates, a seeker for moving targets, and precision navigation
capability in the event of GPS jamming or GPS denial.
Mr. Scott. Did you recommend the use of hospital ships or an ARG to
support relief in Tonga? If not, why not? If you did, were you
overruled and if so, by whom? Do you believe the PRC response to the
disaster has damaged U.S. interests versus our response?
Admiral Aquilino. No, we did not recommend a hospital ship or ARG.
In support of USAID's request for life saving and ISR capabilities,
USINDOPACOM was a first responder, deploying USS SAMPSON and an
embarked aviation detachment to provide search and rescue and natural
disaster recovery assistance to Tonga. No additional DOD assistance was
requested by the host nation or France, Australia, and New Zealand
(FRANZ) leadership in their role as the response on-scene commander.
Tonga was very appreciative of U.S. assistance.
Mr. Scott. Do you intend to advocate for inspections (including of
active PRC bases) in Antarctica during this Antarctic summer? What is
the United States doing to counter China's militarization of the
continent and failure to abide by the Antarctic Treaty? How do they
feel about the lack of inspections of China's station in Kunlun? What
is INDOPACOM's current capacity with the special C-130s to support
inspections?
Admiral Aquilino. Inspections, led by the Department of State, are
an important feature of the Antarctic Treaty System to ensure all
nations use the continent for peaceful purposes and protect its fragile
ecosystem. I support verifying the PRC is meeting its commitments to
the international community in Antarctica, like the prohibition on
military uses. The LC-130 provides a unique capability to support
logistics in Antarctica, including scientific activities or State
Department led inspection activities.
Mr. Scott. How do you assess the intent behind the Chinese lease on
the airstrip on Kiribati's Kanton Island, 1200 miles from Hawaii?
What's the purpose? What threat does it pose to U.S. facilities and
interests, including Hawaii?
Admiral Aquilino. China's investments around the world, and
especially in the Indo-Pacific, generally have three objectives. One,
to expand economic access and opportunities; two, to expand Chinese
presence and influence across all instruments of national power; and
three, to correspondingly reduce U.S. influence and access across those
same domains. The Chinese lease does not increase the threat to U.S.
facilities. However, along with our regional partners, we are
monitoring and engaged to understand the evolving situation.
Mr. Scott. How damaging it is that the Compacts of Free Association
haven't been completed? If it's in the Indo-Pacific Strategy, why has
no progress been made for a year? How concerned are you about China
filling the vacuum in RMI, FSM, Palau? Without the access granted by
the COFAs, how damaging is it to existing O-plans?
Admiral Aquilino. These important agreements strengthen our
security relationships throughout the Pacific and mitigate competitors'
influence. However, as a Combatant Commander, the status of the compact
negotiations does not impact my readiness or ability to plan. The
historically good relationships we've enjoyed with these nations have
allowed us to maintain a credible forward military presence that
continues to this day and promotes regional stability.
I support interagency efforts to speedily conclude the negotiation
of the Compact Agreements.
Mr. Scott. What are your unfunded priorities for bolstering U.S.
ties with Vanuatu, Tonga, Papua/New Guinea and the Solomons?
Admiral Aquilino. Three USINDOPACOM unfunded priorities--Military
Construction ($47.3M), Fusion Centers ($3.3M), and the Asia Pacific
Regional Initiative ($10.3M)--support improved ties with the Pacific
Islands including Vanuatu, Tonga, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon
Islands.
Mr. Scott. As currently configured, can the the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve support a war in the Pacific?
Admiral Aquilino. The Petroleum War Reserve Stock (PWRS) in the
Pacific theater is sized to meet the most demanding contingency at each
military installation of Defense Fuel Support Points until a supply
chain can be established. PWRS is sized, acquired, managed, and
positioned to achieve the greatest practical flexibility and
responsiveness to a full spectrum of regional contingencies.
Mr. Scott. With the necessary funding, resources, personnel and
platforms, what more can the United States Coast Guard do to deter IUU
fishing in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. The Coast Guard has an enduring and specialized
role in Oceania, Southeast Asia, and the greater Indo-Pacific to
preserve the free-flow of commerce, protect natural resources, and
enhance regional stability. The FY23 President's Budget expands the
Coast Guard's current operations in the region in order to advance the
National Defense Strategy by growing capacity for operations, engaging
in maritime governance activities, and participating in meaningful
engagements. Additional Coast Guard presence in the USINDOPACOM AOR
will enable increased partner nation proficiency, self-sustainment, and
local expertise necessary to deter Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated
(IUU) fishing practices in the region.
Mr. Scott. Captain Kenneth Andrus, U.S. Navy, wrote an article for
the October 2021 issue of Proceedings entitled,''Transform Navy Medical
Operational Support.''
According to Captain Andrus, ``The speed and lethality of new
weaponry and the minimal warning of open conflict with adversaries such
as the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) will not allow the luxury
of months of preparation for combat casualty care that the Medical
Corps has had in the past three decades.'' Do you agree with this
assessment?
Admiral Aquilino. We agree that indications and warning for a near
peer conflict in the Pacific may be of short duration, requiring a
ready posture in theater and a ``Fight Now'' mind set. U.S. Pacific
Fleet is using a planning factor of days to medically augment the Fleet
and enable maneuver for a high end fight. The joint force incorporates
OCONUS military treatment facilities as prepositioned medical forces in
theater for contingencies. The short window for preparation highlights
themes of prepositioning of medical capabilities, supplies, and
equipment in theater to minimize response times.
Mr. Scott. What shortfalls exist, if any, in the following areas of
mass casualty care in your AOR? They include at-sea evacuation, medical
regulation, medical unit augmentation, authorized medical allowance,
medical resupply, blood products, shore casualty receiving/personnel
processing, joint host-nation support, and the number of operating and
treatment rooms required for a worst-case scenario?
Admiral Aquilino. Near peer conflict in the Pacific and distributed
maritime operations will result in a large number of casualties that
will exceed a unit's ability to hold and treat. Anti-access and area
denial combined with dynamic force employment from remote medical
facilities will result in significant challenges to patient movement.
As a result, we continue to analyze and refine our plans and exercises
to incorporate patient movement, mass casualties at sea, prolonged
maritime care, medical resupply, and the distribution of blood
products.
Mr. Scott. Should the United States Coast Guard bring back anti-
submarine warfare as a mission? If the U.S. Coast Guard did bring back
ASW as a mission, what would the impact be on the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. The Coast Guard contributes unique and
complimentary capabilities to the Joint Force across both geographic
and functional combatant commands, and plays a critical role in the
gray zone. While the Coast Guard performed anti-submarine operations
during WWII, the Service currently does not possess anti-submarine
capabilities but the demand for the Coast Guard is unprecedented and
continues to work overtime across all of its 11 statutory missions.
Mr. Scott. Is the United States Navy prepared for mine warfare as
much as it should be in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. USINDOPACOM needs a robust set of offensive and
defensive mining capabilities. Current minelaying capabilities have not
been significantly modernized since the 1980s and are largely
inadequate against a peer adversary. However, research and development
for new capabilities is underway and, if fully funded, can reconstitute
a credible minelaying capability to deter peer adversaries. I
identified $50M for the Powered Quickstrike Mine and $45M for the
Hammerhead Mine in my FY23 Unfunded Priorities Report.
Mr. Scott. What are the advantages of High-Power Microwave
technology in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. The directed-energy community has several
prototypes in use and development with counter-UAS and counter-cruise
missile applicability. These systems will strengthen future base
defenses, complimenting other kinetic and non-kinetic systems.
Mr. Scott. Scott Savitz wrote a December 2021 article in
Proceedings entitled, ``Blockship Tactics to Trap Enemy Fleets.''
According to Saitz, ``Blockships have tremendous cost-effective
potential for thwarting adversary forces. An old rust bucket of a ship,
costing tens of millions of dollars, can trap an enemy fleet costing
many times that. The installation of jammers, sensors, netting, booby
traps, or other devices is unlikely to dramatically change this cost
differential, and all these systems involve minimal development risk.
Given ever-improving autonomous navigational technology, this tactic
does not even require U.S. personnel to enter harm's way. By using
blockships, a navy could transform an adversary's prized fleet into a
useless set of fixed targets just when it is most critically needed.''
Should the United States initiate a blockship program to counter
potential threats?
Admiral Aquilino. No, other methods--like stand-off maritime
mining--could accomplish similar objectives with greater flexibility
and responsiveness.
Mr. Scott. Could U.S. Navy and Coast Guard officers benefit from
increased attendance at International Maritime Organization Polar Code
courses? Should the U.S. Navy expand its coordination with partner
nations, especially those with the most Antarctic experience?
Admiral Aquilino. Increased opportunities to attend International
Maritime Organization Polar Code courses could benefit U.S. Navy and
Coast Guard officers as an avenue for additional professional
development and understanding. We advance the Nation's interests by
working with our network of allies and partners across domains and
theaters, including to those with Antarctic experience.
USINDOPACOM also supports Operation Deep Freeze, a joint service,
on-going Defense Support to Civilian Authorities activity in support of
the National Science Foundation (NSF). The NSF manages the United
States Antarctic Program (USAP) and Joint Task Force-Support Forces
Antarctica (JTF-SFA) provides Department of Defense support to the NSF
and the USAP through ODF. This mission provides U.S. forces valuable
Antarctic experience including strategic inter-theater airlift,
tactical deep field support, aeromedical evacuation support, search and
rescue response, sealift, seaport access, bulk fuel supply logistics,
and port cargo handling. Mission support consists of active duty, Guard
and Reserve personnel from the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Army, and Coast
Guard as well as Department of Defense civilians and attached non-DOD
civilians.
Mr. Scott. Is there any lessons that can be learned from our allies
and partners that would make our FMS program more resilient, agile, and
redundant?
Admiral Aquilino. FMS is a unique tool only available from the U.S.
that can be a decisive factor for our allies and partners. However,
slow contracting timelines, long delivery schedules, and lack of
flexibility in terms of tailoring the equipment to customer
requirements are frustrations that are only aggravated by the COVID
pandemic. Our more sophisticated customers balance FMS with Direct
Commercial Sales and often seek hybrid cases that offer more
flexibility and resiliency. Designing technology release into our more
complex systems is also highly desired by partners as it shortens the
release timeline and creates more opportunity for international
customers. Crafting additional payment options, particularly for
customers that don't qualify for dependable undertaking, is crucial as
we seek to supplant Russia and China alternatives that are low cost and
offer attractive financing options.
Mr. Scott. Will Taiwan be invited to RIMPAC 2022?
Admiral Aquilino. No, Taiwan is not invited to RIMPAC 2022.
USINDOPACOM is committed to helping Taiwan implement asymmetric defense
concepts and acquire corresponding capabilities, and we presently judge
that other engagement opportunities would better enable asymmetric
defense capabilities.
Mr. Scott. Have recent deployments reinforced your belief that
fifth generation fighters, like F-35, are ``needed to win''?
Admiral Aquilino. Fifth generation fighter deployments like the one
that took place on the HMS Queen Elizabeth re-affirms the need for
these types of aircraft in the Pacific. Fifth generation fighters
provide the capability to operate within areas that 4th generation
fighters can no longer freely utilize. Our adversaries continue to
refine their anti-access/area denial systems, and fifth generation
fighters are one way we can continue to compete in that area.
Mr. Scott. China's advanced air defenses and fighter capabilities
are rapidly increasing in capability and capacity. These capabilities
are pushing 4th generation aircraft to greater stand-off ranges, often
beyond the targeting ranges of their weapons and sensors. Can you
explain the importance of stand-in capabilities, such as 5th generation
aircraft, and what advantages they provide if a war with Communist
China were to occur?
Admiral Aquilino. Stand-in capabilities are essential against a
peer adversary. Fifth generation fighters provide persistent targeting
coverage while being survivable in a high threat environment. Fifth
generation fighters also provide the ability to engage mobile targets
that challenge stand-off weapons due to time-of-flight. These platforms
also assure allies and demonstrate our commitment to their defense by
providing the ability to fight from stand-off ranges.
Mr. Scott. The F-35 has a unique ability to collect and fuse
information, then share that information with numerous platforms across
multiple domains, making it a critical node in advanced kill webs.
Could you please explain the importance of this capability as it
relates to Joint All Domain Operations involving joint U.S. and allied
forces?
Admiral Aquilino. The F-35 is a forward-edge sensor with lethal
ability and, as such, serves as a vital node to the kill and sensing
webs. Future success in war against a peer adversary will be determined
through information dominance and dissemination; the F-35 is a key
enabler for joint and combined forces to track, coordinate, and engage
enemy targets in a time and manner the enemy cannot effectively
counter.
Mr. Scott. Many of our key allies in the Indo-Pacific region are
participants in the F-35 program. In your opinion, has the F-35 program
had a positive impact on both military and diplomatic relations with
these key allies?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, F-35 partnerships throughout the Indo-
Pacific are paying tremendous dividends by creating common
infrastructure across the region that enhances posture, enables more
complex training, and enhances information sharing. Partnering with
likeminded countries on military capabilities, like the F-35,
reinforces our commitment to the region and lays the foundation for
continued cooperation and a more fully integrated defense.
Mr. Scott. What are the operational and security risks in having
only one strategic tanker in the Air Force's inventory given the vast
size of the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. One strategic tanker will limit the ability to
maintain air dominance in the AOR, especially within the first and
second island chain, given the vast size of the region. We can reduce
risk by establishing forward refueling hubs; however, the limitation or
reduction to one tanker platform will add significant risk to mission
and plan execution.
Mr. Scott. Why is it important for NATO allies like Lithuania to be
a strong supporter of Taiwan and not back down because of threats from
Communist China?
Admiral Aquilino. The PRC utilizes a variety of coercive measures
against countries over which it has leverage to intimidate and deter
others from taking similar actions. When these countries effectively
resist PRC coercion, often with assistance from allies and partners,
they demonstrate to the PRC these tactics do not work. Support for
Taiwan from allies and partners, including NATO members, is important
because it raises the risk for Beijing that the Taiwan issue may become
a multilateral issue--something Beijing wants to avoid at all costs.
This was well demonstrated when NATO partners (U.S., U.K., France,
Spain, the Czech Republic, Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia) participated
in Taiwan's Open Parliament Forum in December 2021, exemplifying how
NATO partners can continue to support Taiwan despite ongoing PRC
pressure.
Mr. Scott. Communist China can easily integrate innovation like
autonomy into their military complex through ``civilian-military
fusion. Meanwhile, we struggle to develop and adapt technologies used
during the era of COIN in the Middle East to the needs of peer combat.
How has China used emerging technologies, particularly autonomy to
strengthen its hand in the region? How does INDOPACOM plan to adapt
Artificial Intelligence models trained on decades of ISR data specific
to the CENTCOM domain to the INDOPACOM domain? Does INDOPACOM have
enough data to understand your area of operations? How can virtual
simulation and synthetic data generation help prepare and ensure U.S.
readiness in the Asian theater to deploy critical autonomous
capabilities?
Admiral Aquilino. China has mature AI and 5G-enabled surveillance
systems that they export throughout the AOR. They advertise ``safety''
and ``security'' as selling points of the systems. China is the top
manufacturer and exporter of commercial drones (with autonomy
features).
USINDOPACOM is closely engaged with OSD, DARPA, JAIC, and other
organizations responsible for developing new AI capabilities. For
example, USINDOPACOM is currently working closely with the USD(I) MAVEN
program to identify technical requirements to support USINDOPACOM's
objectives.
USINDOPACOM's Stormbreaker will support this effort by generating
synthetic data in support of machine learning. Additionally, the
Pacific Multi-Domain Training and Experimentation Capability will
support live, virtual, and constructive training and experimentation
with new warfighting concepts by integrating emerging technology
throughout the Indo-Pacific region.
Additionally, USINDOPACOM established a Chief Data Office (CDO) to
build AI expertise within the command. As the CDO matures, we will be
better postured to establish our processes and procedures for data
requirements.
Mr. Scott. Assessments show that Chinese hypersonic missiles will
push aircraft carriers thousands of miles from Chinese territory. Naval
aviation assets will need to operate at unsustainable ranges for humans
and in contested, communications-denied environments. Increased
autonomy will be needed to project U.S. power and deter potential
Chinese aggression. Yet, I am deeply concerned U.S. military
departments will be unable to deploy autonomous systems effectively in
the near term. Development of next generation vehicles (OMFV, Skyborg,
UUVs) have significant delays and cost-overruns.
How does INDOPACOM plan to win in a potential future conflict
before modernization programs have delivered new air, ground, and
maritime platforms? Does INDOPACOM see a benefit in recapitalizing
certain legacy ground, sea and air platforms and making them more
survivable, autonomous, or lethal? Is there a need to recapitalize on
existing ``legacy'' ISR platforms, like the MQ-9 Reaper and the Joint
AI Center's Smart Sensor project, to ensure they can operate
autonomously in GPS and C2 denied environments?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, this is a valid approach that should be
carefully considered on a case by case basis. Recapitalizing legacy
platforms with survivability enhancements can extend their useful
lifespan and fill gaps, especially in the near term. USINDOPACOM works
closely with the Strategic Capabilities Office to look at new and
innovative ways to repurpose existing legacy platforms to make them
effective in an evolving threat environment.
Mr. Scott. The entire U.S. Coast Guard is a high-demand, low-
density platform. What additional U.S. Coast Guard resources could you
use in theater?
General LaCamera. The Coast guard historically provides seaport
security and convoy escort in contested areas. Here in the Republic of
Korea, both of these missions are supported by our capable Republic of
Korea counterparts. If additional capacity is needed, the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG) could provide augmentation to host nation forces executing
these missions, especially in support of U.S. NEO. Ensuring
unrestricted access to sea lines of communication (SLOCs), queue
routes, harbors and seaports is vital to the delivery of forces and
sustainment during contingency operations.
The last time a USCG Cutter visited the ROK was in 2019, before the
start of the COVID pandemic. Ideally, we would like to incorporate the
USCG into the alliance planning and begin executing joint combined
operations and exercises again soon.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Mr. Carbajal. The testimony highlights China's investment in its
space and counter-space programs. In its recently released white paper
``China's Space Program: A 2021 Perspective,'' the Chinese government
outlines the important of space in its overall national strategy.
China's launch rates more than doubled in the last 5 years compared
to the previous 5 years. Space launch and American competitiveness in
space is something I am very focused on, especially with Vandenberg
Space Force Base in my district, which why I am concerned with how
China intends to employ its space capabilities.
What is the extent of your engagement with partner nations on
issues and concerns related to space? What aspects of space policy and
engagement do you think needs more attention in the AOR?
Dr. Ratner. Within the Department of Defense, my office works
closely with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy and
the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Space and Missile Defense to engage
allies and partners on space cooperation, including building a shared
understanding of the threats we face in space. We have standing space
engagements with our key allies in the Indo-Pacific region, such as
Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and the Republic of Korea, as well as
allies and partners across Europe, Africa, and in Latin America. These
engagements focus on cooperation efforts in key space mission areas and
aim to increase resilience in the space domain through coordinated
efforts.
The Department is currently working on the ongoing development of
responsible behaviors in the space domain. It is critical that we
continue engaging our allies and partners, specifically in the Indo-
Pacific region, on norms of behavior that contribute to the safety,
stability, security, and long-term sustainability of space activities
in order to increase the cost of irresponsible behavior in the space
domain.
Mr. Carbajal. The testimony highlights China's investment in its
space and counter-space programs. In its recently released white paper
``China's Space Program: A 2021 Perspective,'' the Chinese government
outlines the important of space in its overall national strategy.
China's launch rates more than doubled in the last 5 years compared
to the previous 5 years. Space launch and American competitiveness in
space is something I am very focused on, especially with Vandenberg
Space Force Base in my district, which why I am concerned with how
China intends to employ its space capabilities.
What is the extent of your engagement with partner nations on
issues and concerns related to space? What aspects of space policy and
engagement do you think needs more attention in the AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. We coordinate with USSPACECOM to strengthen our
alliances and enhance emerging partnerships by increasing the frequency
of space-related combined operations, exercises, and training with
Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea, and New Zealand. We also support
USSPACECOM's execution of Global Sentinel, participate in Space Force's
Schriever Wargames, and integrate space into our exercises, like
Talisman Saber, Keen Edge, and Cobra Gold. USINDOPACOM and the Defense
Security Cooperation Agency are also building partner capacity with
Thailand to contribute to regional multi-domain capability by 2027,
supported by $600K in FY23 Title 10 funding and USSPACECOM expertise.
Similar initiatives will be evaluated in FY24 for other emerging
partners like India, Indonesia, Philippines, Singapore, and Vietnam.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
Mr. Kelly. The Administration's Indo-Pacific Strategy, published in
February of this year, states that the United States needs to focus on
targeted spending and relationship building with allies in the region.
In 2016, India was designated as a ``Major Defense Partner,'' but
nearly 60% of its military equipment has been purchased from Russia.
While developing a more robust partnership with the Quad (India, Japan,
Australia, U.S.), what are we doing to enhance interoperability with
India since they are the newest ally in the region?
a. Since we have been working strongly with Japan and Australia for
some time now, what integration or interoperability challenges do we
face when improving our partnership with India as a member of the Quad?
b. Is there anything else we could be doing to aid in either the
expansion of programs or funding needed to improve India's defense
capabilities as our strategic partner in the region, and reducing their
reliance on Russian military equipment?
Dr. Ratner. Over the course of the last year, we have deepened and
broadened the scope of U.S.-India defense cooperation across several
domains--including in space and cyberspace. To continue strengthening
our interoperability, we will prioritize a few promising areas of
cooperation. These include deepening information-sharing and mutual
logistics operations; growing our defense trade and technology
relationship; and expanding high-end cooperation in the maritime
domain, including in the Indian Ocean region and in Southeast Asia.
Navy-to-Navy cooperation remains the most mature aspect of our defense
ties and given shared challenges in the Indo-Pacific region, there is
potential for even more growth. Going forward, we seek to build
interoperability between our two militaries and identify new
opportunities for cooperation in support of India's role as a net
security provider in the region.
a. India is a critical partner and member of the Quad. Over the
past couple of years, the Quad partners have continued to deepen
interoperability through joint exercises such as MALABAR. Through a
wide range of shared activities, such as space cooperation, technology
cooperation, and vaccine production, the Quad partners are working
closely together to sustain a free and open Indo-Pacific, including in
support of the Association of Southeast Asian Nation's (ASEAN)
centrality in the region. The Quad partners are also continuing to
deepen interoperability through joint exercises such as MALABAR. These
cooperative activities, however, do not reflect a formal alliance
structure. Rather, they reflect the partners' abiding commitment to
ensuring the durability of shared principles such as the rule of law
and the peaceful resolution of disputes.
b. As noted above, we are strengthening U.S.-India defense
cooperation across a range of domains. This includes working closely
with India to deepen our bilateral industrial cooperation on co-
production and co-development of defense articles, through initiatives
such as the Defense Trade and Technology Initiative (DTTI). We have
urged India--as we do with all of our allies and partners--to avoid
transactions with Russia and to continue diversifying away from its
procurement of Russian arms. We remain encouraged by India's
diversification of defense equipment over the past decade, including
the over $20 billion of U.S.-origin defense equipment it has purchased
since 2008.
Mr. Kelly. Do the unmanned aerial systems (UAS) of near-peer
adversaries pose a threat to U.S. forces and installations in the
INDOPACOM AOR in a competitive peacetime environment? In your opinion,
is the capability and capacity of currently deployed systems sufficient
to meet your requirement for detection, tracking, identification, and
defeat of adversary UAS? If not, what steps is INDOPACOM taking
together with the services and USSOCOM to address any capability gaps
or capacity shortfalls?
Admiral Aquilino. America's potential adversaries are investing
heavily in a range of UAS for reconnaissance and surveillance, target
acquisition, and with an increasing capability to conduct non-lethal
and lethal attacks. I believe existing airspace control measures are
struggling to keep pace with the rate of UAS technological innovation
and proliferation which could threaten U.S. forces and installations.
Over the past several years, USINDOPACOM has participated in counter
UAS technology field demonstrations, experiments, and workshops to help
technology developers build operationally suitable prototypes for land,
sea and air defense against UAS attacks.
Additionally, USINDOPACOM has informed the requirements and
acquisition communities of needs to address capability and capacity
gaps in this dynamic threat space. Continued Departmental, Combat
Support Agency, and Service Laboratory support will enable USINDOPACOM,
USSOCOM, and the other Combatant Commands to collaborate on closing
these gaps. Undoubtedly, this effort will be ongoing as the
requirements to detect, track, identify, and defeat adversary UAS
platforms evolve with technology advancements and human ingenuity.
Mr. Kelly. In the recent transition from the continuing war on
Countering Violent Extremism to Strategic Competition, global
requirements are continuously shifting in the face of today's
geopolitical realities. With additional focus and demands being placed
on USINDOPACOM in response to this increasingly dynamic transition are
you positioned to meet operational requirements outlined in the NDS and
national military strategy, and particularly in relation to
expeditionary warfare and USMC`s 2030 vision?
Admiral Aquilino. Though USINDOPACOM has quickly evolved its
exercises, operations, and activities to deliver integrated deterrence
in the Indo-Pacific in line with strategic guidance, the command is
limited due to a consolidated footprint of bases and misallocated
forces. Much of the Joint Force assigned to USINDOPACOM is not postured
to respond to critical threats and strategic competition within the
Indo-Pacific region. I have outlined a prioritized set of activities
and resources required to implement the NDS within the Indo-Pacific
region via my Section 1242 Independent Assessment--available in a
classified document and unclassified executive summary. If realized,
the capabilities and requirements described in my Independent
Assessment will allow the U.S. to maintain or restore the comparative
military advantage with respect to the PRC.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER
Mr. Gallagher. Admiral Aquilino, 1 year ago, your predecessor
famously warned about potential Chinese action against Taiwan within
the decade. Since then, and particularly in light of the Russian
invasion of Ukraine, in your professional judgement, has the threat to
Taiwan become even more urgent?
Admiral Aquilino. While I think it is still premature to assess how
Russia's invasion of Ukraine will affect the cross-Strait situation,
the PRC's relentless pressure campaign against Taiwan and preparations
for possible military action does not suggest the potential for action
has subsided. President Xi Jinping articulated a shift in his military
modernization target date from 2035 to 2027, and the PRC has been
meeting timelines ahead of initial target dates. The mission I've been
given is to be prepared for that; so while I can't predict the exact
date, I know we need to be ready now.
Mr. Gallagher. Security assistance has paid enormous dividends so
far in helping the Ukrainians defend their homeland against the Russian
invasion. How would similar security assistance to Taiwan, beyond
Foreign Military Sales, contribute to both Taiwan and America's
security?
Admiral Aquilino. In accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act,
USINDOPACOM uses Title 10 Grant Aid Assistance (Section 332, Section
333, and Section 1263 Authorities) to help Taiwan implement asymmetric
defense concepts and capabilities. USINDOPACOM has active Significant
Security Cooperation Initiative (SSCI) projects that complement Foreign
Military Sales procurements for materiel capabilities critical to
enhancing the ability of the Taiwan Armed Forces to deter, delay, or
deny military aggression. These projects provide support equipment,
training, and advising. Additionally, USINDOPACOM is coordinating other
SSCI projects to address a holistic approach to self-defense through
strengthening reserve force capacity, civil-military crisis response,
and cybersecurity.
Mr. Gallagher. When it comes to joint warfighting, what benefits
would there be to preemptively integrating allies like Japan and
Australia into structures in peacetime, such as a reconstituted Joint
Task Force 519 or an equivalent to help coordinate contingency response
in INDOPACOM?
Admiral Aquilino. I have spent the vast majority of my time
strengthening and enhancing our relationships with allies and
partners--our #1 asymmetrical advantage. Over the past year, I have
participated in treaty events with our five bilateral treaty allies and
conducted multiple mini & multi-lateral engagements all focused on
increasing interoperability. AUKUS, the QUAD, and engagements with
ASEAN are instrumental to these efforts. Additionally, I regularly
engage with Chiefs of Defense to discuss areas of increased
collaboration, and we have implemented a robust joint and combined
exercise program with the focus of increasing our interoperability, so
that in times of crisis, we are ready to respond. I am confident in
USINDOPACOM and our allies' and partners' ability to work together to
confront any contingency response.
Mr. Gallagher. How important are long-ranged, ground-based fires
for your command? What would be the strategic impact if that capability
were to be delayed by budget cuts or otherwise foreclosed?
Admiral Aquilino. Long-range ground-based fires are critical to
USINDOPACOM's ability to execute operations from established,
expeditionary, and dispersed locations throughout the AOR. They enable
us to hold critical capabilities at risk while allowing freedom of
maneuver inside anti-access/area denial regions. If delayed, the
capability gap will increase, reducing USINDOPACOM's effectiveness at
deterring increasingly modern competitors, and ultimately placing U.S.
and partner forces at greater risk in the future.
Mr. Gallagher. How do you envision Marine littoral regiments,
especially those equipped with long-range fires, contributing to the
execution of your operational plans?
Admiral Aquilino. The ability to maneuver among small islands and
establish Expeditionary Advanced Bases throughout the INDOPACOM Area of
Operations provides significant combat capability. In particular, the
Marine Littoral Regiment's organic long-range precision fires
capability has the potential to create a counter-Anti Access/Area
Denial bubble, complicating the calculus of the adversary.
Mr. Gallagher. Which U.S. territories and possessions in the
INDOPACOM AOR are the most strategically underutilized? How can we,
Congress, help DOD maximize these places' military utility for
deterring PLA malign activity and in a worst case, responding to PLA
armed aggression in the AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. The Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands
(CNMI), in general, is the most strategically underutilized territory
in the INDOPACOM AOR. While our infrastructure in CNMI supports some
training and exercises, it is not sufficient to support large-scale,
continuous operations. While Guam is critical to our contingency plans,
CNMI could provide important additional operating locations in the
region as alternatives to Guam. Congress' support to ongoing DOD
posture investments in CNMI would help strengthen our military
capability in the region to deter and respond to the PLA.
Mr. Gallagher. Andersen AFB has in recent years invested to improve
its ability to load munitions and aircraft and turn higher sortie
rates. What other basing facilities across the INDOPACOM AOR would
benefit from Congressional appropriations for expansion and hardening
of munitions storage and loading facilities? How would you rank order
those locations in terms of priority?
Admiral Aquilino. My priorities are improvements to: 1) Guam
Cluster (Yap, Palau, Tinian); 2) Philippine Cluster (Basa); and 3)
Australia Cluster (Tindal, Darwin, Baucau).
Mr. Gallagher. If the USAF, USN, and USMC were each appropriated an
additional $5 billion per year for munitions procurement, what would
you like to see them spend it on? Can potentially use the response to
inform supply chain conversations and find ways for Congress to better
facilitate higher-rate procurement of key systems such as SM-6 Block
IB, LRASM, Tomahawk ASM, JASSM-XR etc.
Admiral Aquilino. Integrated Fires is a critical capability for the
Indo-Pacific Theater to improve Joint Force lethality, which I've
highlighted in my Section 1242 Independent Assessment. I recommend each
of these services procure additional LRASM, TLAM, and SM-6 1B missiles.
Mr. Gallagher. What options does the DOD have to replace the
reserves held in the strategically vital Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage
Facility? How quickly can replacement fuel storage options be brought
online at an equivalent aggregate volume level across the INDOPACOM AOR
and how can Congress help you facilitate rapid incorporation of these
assets and capabilities?
Admiral Aquilino. Since the announcement of permanently closing Red
Hill, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) has been working to establish a
contractor-owned/contractor-operated facility on Oahu. DLA has recently
announced entering into a contract with PAR Hawaii Refining LLC for one
year with one-year-option period which can be further expanded as
necessary. USINDOPACOM is also working closely with DLA to acquire
additional contract storage capability in Guam and Subic. Another
option is storage afloat which can provide USINDOPACOM mobile logistics
capability to bridge potential gaps in fuel distribution. This can come
in the form of medium-range tankers, coastal tankers, and off-shore
support vessels. At this time, DLA and United States Transportation
Command (USTRANSCOM) are in the preliminary stages of planning and
coordination to contract tanker vessels. I appreciate Congress's
support in transitioning to these new assets and capabilities.
Mr. Gallagher. What ``off the shelf'' construction capabilities
could potentially be paired with military personnel and assets to
maximize our Rapid Airfield Damage Repair capabilities and thus
complicate the PRC target set and campaign planning? How can Congress
help you facilitate this?
Admiral Aquilino. There are a number of mature Government-Off-The-
Shelf and Commercial-Off-The Shelf solutions that enable military
personnel to repair runway surfaces with logistically-friendly tools
and methods. Congress can assist by funding the President's Budget
Request that includes resourcing for ``off-the-shelf'' solutions for
Rapid Airfield Damage Repair capabilities. A prime example of a joint
effort addressing a portion of the problem set is the recently
completed Expedient and Expeditionary Airfield Damage Repair (E-ADR)
Joint Capability Technology Demonstration (JCTD) co-funded by the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Development,
United States Transportation Command, and Air Force Installation and
Mission Support Center. The E-ADR/JCTD investigated, designed, and
developed expeditionary capabilities for runway repair and demonstrated
them in operationally-relevant environments with uniformed personnel
across the services. Furthermore, a number of commercial solutions from
both large and small-scale equipment manufacturers were included in the
assessments and exhibited great promise (some examples include modular
attachments for commonly found tracked loaders and logistically-lean
crater backfill methods).
Mr. Gallagher. How, if at all, is INDOPACOM working with partners
in Taiwan to facilitate the following items? (1) backup electricity
generation, (2) dispersion and hardening of fuel inventories sufficient
for 45 days, (3) distributed food stockpiles sufficient for 45 days,
(4) hardening of Taiwan municipal water supply infrastructure to
maximize continuity during PRC blockade and or bombardment efforts, and
(5) hardening of Taiwan telecommunications infrastructure, including
satellite internet access to mitigate potential PRC efforts to cut the
island off by interdicting subsea fiber optic cables
Admiral Aquilino. Through the American Institute in Taiwan, the
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), and the Joint Staff,
USINDOPACOM actively supports Taiwan's efforts to prioritize resilient
and distributed capabilities that are crucial for both natural
disasters and self-defense scenarios.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CROW
Mr. Crow. According to a 2018 USGS study, several U.S. military
installations in the Pacific, such as the one on Kwajalein Atoll, that
host critical missile tracking and defense capabilities, could be
decimated by rising sea levels by 2035.
1. Can you please provide an update on measures DOD is taking to
mitigate the impacts of climate change on these important installations
in the Pacific?
Dr. Ratner. The Department is currently incorporating climate
considerations into policies and decision-making at all levels to
ensure the Joint Force can operate under changing climate conditions,
maintain important operational capabilities, and protect and enhance
the natural and man-made systems essential to the Department's
operations. As the National Defense Strategy makes clear, China is the
Department's pacing challenge, so these imperatives are particularly
important in the Indo-Pacific region. DOD has developed several tools
to incorporate the impact of climate change into assessment of, and
future planning for, installations, including at Pacific locations like
the Kwajalein Atoll and Guam. For the past several years, the
Department has been assessing climate hazards, as described in the DOD
Installation Exposure to Climate Change at Home and Abroad report. That
report includes information on installation exposure and on resilience
measures the Department is taking to reduce vulnerabilities through a
mix of management, temporary, structural, non-structural, and nature-
based measures. The DOD Climate Assessment Tool, or DCAT, is also being
used to inform development of an ``all hazards'' assessment for
installations, which will be incorporated subsequently into
installation master plans and military construction projects. In
addition to the DCAT, the DOD Regional Sea Level (DRSL) database
provides projected regionalized sea level scenarios at three future
time horizons (2035, 2065, and 2100) for 1,774 coastal and tidally
influenced DOD sites worldwide. DRSL information is now incorporated
into DOD's installation master planning and civil engineering design
criteria for coastal locations. As these assessments progress, they
will produce more detailed information to support further development
of climate hazard reduction measures at important installations in the
Pacific and elsewhere around the world.
Mr. Crow. According to a 2018 USGS study, several U.S. military
installations in the Pacific, such as the one on Kwajalein Atoll, that
host critical missile tracking and defense capabilities, could be
decimated by rising sea levels by 2035.
2. If these installations are greatly impacted by rising sea levels
to the point of degraded operational capacity, how will that affect our
missile defense posture in the Pacific and ability to protect the
homeland?
Dr. Ratner. The Department has postured considerable missile
defense capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region, such as missile
defense and domain awareness assets in the Marshall Islands, Palau, and
the U.S. territory of Guam. We also conduct developmental missile
defense testing in the region. The loss of such assets would be
detrimental to our national defense.
Mr. Crow. According to a 2018 USGS study, several U.S. military
installations in the Pacific, such as the one on Kwajalein Atoll, that
host critical missile tracking and defense capabilities, could be
decimated by rising sea levels by 2035.
3. Does DOD have the funding, resources, and authorities required
to ensure these strategic missile detection and tracking ground station
sites are resilient to the effects of climate change?
Dr. Ratner. The Department has the necessary authorities, but
because of the remote location and harsh climate, construction is more
costly than what normal expectations would suggest. Currently, the
construction cost index for Kwajalein is 3.72. That means construction
of similar buildings on Kwajalein will cost nearly four times what the
same building would cost in continental United States.
Mr. Crow. According to a 2018 USGS study, several U.S. military
installations in the Pacific, such as the one on Kwajalein Atoll, that
host critical missile tracking and defense capabilities, could be
decimated by rising sea levels by 2035.
2. If these installations are greatly impacted by rising sea levels
to the point of degraded operational capacity, how will that affect our
missile defense posture in the Pacific and ability to protect the
homeland?
Admiral Aquilino. Regional and national security aspects of rising
sea levels in the Indo-Pacific are a real concern. While Kwajalein is
an important research and testing site, there are currently no missile
defense systems on Kwajalein. USINDOPACOM is reinforcing
infrastructure, increasing resilience at our own facilities, and
assisting partner nations to do the same. In coordination with allies
and partners, we have established the Community for Indo-Pacific
Climate Security (CIPCS), comprised of military and civil sector
experts to address climate impacts on security. In the specific case of
missile defense, none of our missile defense facilities have been
identified as being at risk to rising sea levels by 2035.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. What is the viability of transferring some of the U.S.
Navy's inventory of sea mines, such as the Quickstrike ER, to the
Taiwanese? If those sea mines are not transferable or easily used by
the Taiwanese, is there a way for the United States to facilitate the
Foreign Military Sale of modern sea mine systems from other partner
nations, such as the Italian MN103 MANTA?
Dr. Ratner. Owing to inactive production lines, limited U.S.
inventory, and Technology Security and Foreign Disclosure (TSFD)
constraints, we are seeking to assist Taiwan develop its defensive
naval mining capabilities through other means. These include technical
assistance, subject matter expert exchanges, and operator-to-operator
engagements.
Regarding the Italian MN103 MANTA, DOD would defer to Taiwan
regarding whether this capability meets Taiwan's operational needs.
More broadly, DOD and interagency partners encourage other third
parties who are committed to cross-Strait peace and stability to
develop more fulsome security and defense relations with Taiwan.
Mr. Waltz. Is it possible to include Taiwan in the development of
the XLUUV Orca system or its associated Clandestine Delivered Mine
(CDM)?
Dr. Ratner. I will defer to the U.S. Navy regarding cooperation on
this program. More broadly, DOD is examining ways to increase technical
cooperation with Taiwan on capabilities of mutual interest. Moreover,
U.S. Indo-Pacific Command and U.S. Pacific Fleet regularly engage the
Taiwan Navy on technical and operational issues critical to Taiwan's
security.
Mr. Waltz. What resources does the Department of Defense need to
accelerate the fulfillment of the Foreign Military Sale of the Harpoon
anti-ship missile to the Taiwanese? Is it possible to expand the number
of Harpoon Coastal Defense Systems (HCDSs) beyond 100 launchers?
Dr. Ratner. DOD has sought consistently to accelerate production
and delivery of the Harpoon coastal defense cruise missile (CDCM)
system to Taiwan. The current schedule accounts for all known
efficiencies, but we continue to look for additional ways to get this
capability to Taiwan as fast as possible.
Regarding additional launchers, DOD defers to Taiwan regarding any
operational requirements over and above its current Foreign Military
Sales (FMS) case.
Mr. Waltz. What is the viability of transferring some of the U.S.
Navy's inventory of sea mines, such as the Quickstrike ER, to the
Taiwanese? If those sea mines are not transferable or easily used by
the Taiwanese, is there a way for the United States to facilitate the
Foreign Military Sale of modern sea mine systems from other partner
nations, such as the Italian MN103 MANTA?
Admiral Aquilino. I will provide more detail in a classified
response, but what I can say here is that the United States adheres to
the Taiwan Relations Act, the three Joint Communiques, and the Six
Assurances as the legal framework for making defense articles and
services available to Taiwan. Other partners may have a different
policy.
Mr. Waltz. What resources does the Department of Defense need to
accelerate the fulfillment of the Foreign Military Sale of the Harpoon
anti-ship missile to the Taiwanese? Is it possible to expand the number
of Harpoon Coastal Defense Systems (HCDSs) beyond 100 launchers?
Admiral Aquilino. Accelerating the production and delivery of
Harpoon anti-ship missiles to Taiwan is absolutely crucial for
enhancing the ability of the Taiwan Armed Forces to deter, delay, or
deny military aggression. However, the delivery timelines are dependent
on the suppliers. USINDOPACOM continues to explore options with
suppliers, through the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, to shorten
the timelines. Taiwan can choose to increase the number of systems by
amending the case.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. JACOBS
Ms. Jacobs. China has been undertaking a significant, long-term
military modernization effort. In what areas have they made the most
progress? And in what areas have they fallen behind publicly stated
goals?
Dr. Ratner. The People's Liberation Army (PLA) has fielded, and is
further developing, capabilities to provide options for the People's
Republic of China (PRC) to dissuade, deter, and/or defeat, as
necessary, third-party intervention during a large-scale, theater
campaign such as a Taiwan contingency. In addition to strike, air and
missile defense, anti-surface and anti-submarine capabilities
improvements, the PRC is focusing on information, cyber, and space and
counterspace operations. The PLA's focus on an integrated approach to
the cyber domain using advanced technologies likely will lead to the
PLA improving its ability to conduct cyber operations over the next
several years.
In 2020, the PLA assessed that they achieved their 2020 goal of
``generally achieving mechanization,'' its new 2027 goal stresses the
need for the PLA to ``accelerate the integrated development of
mechanization, informatization, and intelligentization, while boosting
the speed of modernization in military theories, organizations,
personnel and weapons and equipment.'' Upon the announcement of the
goal, a PLA spokesperson added, ``China's national defense strength
does not match its economic growth, and is not compatible with China's
international standing and its strategic security needs.''
Ms. Jacobs. I want to talk about some of the lessons DOD can learn
from Ukraine, but I want to be specific. As we all have seen, in a
short amount of time the Ukrainian military's performance has greatly
improved since its initial clash with Russia over Crimea. I assume a
lot of this is due to the training our Special Forces have provided
since 2014. So my question is what specifically has the U.S. learned
about how to properly stand up a partner force. What SOF training has
proven the most helpful to Ukraine in its defense of their homeland and
what lessons can we apply to other partner forces in Asia who might
also need to one day repel an outside superior force? What do you think
we could have done better in Ukraine and have those lessons similarly
been applied?
Dr. Ratner. Prior to conflict, the Department of Defense programs
strengthened Ukraine's ability to understand Russian activities and
develop the operational skills and organizational structure to counter
Russian aggression. Specifically, DOD training improved the tactics,
techniques, and procedures of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, and
particularly the Ukrainian Special Operations Forces (UKRSOF), such
that they are better able to plan, coordinate, and implement complex
operations at the tactical and operational level. Moreover, U.S.
Special Operations Forces (USSOF) have helped UKRSOF restructure itself
such that it can better integrate and plan with NATO Allies and other
partners. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has reinforced the need to
develop operational skills and organizational structures for these
types of activities in vulnerable areas prior to conflict.
Additionally U.S., allied, and partner Special Operations Forces
(SOF) were actively engaged in bilateral medical training with
Ukrainian forces. Medical care capable of addressing combat casualties
provides motivation and hope to a fighting force, especially a force
resisting aggression. For example, the same Tactical Combat Casualty
Care (TCCC) training, which has proven invaluable in the treatment of
U.S. casualties, was provided for Ukrainian forces. There is
opportunity for the DOD, other U.S. departments and agencies, and
partners to build resiliency of a nation's population in future crises
or conflicts through similar medical training initiatives.
Ms. Jacobs. What are we doing and what more needs to be done to
accelerate full interoperability of these partner forces with their
U.S. counterparts? Are we conducting enough joint training exercises?
Are all the comms with our allies both secure and compatible?
Dr. Ratner. The United States continues to deepen our alliances and
bilateral defense cooperation with Australia, Japan, and the Republic
of Korea through training and exercises; cooperation on integrated air
and missile defense; joint research, development, test, and evaluation
(RDT&E) on capabilities; and other defense engagements and cooperative
efforts. In South and Southeast Asia, DOD is also focused on enhancing
interoperability through major training exercises like Cobra Gold with
Thailand, Balikatan with the Philippines, and Garuda Shield with
Indonesia, and complementing that training with security assistance to
improve partners' communications capabilities and interoperability.
Ms. Jacobs. The State Department has assessed that Burma's civilian
government was deposed in a military coup. U.S. military-to-military
relations with Burma were already extremely limited due to gross
violations of human rights conducted by Burma's military. What does our
military-to-military engagement with Burma look like? Is our engagement
impacted by the coup determination? And, if so, what conditions or
factors would be used to determine the scope and scale of engagement
going forward?
Dr. Ratner. The Department of Defense has prohibitions on military-
to-military engagements with Burma, including but not limited to
prohibiting contact with members of the Burmese military, Burmese
participation in U.S. military exercises or multilateral military-to-
military engagements, and intelligence sharing. The coup determination
did not significantly impact U.S. military-to-military engagement with
Burma, and future engagement will depend on factors such as the
cessation of military violence in the country, sincere efforts to
restore democratic governance, and the establishment of an inclusive
and representative civilian government, and the promotion of
accountability for atrocities committed by the junta.
Ms. Jacobs. Are we actually selling the equipment Taiwan needs to
defend itself? My concern is not about the amount of FMF and FMS we
provide to Taiwan, but the type of platforms it is used for. Taiwan
needs redundancy for radar and sensors. Others have pointed to the need
for rapid attack boats armed with anti-ship missiles. More broadly, it
is clear that the focus for Taiwan must be on defeating an attempt at
an amphibious invasion. Shouldn't that be emphasized over additional F-
16 sales?
Dr. Ratner. We continue to work with Taiwan to define its defense
requirements in line with the cross-Strait threat. As part of this
effort, we have emphasized the importance of capabilities that can be
massed in larger numbers and distributed in a manner that best enables
island defense. This includes short-range air defense, anti-ship
missiles, defensive naval mining, and decentralized and redundant
command and control. Nevertheless, we understand Taiwan's need to
maintain some conventional capabilities that are best suited for
steady-state activities, and will continue to support maintenance and
sustainment of such previously provided capabilities.
Ms. Jacobs. As we have seen in Ukraine, wars are often not won or
lost by who has the shiniest toys, but in fact who has the best long
term plan for logistics. In light of that fact, what is the U.S. doing
to shore up gaps that might arise in our supply chain should a conflict
break out in Asia? Do you have enough fuel tankers and vertical lift
assets so that all of our forward deployed forces can not just be
combat ready but survive a prolonged campaign? I want you to be
specific, given our current posture what percentage of U.S. forces
currently in the INDOPACOM AOR could we adequately supply for a fight
which lasted longer than 6 months?
Dr. Ratner. DOD's President's Budget request for Fiscal Year (FY)
2023 makes significant investments in key industrial base sectors such
as microelectronics, casting and forging, batteries and energy storage,
kinetic capabilities, and strategic and critical minerals. Importantly,
DOD increased Defense Production Act (DPA) Title III funding to $660
million in Fiscal Year (FY) 2023, bolstering the supply chain for
defense-critical components such as critical chemicals for missiles and
munitions; hypersonics components; secure, hardened microelectronics;
and rare earths processing. To complement DPA investments, the FY 2023
President's Budget request includes a further $1.1 billion to secure a
robust supply chain for DOD microelectronics; $231 million for
hypersonics; $150 million for munitions components, including critical
chemicals and materials; and $48 million for supply chains for casted
and forged parts.
In addition, on October 3, 2022, the President Signed a waiver
authorizing the use of DPA Title III authorities to increase the
production capacity of materials critical to supporting the national
defense against adversarial aggression. This will enable the Program to
execute the $600 million appropriated to it through the Ukraine
Supplemental Appropriations Act to mitigate industrial base constraints
for missile production and expand domestic capacity for strategic and
critical minerals. The waiver will also allow the Program to
expediently respond to potential future conflicts in Asia.
The FY 2023 President's Budget request also includes $13 billion
for the Air Force for rapid global mobility as a core function. This
includes procurement of 15 KC-46s--the world's most capable aerial
refueling platform--which significantly increases the range,
flexibility, and capability of the Air Force while reducing risk to
force in a near-peer conflict. The Air Force also continues to fine-
tune its fleet of tactical and strategic airlift capabilities provided
by specific C-130 configurations and the C-17. The Navy's budget
includes $2.3 billion for five KC-130J Super Tankers and ten CH-53K
King Stallions, and $794.719 million for one John Lewis-class fleet
oiler (T-AO). The Navy also plans to procure two used sealift vessels.
The Army's budget includes $897 million for 53 UH-60 Black Hawk utility
helicopters, and $199 million for six CH-47 Chinook heavy lift
helicopters.
These investments are part of DOD's continuing, long-term
investments in logistics assets that DOD relies upon to sustain its
forces over the course of an extended conflict.
Ms. Jacobs. China has been undertaking a significant, long-term
military modernization effort. In what areas have they made the most
progress? And in what areas have they fallen behind publicly stated
goals?
Admiral Aquilino. I would highlight three areas where China has
made significant progress. First, the PLA continues to field large
numbers of modern weapons and systems such as fighters, warships, and
missiles. Second, the PRC is showing progress in developing and
fielding advanced technologies like hypersonics and smart systems. And
third, the PRC is rapidly expanding its space and counter-space
capabilities. I do not believe the PLA has met its goals for joint
command and control or integration; still lacks realism in training and
exercises; struggles to incorporate key enablers like logistics into
operations and exercises; and remains behind plan in building
professional education for the force, most notably for NCOs and
soldiers.
Ms. Jacobs. I want to talk about some of the lessons DOD can learn
from Ukraine, but I want to be specific. As we all have seen, in a
short amount of time the Ukrainian military's performance has greatly
improved since its initial clash with Russia over Crimea. I assume a
lot of this is due to the training our Special Forces have provided
since 2014. So my question is what specifically has the U.S. learned
about how to properly stand up a partner force. What SOF training has
proven the most helpful to Ukraine in its defense of their homeland and
what lessons can we apply to other partner forces in Asia who might
also need to one day repel an outside superior force? What do you think
we could have done better in Ukraine and have those lessons similarly
been applied?
Admiral Aquilino. I'll let the EUCOM Commander address U.S.
training activities with Ukraine, but I think what we're seeing
illustrates the value of enhancing partnerships and developing credible
civil-military defense capabilities. In the Indo-Pacific, we have a
very strong program aimed at building partner capacity to strengthen
self-defense capability and to contribute to regional and international
stability. This network of strong alliances and partnerships are a key
U.S. asymmetric advantage that our security challengers do not possess.
Because these relationships are based on shared values and people-to-
people ties, they provide significant advantages such as long-term
mutual trust, understanding, respect, interoperability, and a common
commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific.
Ms. Jacobs. What are we doing and what more needs to be done to
accelerate full interoperability of these partner forces with their
U.S. counterparts? Are we conducting enough joint training exercises?
Are all the comms with our allies both secure and compatible?
Admiral Aquilino. ``Full interoperability'' will remain elusive
given wide ranging technologies--even within the U.S. inventory--and
the desire by partner nations to diversify sourcing to enhance
resilience and strategic flexibility. We are working closely with
allies and partners to increase the complexity of exercises, not
necessarily adding more, as we already conduct more than 120 exercises
a year in INDOPACOM. The most important areas for developing as much
interoperability between U.S. and partner forces are in the warfighting
functions of secure command and control, intelligence and information
sharing, and protection of critical ally/partner capabilities,
infrastructure, and force protection. Interoperability in these
functions is critical to progress in the areas of maneuver, fires and
sustainment capabilities.
USINDOPACOM is partnering through major exercises with Japan,
Philippines, Australia, and Thailand by improving Combined and Joint
interoperability via the Pacific Multi-Domain Training Experimentation
Capability (PMTEC) and Mission Partner Environment (MPE). Establishing
secure and compatible communications to share operational information
and intelligence with our allies and partners, is one of my priorities,
specifically through MPE. Through these efforts, we can better train
together and achieve integrated deterrence by incorporating allies and
partners into our warfighting concepts.
Ms. Jacobs. There is significant strategic and operational
discussion with respect to the relevance and therefore utility of land
forces throughout the USINDOPACOM area of responsibility (AOR).
Legitimate questions revolve around the value of land forces and their
current, even projected, capabilities against potential adversaries and
the inherent risk associated with how, when, and where they might be
positioned, their relative lack of operational mobility, and their
logistical vulnerability. What is your assessment of relevance and
utility of land forces across the spectrum of competition and conflict
in your AOR? In conflict, how should we consider the value and
management of risk associated with how land forces might be
operationally positioned, employed, and sustained over time and long
distances?
Admiral Aquilino. The presence of capable and lethal land forces
with the capability to strike air and naval forces are a powerful
deterrent and critical to my ability to protect our national interests.
Often, presence equals deterrence and we have two critical components
to our land forces--USMC Marine Littoral Regiments (MLR) and Army
Multi-Domain Task Forces (MDTF). These complementary forces will be
able to operate in austere locations in contested environments and
include organic lift. The MLR and MDTF offer USINDOPACOM relevant
capabilities across the spectrum of conflict. They will also be
integral in building partner capacity by developing allies'
capabilities to work across domains and operate jointly.
MLRs and MDTFs will face challenges in logistics. Both the Army and
USMC are working to shore up their ability to provide logistical
support from maritime sources while operating in the littorals. We will
also need to work with our allies and partners to ensure the required
access in the right location for elements to support the MLR and MDTF.
Ms. Jacobs. Are we actually selling the equipment Taiwan needs to
defend itself? My concern is not about the amount of FMF and FMS we
provide to Taiwan, but the type of platforms it is used for. Taiwan
needs redundancy for radar and sensors. Others have pointed to the need
for rapid attack boats armed with anti-ship missiles. More broadly, it
is clear that the focus for Taiwan must be on defeating an attempt at
an amphibious invasion. Shouldn't that be emphasized over additional F-
16 sales?
Admiral Aquilino. The U.S. Government has been readjusting FMS to
Taiwan to emphasize self-defense capabilities that deter, delay, or
deny military aggression. For example, HIMARS launchers, ATACMS
missiles, Harpoon coastal defense cruise missiles, and MQ-9B unmanned
aerial systems are FMS cases in the past 18 months that provide a
joint, layered self-defense capability. The Field Information
Communications System and Patriot sustainment FMS cases in the previous
months also enhance the survivability and resiliency of Taiwan's
command and control in self-defense.
Ms. Jacobs. As we have seen in Ukraine, wars are often not won or
lost by who has the shiniest toys, but in fact who has the best long
term plan for logistics. In light of that fact, what is the U.S. doing
to shore up gaps that might arise in our supply chain should a conflict
break out in Asia? Do you have enough fuel tankers and vertical lift
assets so that all of our forward deployed forces can not just be
combat ready but survive a prolonged campaign? I want you to be
specific, given our current posture what percentage of U.S. forces
currently in the INDOPACOM AOR could we adequately supply for a fight
which lasted longer than 6 months?
Admiral Aquilino. When it comes to scenarios of protracted conflict
such as the one described, the logistics requirement is no longer
simply theater-specific. As we are observing first hand with the
current crisis, a protracted conflict requires extensive amounts of
support from the whole of government, domestic industrial base, as well
as our allies and partners. To answer your question on percentage of
the force we can adequately supply, I would offer that we can supply
all of them. However, this requires an extensive amount of globally
allocated military and commercial assets that are not necessarily
resident in the Pacific, which could result in delays if not mitigated.
To overcome this challenge, we are working diligently with commercial
industry and our allies and partners to pre-position essential
resources throughout the theater thus shortening our supply lines.
Fuel tankers during peacetime are designed to sustain U.S. forces
based on daily operational requirements. The DOD needs to rapidly
acquire and employ tankers to be able to sustain combat forces in a
prolonged conflict. One way to fill this gap is through the Tanker
Security Program in which commercial tankers are incentivized to
guarantee their vessels will be made available to the DOD during crises
or contingencies. Another program that would enhance readiness is the
renewal of the Voluntary Tanker Agreement (VTA) program. VTA
establishes an emergency preparedness program for accessing tankers and
formal capability between the government and the tanker industry.
Ms. Jacobs. China has been undertaking a significant, long-term
military modernization effort. In what areas have they made the most
progress? And in what areas have they fallen behind publicly stated
goals?
General LaCamera. [The information is classified and retained in
the committee files.]
Ms. Jacobs. I want to talk about some of the lessons DOD can learn
from Ukraine, but I want to be specific. As we all have seen, in a
short amount of time the Ukrainian military's performance has greatly
improved since its initial clash with Russia over Crimea. I assume a
lot of this is due to the training our Special Forces have provided
since 2014. So my question is what specifically has the U.S. learned
about how to properly stand up a partner force. What SOF training has
proven the most helpful to Ukraine in its defense of their homeland and
what lessons can we apply to other partner forces in Asia who might
also need to one day repel an outside superior force? What do you think
we could have done better in Ukraine and have those lessons similarly
been applied?
General LaCamera. As the conflict in Ukraine continues, we will
continue to draw on lessons learned and apply those lessons to further
integrated deterrence in Northeast Asia. The Ukrainian conflict
reinforces the advantage of close, if not, in-person partnership, as
well as utilizing a multi-lateral Special Operation Forces (SOF)
approach to assisting a partner force. While the strategic context is
different in Northeast Asia, SOF adds value through a multi-domain
approach to standing up or reinforcing an existing partner force. That
multi-domain approach is best applied through consistent partnership
with Irregular Warfare capabilities as a centerpiece.
Applied to Northeast Asia, U.S. SOF support must be tailored to the
capabilities required in the region, seeking asymmetric advantage
against adversaries, and reinforcing broader theater and conventional
campaigns. Specific to the Korean peninsula, we focus on realistic
combined training across the spectrum of potential missions in crisis
and conflict, from logistics support to SOF, unconventional warfare,
reconnaissance, and raids on high value targets. We also seek to ensure
that our partners understand the value of Civil Affairs and military
information support operations integration into operations through all
phases.
I would defer to SOCEUR/EUCOM for their expert perspective on any
specific lessons for improvement relative to Ukraine.
Ms. Jacobs. What are we doing and what more needs to be done to
accelerate full interoperability of these partner forces with their
U.S. counterparts? Are we conducting enough joint training exercises?
Are all the comms with our allies both secure and compatible?
General LaCamera. We continue to work with our allies and partners
to develop and implement solutions that enable us to communicate
effectively and efficiently in operations ranging from armistice to
armed conflict. While some of our communications platforms with our
Republic of Korea (ROK) and United Nations partners are secure and
compatible, additional work is needed to achieve true technical
interoperability. To address this, there are four working groups at
different levels that meet regularly focused on interoperability
concerns.
A large ongoing effort is that CENTRIXS-K, the primary
communications network for coalition forces in Korea, is being
transitioned to the Mission Partner Enterprise (MPE). MPE is the
framework that the U.S. uses to establish networks and communicate with
mission partners. Once in place in Korea, MPE will improve our ability
to communicate with the ROK and our other coalition allies.
To address other communication security concerns, the U.S.
Department of Defense Chief Information Office and the ROK Minister of
National Defense (MND) are working to agree to an established
cybersecurity standard that will apply to all interconnected systems to
ensure integrity of sensitive and classified information exchanges.
Similar to how the United States uses Risk Management Framework to
address cybersecurity concerns of networked systems, the U.S. and ROK
agreement on a standard will help improve the security and
interoperability of systems in the future.
Joint Combined training opportunities provide us the single
greatest method to enhance interoperability with our key alliance
partners. At the highest level, during the bi-annual, theaterwide,
joint Combined Command Post Training (CCPT), all commanders and staff
work to become proficient in all aspects of planning, intelligence, and
execution of defense plans including facets of interoperability over a
two-week period. However, outside of CCPT and small unit level
training, we are not doing enough joint training with our ROK Allies.
While we do conduct as many joint training events as possible, in
recent years' restrictions designed to reduce tensions on the
peninsula, shrinking training areas and the continued presence of COVID
have limited joint training events. The current level of joint training
is not sufficient to develop true interoperability.
Ms. Jacobs. Are we actually selling the equipment Taiwan needs to
defend itself? My concern is not about the amount of FMF and FMS we
provide to Taiwan, but the type of platforms it is used for. Taiwan
needs redundancy for radar and sensors. Others have pointed to the need
for rapid attack boats armed with anti-ship missiles. More broadly, it
is clear that the focus for Taiwan must be on defeating an attempt at
an amphibious invasion. Shouldn't that be emphasized over additional F-
16 sales?
General LaCamera. Determinations on platforms being provided to
Taiwan are not within my authorities as the Commander of UNC/CFC/USFK.
The Commander INDOPACOM or the Office of the Secretary of Defense may
be better able to address this issue.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KAHELE
Mr. Kahele. Do you support a DOD investment in a water treatment
facility and water quality testing facility at Red Hill? Does it make
sense to have a permanent water quality testing facility at Red Hill so
that we don't have to constantly ship samples to the mainland?
Dr. Ratner. I join the Secretary in his commitment to address the
incident at Red Hill by remediating environmental impacts, restoring
safe drinking water, and caring for affected military families and the
people of Hawaii. While the question about the water treatment and
testing facilities is outside of my area of responsibility, it is my
understanding that the Navy has made or plans to make investments in
both technologies, including the procurement high-precision lab
equipment to establish an on-island, independent water testing
capability at the University of Hawaii.
Mr. Kahele. The Red Hill WAI Act also requires the Navy to
reimburse the Honolulu Board of Water Supply and the Hawaii State
Departments of Health and Education for the enormous expenses incurred
as a result of Red Hill fuel spills. These expenses include drilling
new drinking water wells and monitoring wells. Dr. Ratner, do you
believe that DOD is responsible for reimbursing the State for costs
associated with the Red Hill water crisis?
Dr. Ratner. I am unfamiliar with the Red Hill WAI Act, and I defer
to our legal team on what specific responsibilities DOD has to
reimburse the state for costs. While outside of my area of
responsibility, it is my understanding that the Navy is in discussions
with the Hawaii Department of Health (DOH) about the scope of
reimbursement to DOH for expenses incurred in response to the release
of fuel from the Red Hill facility.
Mr. Kahele. The White House's 2022 Indo-Pacific strategy document
highlights the importance of ``building connection within and beyond
the region'' through people-to-people exchange. Dr. Ratner, what are
some of the soft power support systems and institutions that can help
support this INDOPACOM national security requirement? In Hawaii, the
East West Center (EWC) is uniquely postured to do just that. Dr.
Ratner, do you believe that DOD can dedicate more resources to people-
to-people exchanges in the Indo-Pacific region?
Dr. Ratner. People-to-people exchanges are a critical part of the
Department and U.S. government's toolkit for engaging the Indo-Pacific
region. The Daniel K. Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies
is a particularly valuable soft power resource for the Department,
which facilitates training, education, and the development of strong
networks between defense professionals in the Indo-Pacific region. We
also work closely with the Department of State in leveraging the U.S.
Government's full suite of tools--including the International Military
Education and Training (IMET) program--to build people-to-people ties
and professional development between the U.S. Department of Defense and
our allies and partners.
Mr. Kahele. I appreciate that DOD is giving Hawaii the attention it
deserves related to the Red Hill water contamination crisis. Given what
is happening at Red Hill, I am hearing from constituents who have
relatives or friends in Okinawa that the U.S. military also
contaminated the local water supply there. The U.S. military has
allegedly been allowing PFOS and other harmful chemicals to go into
Okinawa's main streams, springs and water supplies, thereby
contaminating local farmlands and making the water undrinkable. What is
DOD doing to address the water contamination issues caused by the U.S.
military in Okinawa?
Admiral Aquilino. All drinking water provided to the people of
Okinawa meets Government of Japan (GOJ) drinking water standards, which
are more stringent than the EPA health advisory level for
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS).
U.S. Forces Japan (USFJ) considers PFAS contamination the most
important environmental issue currently under discussion between USFJ
and GOJ, particularly in the groundwater wells affecting Kadena Air
Base that may have been caused in part by DOD Aqueous Film Forming Foam
(AFFF) systems. USFJ and the GOJ are cooperatively working to identify
the cause of high PFAS levels at wells and surface water sites near
U.S. military bases on Okinawa (Kadena, Camp Hansen, and Futenma) and
taking steps to ensure continued safe drinking water for all while
dramatically reducing the risk of future PFAS pollution as a result of
mishaps.
To these ends, USFJ and the GOJ have established the PFAS Technical
Working Group, under the authority of the USG/GOJ Joint Committee, to
bilaterally address PFAS issues in Japan. Additionally, USFJ is moving
forward unilaterally to upgrade and replace legacy AFFF firefighting
systems to systems with significantly lower levels of PFAS while still
meeting military firefighting specifications.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARL
Mr. Carl. The nature of the Indo-Pacific requires a steadfast and
robust logistics backbone in order to get supplies and service members
across thousands of miles of ocean and to facilitate movements within
the theater. As you mention in your testimony, the Global Posture
Review stresses the importance of enhancing our infrastructure in Guam,
Australia, and the Pacific Islands. This task will also require strong
logistics and supply chains. The closure of the Red Hill Bulk Fuel
Storage Facility will also impact the logistics and supply chains
throughout the AOR (Area of Responsibility). What do you see as
critical for improving our logistic and supply chains in the Indo-
Pacific and for the enhancement of our infrastructure throughout the
region?
Admiral Aquilino. Aside from increased military posture in the form
of permanent infrastructure, it is vital that the Joint Force begin to
integrate intra-theater distribution platforms and capabilities as well
as logistics decision tools and networks. Understanding the massive
amount of multimodal lift--air, maritime, and last-tactical-mile land
movement associated with deploying and sustaining combat power--it is
paramount that we capitalize on all available distribution platforms.
This requires an extensive joint logistics command and control network
to ensure operational efficiency and joint force priorities.
Furthermore, the current resource pool of distribution platforms in
either domain are limited and aging, which necessitates investment,
overhaul, and sustainment.
In regards to fuel posture, the joint force must have access to
various locations throughout the theatre to ensure a redundant and
resilient supply chain. This notion is supported by the Institute for
Defense Analysis study published in 2020. Increasing capacity and
capability in Guam, Australia, and other Pacific islands will provide
resiliency and survivability to our logistics network. Additionally,
investing in fuel infrastructure postured west of the International
Date Line and east of the PRC weapon engagement zone provides service
components the ability to transition from competition to crisis in an
effective manner. We need to invest not only in infrastructure, but
also in capabilities that will ensure we can rapidly contract and
acquire strategic sealift vessels to carry dry and liquid cargo to
sustain the joint force during contingencies.
Mr. Carl. Can you explain how fully equipped naval medical ships,
like the EPF and EMS can contribute to maximizing deterrence and
distributed lethality in the Indo-Pacific as well as important
partnership building exercises throughout the region?
Admiral Aquilino. Future wars are likely to take place in contested
environments, where success will depend in part on how quickly the
Joint Force can build and then reconstitute warfighting readiness once
attacked. Fully equipped medical ships that can rapidly treat service
members and enable them to rejoin the fight or help evacuate them for
future treatment will be critical in ensuring high rates of personnel
readiness.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Ms. Strickland. As the United States Government continues to focus
on the Indo-Pacific, I have heard some argue that we need to better
align U.S.-based forces with particular theaters. I think that it is a
compelling argument for service members to have more expertise in a
particular region, as we see with the need for Arctic Warriors in
Alaska, while still maintaining opportunities for people to advance in
their careers. Can you tell me more about the current debate and what
your views are?
If the Department moved to a regional alignment U.S.-based forces,
how would this be implemented? What role would the services play in
regional alignments?
Obviously, as we are seeing in Ukraine, there will be crises that
happen that will increase demand on U.S. servicemembers. How would the
Department align urgent needs with the need to maintain regional
expertise?
Dr. Ratner. DOD has robust global force management processes that
balance mission requirements, readiness, competing demands, and force
availability. As a part of these processes, DOD considers what
skillsets or capabilities are required to support certain missions. In
some circumstances, DOD trains and equips forces for a specific
skillset that has regional relevance, such as language skills or the
ability to operate in certain geographic conditions. Additionally,
other forces routinely operate in certain regions and develop region-
specific expertise, such as Marines in Okinawa training across
Southeast Asia and Soldiers in Germany training across Eastern Europe.
As DOD continues to support these forces and their role in military-to-
military relationships and interoperability, our top priority is
maintaining the readiness and flexibility required to provide the
Secretary the ability to respond to a wide range of potential global
crises.
Ms. Strickland. We are seeing in Ukraine the significant logistical
questions by the Russian military which is even starker because Ukraine
is Russia's neighbor. Given the ongoing concerns about the tyranny of
distance, how are you going to ensure that we don't face the same
logistics challenges in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Dr. Ratner. In accordance with the National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year (FY) 2022, DOD's FY 2023 President's Budget request
includes Pacific Deterrence Initiative (PDI) investments to 1)
modernize and strengthen U.S. presence in the Indo-Pacific region; 2)
improve logistics, maintenance capabilities, and prepositioning of
equipment, munitions, fuel, and material; 3) improve infrastructure
west of the International Date Line to enhance responsiveness and
resilience of U.S. forces; and 4) build the defense and security
capabilities, capacity, and cooperation of allies and partners. These
four categories of PDI investments comprise $3.8 billion of the total
$6.1 billion PDI request for in FY 2023, and complement the significant
Air Force, Navy, and Army investments in logistics assets and
capabilities that ensure the Joint Force's ability to supply and
sustain its forces in conflict.
Ms. Strickland. As the United States Government continues to focus
on the Indo-Pacific, I have heard some argue that we need to better
align U.S.-based forces with particular theaters. I think that it is a
compelling argument for service members to have more expertise in a
particular region, as we see with the need for Arctic Warriors in
Alaska, while still maintaining opportunities for people to advance in
their careers. Can you tell me more about the current debate and what
your views are?
If the Department moved to a regional alignment U.S.-based forces,
how would this be implemented? What role would the services play in
regional alignments?
Obviously, as we are seeing in Ukraine, there will be crises that
happen that will increase demand on U.S. servicemembers. How would the
Department align urgent needs with the need to maintain regional
expertise?
Admiral Aquilino. As a Combatant Commander, I view it from the
standpoint of needing to be prepared for full-spectrum conflict with
forces that are adaptable to a wide range of environments. I am
confident that I can meet my current requirements with the forces I
have assigned to me.
If the Department moved to a regional alignment of U.S.-based
forces, successful implementation by the services would need to ensure
combatant commanders retained the ability to direct planning, training,
and integration to better prepare for the transition from steady state
and to crisis and contingency operations.
In practice, the Services' Talent Management and Game Plan
Marketplaces develop, hire, and retain talent with regional experience.
This approach capitalizes on Service Members' recent and relevant
regional experience by selecting and placing them, sequentially, in
positions of increasing responsibility while continuing to develop and
utilize their regional expertise.
Presently, there is insufficient capacity to ``fence'' regional
expertise in the event of a major crisis. Every unit in the DOD
participated in CENTCOM operations in some capacity. Without a
substantive increase in end strength, maintaining regional expertise is
untenable.
Ms. Strickland. We are seeing in Ukraine the significant logistical
questions by the Russian military which is even starker because Ukraine
is Russia's neighbor. Given the ongoing concerns about the tyranny of
distance, how are you going to ensure that we don't face the same
logistics challenges in the INDOPACOM AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. We are working with USTRANSCOM, the Defense
Logistics Agency, the Joint Logistics Enterprise, and greater
department to ensure the tyranny of distance in this theater is
overcome by resilient and redundant logistical support. The USINDOPACOM
Theater Posture Plan ensures logistics are postured to provide support
at the point and time of need.
Ms. Strickland. As our focus moves to China, I don't want to forget
our treaty allies including Korea. In December, Secretary Austin met
with Minister of Defense Suh in the Security Consultative Meeting
(SCM). During the SCM the Minister and the Secretary emphasized that
continuous training opportunities are important to maintain readiness.
Right now, our joint forces do far too much training outside of the
peninsula which is a significant cost burden and sometimes results in
truncated training times. I know that there have been extensive
discussions between our respective governments on the development of a
combined multi-purpose live-fire training complex. Given how important
this training complex is to maintaining readiness, can you give us a
status update on this complex? Any idea when construction may begin?
General LaCamera. USFK and ROK MND are still committed to continued
cooperation toward the development of a combined joint multi-purpose
live-fire training complex (CJMPLFC), however, there has been no
progress on the development of the CJMPLFC. This delay is due to
ongoing noise abatement negotiations with civilian protestors and the
ROK, due to the range's proximity to civilian populations. After the
ROK government was unable to make progress with the protesters, they
enlisted the services of the Anti-Corruption Civil Right Commission
(ACRC). The ACRC immediately called for a stop of all AH-64 gunnery
training until further notice as a negotiation tactic. Recently, the
ROK government commissioned a study to develop a concept for U.S.
forces range operations and this year, USFK forces participated in
noise abatement tests at Korean live fire ranges to provide data for
the ROK study, using MI Abrams, Bradleys, and AH-64 helicopters. While
there has been little progress in the development of a new range, the
ROK is making some progress to increase training on the peninsula.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. Much emphasis has been placed on the importance of our
QUAD and AUKUS alliances in addition to those with Japan and South
Korea. However other partners in the South and Central Pacific such as
France, the Marshall Islands, Palau and the Federated States of
Micronesia are also critical to our supremacy in the region. I am very
concerned China is actively working to flip many Pacific Island
Nation's recognition from Taiwan to China, thus potentially enabling a
larger Chinese Pacific military presence. How are you able to
effectively secure these waters in peace as well as war, and what are
you doing to oppose Chinese coercion and military encroachment in the
South and Central Pacific?
Admiral Aquilino. USINDOPACOM coordinates closely with allies and
partners in the region, especially Australia, New Zealand and France,
to support a consolidated approach toward regional security in the
south and central Pacific. This includes participation in multilateral
coordination mechanisms such as the Pacific Quadrilateral and the FVEY
plus Japan and France multilateral. USINDOPACOM also works closely with
the U.S. Interagency to stay engaged with Pacific Island nations
without militaries. ``Soft power'' mechanisms are the primary DOD
counter to PRC influence in the region including infrastructure
development, assistance to Maritime Domain Awareness, and providing
training opportunities to government personnel (i.e. medical,
administrative, HA/DR, etc.).
Mr. Moore. Since your testimony last year, the F-35 has
successfully completed multiple deployments to the Pacific region, most
notably the combined U.S.-U.K. deployment aboard the HMS Queen
Elizabeth and the U.S. Navy deployment aboard the USS Carl Vinson. Have
recent deployments reinforced your belief that 5th generation fighters,
like F-35, are ``needed to win?
Admiral Aquilino. Fifth generation fighter deployments like the one
that took place on the HMS Queen Elizabeth re-affirms the need for
these types of aircraft in the Pacific. Fifth generation fighters
provide the capability to operate within areas that 4th generation
fighters can no longer freely utilize. Our adversaries continue to
refine their anti-access/area denial systems, and fifth generation
fighters are one way we can continue to compete in that area.
Mr. Moore. As we know, China's advanced air defenses and fighter
capabilities are rapidly increasing in capability and capacity. These
capabilities are pushing 4th generation aircraft to greater stand-off
ranges, often beyond the targeting ranges of their weapons and sensors.
Can you explain the importance of stand-in capabilities and what
advantages they provide if an engagement with China were to occur?
Admiral Aquilino. Stand-in capabilities are essential against a
peer adversary. Fifth generation fighters provide persistent targeting
coverage while being survivable in a high threat environment. Fifth
generation fighters also provide the ability to engage mobile targets
that challenge stand-off weapons due to time-of-flight. These platforms
also assure allies and demonstrate our commitment to their defense by
providing the ability to fight from stand-off ranges.
Mr. Moore. I had the privilege of spending years of my life on the
Korean Peninsula and greatly value the stalwart partner we have in
South Korea. As you are aware, Kim Jong Un has recently outlined a set
of ambitious nuclear modernization plans for North Korea, discussing
developments in reentry vehicles, ICBMs and tactical nuclear weapons.
Recent testing confirms this. Many believe that Russia would not have
invaded Ukraine had it not de-nuclearized and that this crisis will
only embolden North Korea's nuclear ambitions. Does our approach to
North Korea shift in light of recent events?
General LaCamera. [The information is classified and retained in
the committee files.]
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. PANETTA
Mr. Panetta. During his testimony, Admiral Aquilino referred to
Taiwan as a ``Nation'' during an exchange with Rep Panetta on U.S.
support to Taiwan's National Guard. Can you please clarify our
relationship with Taiwan and whether or not this was a mis-speak?
Please consider the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA), three Joint
Communiques, and the Six Assurances in your response.
Admiral Aquilino. During my testimony, I mistakenly referred to
Taiwan as a ``nation'' during an exchange regarding support to Taiwan's
National Guard. I immediately recognized I misspoke and submitted a
clarification for the record at the conclusion of the hearing. As
indicated in my written testimony and in other exchanges with the
Committee members, USINDOPACOM conducts military activities in
accordance with the U.S. One-China policy, as guided by the Taiwan
Relations Act, three U.S.-China Joint Communiques, and the Six
Assurances.
[The clarification referred to can be found in the Appendix on page
119.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. MURPHY
Mrs. Murphy. China announced that its defense budget would grow by
7.1 percent at the annual Two Sessions, which is currently underway.
Was this budgetary increase in line with your expectations, and what
capabilities do you expect the PLA to invest in with this increase?
Dr. Ratner. This year's People's Republic of China (PRC) budget
continues more than 20 years of annual defense spending increases and
sustains the PRC's position as the second-largest military spender in
the world after the United States. Moreover, the PRC's published
military budget omits several major categories of expenditures and its
actual military related spending is higher than what it states in its
official budget. This budget will support the PLA's ambitions to
implement the 14th Five-Year Plan, which will also serve the 2027 goal
to accelerate the integrated development of mechanization,
informatization, and intelligentization of the PRC's armed forces.
Mrs. Murphy. Xi Jinping, as Chairman of the Central Military
Commission, promoted a record number of PLA officers to the rank of
general in 2019, breaking longstanding military convention in the
process. Some analysts have ascribed these movements to Xi's efforts to
increase the number of full-generals and place only totally loyal
officers in key posts. How have such structural reforms within the PLA,
including Xi's internal anti-corruption drive, affected PLA readiness?
Dr. Ratner. Despite recent turnover, disruptions to the People's
Liberation Army (PLA) readiness remains minimal. The PLA will continue
to pursue ambitious modernization objectives, implement major
organizational reforms, and improve its combat readiness in line with
the goals and timelines announced by Xi in 2017 and 2020.
Mrs. Murphy. Our relationship with the freely associated states of
Palau, the Marshall Islands, and Micronesia is an enduring American
advantage in the Pacific. The Pacific Islands were mentioned 10 times
in the President's recently released Indo-Pacific Strategy. How has our
failure to renegotiate the compacts of free association in a timely
manner affected operational planning and overall readiness in your AOR?
Admiral Aquilino. These important agreements strengthen our
security relationships throughout the Pacific and mitigate competitors'
influence. However, as a Combatant Commander, the status of the compact
negotiations does not impact my readiness or ability to plan. The
historically good relationships we've enjoyed with these nations have
allowed us to maintain a credible forward military presence that
continues to this day and promotes regional stability.
I support interagency efforts to speedily conclude the negotiation
of the Compact Agreements.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Mr. Horsford. I've recently heard from Pacific Air Forces that
their top acquisition requests include accelerated F-15EX fielding and
the rapid procurement of the E-7 Wedgetail or a similar system. I agree
with their assessment and strongly support both programs. I hope to see
them prioritized in the upcoming budget request. As the combatant
commander, I'm curious how these acquisition priorities influence your
overall strategy for the Indo-Pacific.
Are you confident that your current forces could gain and maintain
air superiority in the Indo-Pacific if required; and how would
accelerated F-15EX procurement and the acquisition of a next-generation
AWACS capability better posture you to meet the Chinese threat?
Admiral Aquilino. The E-7 is needed to replace the E-3, and
directly contributes to the stand-in fight due to its superior radar
system. When combined with the Royal Australian Air Force's E-7 force,
the joint/combined force is able to command and control the air domain
throughout the vast Pacific theater. To strengthen this capability even
further, it is imperative the U.S. and Australia work together to
increase E-7 capability as quickly as possible. To supplement the E-7,
the F-15EX directly contributes to the stand-off capability as an
airborne stand-off weapons delivery platform.
I am confident our current forces could gain air superiority, but
may struggle to maintain it based on PRC's massive military buildup and
our own modernization efforts, which often come at the expense of
current capacity. Accelerating F-15EX procurement, long range weapon
development, and increasing land-based air defenses will contribute to
re-gaining the necessary edge to maintain air superiority where and
when it is needed.
Mr. Horsford. In last week's hearing with Secretary Karlin, we
discussed the strategic importance of multi-lateral training events
like Pacific Pathways, and the vital role they play in guaranteeing
persistent access in the Indo-Pacific. We agreed that these exercises
are mutually beneficial and allow the U.S. and allied nations to place
combat power forward to deter aggression. I strongly believe that these
exercises not only improve readiness, but are one of the most cost-
effective ways to present a more complex strategic challenge to the
Chinese.
Do you intend to request increased funding for the Pacific Pathways
exercise in FY23, and if so, how would this increased funding allow
U.S. Army Pacific to guarantee and optimize persistent access in the
1st and 2nd island chains?
Admiral Aquilino. U.S. Army Pacific, as the lead for Operation
Pathways (redesigned and renamed from the former Pacific Pathways),
requested an additional $104M for FY23 to provide persistent access in
the Indo-Pacific as part of INDOPACOM's FY23 Unfunded Priorities Report
submission. Operation Pathways optimizes persistent access in the First
and Second Island Chain in a phased operation enabling a sustainable,
strategic path through Army and Joint multilateral exercises from
October 2022 to September 2023, while our overall approach to
campaigning improves our ability to deter conflict.
Mr. Horsford. I'm curious about the role ``2805'' unspecified minor
construction authorities enable the Air Force to implement its Agile
Combat Employment strategy.
Do you require expanded 2805 authorities to rapidly execute the
military construction projects necessary for the implementation of the
Agile Combat Employment doctrine?
Admiral Aquilino. Yes, using existing authorities in support of
Agile Combat Employment (ACE) doctrine across the Pacific is
challenging. Average cost factors in the Indo-Pacific are often between
2-3 times the cost of comparable U.S. contract or troop labor projects
in other locations due to logistical challenges present in the area of
responsibility. Operating in remote locations drives up construction
costs in all aspects--including material, equipment, and workforce
mobilization--and operating under current authorities in 10 U.S.C. 2805
can impose limitations.
