[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-93]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED
PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

ON

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, DIGITAL

DEVELOPMENTS, AND ARTIFICIAL

INTELLIGENCE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 18, 2022

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-653                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              JIM BANKS, Indiana
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
RO KHANNA, California                MO BROOKS, Alabama
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania,      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Vice Chair                       C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado                 BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             PAT FALLON, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York

Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Moxley, Professional Staff Member
Payson Ruhl, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Banks, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Indiana, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and Information
Systems........................................................     3
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems............................................     1

WITNESSES

Sherman, John, Chief Information Officer and Acting Chief Digital
and Artificial Intelligence Officer, Office of the Secretary of
Defense; Dr. Kelly Fletcher, Principal Deputy Chief Information
Officer, Office of the Secretary of Defense; and Margie
Palmieri, Principal Deputy Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Officer, Office of the Secretary of Defense.......     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................    23
Sherman, John................................................    26

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Fallon...................................................    45

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS, AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2023

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, May 18, 2022.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Langevin. The subcommittee will come to order.
I want to welcome everyone to today's ``Department of
Defense Information Technology, Digital Developments, and
Artificial Intelligence for Fiscal Year 2023'' hearing.
Some housekeeping things before I give my official opening
statement. We have obviously convened this as a hybrid hearing,
so just to--for formality, members who are joining remotely
must be visible on screen for the purposes of identity
verification, establishing and maintaining a quorum,
participating in the proceeding, and voting.
Those members must continue to use the software platform's
video function while in attendance unless they experience
connectivity issues or other technical problems that render
them unable to participate on camera. If a member experiences
technical difficulties, they should contact the committee staff
for assistance.
The video of members' participation will be broadcast in
the room and via the television internet feeds. Members
participating remotely must seek recognition verbally, and they
are asked to mute their microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding. If members depart for a short while for reasons
other than joining a different proceeding, they should leave
the video function on. If members will be absent for a
significant period, or depart to join a different proceeding,
they should exit the software platform entirely and then rejoin
if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature in
communication--to communicate with staff regarding technical or
logistical support issues only.
Finally, I have designated a committee staff member to, if
necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to cancel any
inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the proceeding.
With that, today we are joined by Mr. John Sherman, the DOD
[Department of Defense] Chief Information Officer [CIO] serving
concurrently as the interim Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Officer. He is joined by Ms. Margaret Palmieri,
the Deputy Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer;
and Dr. Kelly Fletcher, the Principal Deputy Chief Information
Officer.
I welcome our witnesses today.
The position of the Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Officer is a new one at the Department of Defense,
effective as of February. The CDAO will serve as the
Department's senior official responsible for strengthening,
integrating data, artificial intelligence, and digital
solutions, and at its outset assumed responsibility for the
three preexisting entities that our members will be familiar
with--the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center, or the JAIC;
the Office of the Chief Data Officer; and the Defense Digital
Service.
While Mr. Sherman has appeared before us previously, he did
so in his CIO capacity, and today marks the inaugural
appearance of the CDAO in front of Congress.
For as long as I have served on this committee, there has
been a bicameral and bipartisan push to elevate the role
technology plays in the Department and to disassemble the
artificial stovepipes that exist within the sprawling
bureaucracy.
In bringing the CIO and CDAO together today, the committee
is making clear precisely how important of a role of technology
plays in warfare and that no single leader can manage it all.
So from data to operationalizing artificial intelligence, to
building resilience in our networks, these topics are just too
vital to be foisted onto a single official's already full
plate.
So I here--I applaud the Department's leadership for taking
this first step in creating the CDAO.
Next comes that vital pivot when the Department moves from
concept to execution. And as long--as the saying goes, the
devil really is in the details. So the lion's share of the CDAO
duties were previously held by the Chief Information Officer.
The future success will depend in part on the clear delineation
of responsibilities between the CIO and the CDAO.
These are positions whose responsibilities will
persistently sit adjacent to one another. It is critical that
these lanes of the road are clear not only to one another, but
[to] the Department, the rest of the executive branch,
congressional oversight committees, and our international
partners and allies.
In addition to this delineation, I am eager to hear how the
CDAO will organize its efforts. In inheriting three separate
entities in the JAIC, Defense Digital Service, and the Chief
Data Officer, the CDAO is poised to develop exciting new
constructs and build expertise across teams that have
previously been siloed.
For instance, we have seen how critical good data
principles are to building useful artificial intelligence
models. Hence, it only stands to reason that the CDAO would be
thinking about new ways to align the teams that had previously
worked these problems in separate silos.
So, finally, I hope to hear how both the CIO and the CDAO
will be working with the services. While we finally have
empowered CIOs within each of the military departments, there
are not--there are not natural parallels for the CDAO. So will
the CDAO's engagement with the services be directed at their
CIOs or are there other more suitable positions for the CDAO to
work with?
There are many historical comparisons to show that all of
the best efforts within the Office of the Secretary of Defense
can be quickly stymied without commensurate efforts by the
services.
Again, I am excited to hear about all of these matters and
more. But before proceeding, I want to remark briefly about Mr.
Sherman and his CIO team. So here I want to stay that when he
was with us last year, I put a spotlight on the frustration
that the subcommittee was dealing with, specifically in
transparency on the budget request and information technology
matters with his office.
So in the year since, under John's leadership, we have seen
a remarkable transformation when it comes to transparency,
increased responsiveness to congressional inquiries, and the
timely delivery of products required by law.
Too often it falls on Congress to point out the shortfalls
or failings of the Department of Defense. But when deserved, we
should also acknowledge its successes, and I commend John and
his team for its track record over the last year, and I thank
you for your efforts.
So with that, I want to thank our witnesses for appearing
before us today, and I will turn now to Ranking Member Banks
for his remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 23.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM BANKS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM INDIANA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES,
AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses who are here with us today and for joining us on
short notice.
Mr. Sherman, as CIO for the Department of Defense, you are
responsible for a significant number of programs--cloud
adoption, IT [information technology] networks, data policies,
spectrum management, cybersecurity, and more. All of these
things are critical to the warfighter, and we don't take that
lightly.
Secure, effective technology can revolutionize how the
Department conducts its business, but investments in IT
infrastructure are necessary to do so.
I am encouraged by the progress that you have made in the
last year, but I fear there is still a long road ahead. I also
have been disappointed in the delays to award contracts in the
Joint Warfighter Cloud Capability program.
I think the creation of the Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Officer was a wise move to help the Department
better use and deploy AI at scale, but the value of that move
won't be realized for months as Dr. Martell is not yet in
place. With an enterprise as large and diverse as the DOD,
modernization and security is a difficult task. You need the
buy-in not just from the highest levels of the DOD but everyone
who logs onto a DOD network.
You also need a capable workforce to acquire and deploy it,
as well as train the rest of the workforce on how to use it.
Without strong investments, strategic vision, diligence in
implementation, and accountability, we risk weakening the
Department's security, which is unacceptable.
I look forward to our conversation today about how to
continue the progress that you have made and to expand upon it.
And with that, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Ranking Member Banks,
for your remarks.
As a point of order, while we have three witnesses joining
us today, we will have Mr. Sherman deliver opening remarks, and
during the question portion we will ask that he turn to his
colleagues as he sees fit for remarks and answers.
With that, I will turn it over to Mr. Sherman for 5 minutes
of remarks. Your full statement can be submitted for the
record, and I ask you to summarize your remarks for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman, please proceed. We need to have your
microphone on. Mr. Sherman, I can't hear you. Nothing yet.
Okay. I am going to have to ask staff to intervene here and
figure out the technical issues here.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SHERMAN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER AND ACTING
CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OFFICER, OFFICE OF
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE; DR. KELLY FLETCHER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE;
AND MARGIE PALMIERI, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY CHIEF DIGITAL AND
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OFFICER, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE

Mr. Sherman. Chairman Langevin, all right, it looks like we
are hot now.
Mr. Langevin. We have got it. Yes. Please proceed.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you very much, sir.
Good morning, Chairman Langevin, Ranking Member Banks, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today. As you noted, with me
is Dr. Kelly Fletcher, our Principal Deputy Chief Information
Officer, who can help provide insight on our resources and
budget, among other topics; and Ms. Margie Palmieri, our Deputy
Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer, who will
help me speak on the standup of this exciting new office.
Chairman Langevin, I would first like to thank you for your
past 22 years----
Mr. Langevin. Mr. Sherman, if you can please pause for a
minute. We are having some technical difficulties here.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. We are hot again.
Chairman Langevin, I would first like to thank you for your
past 22 years of public service to our Nation. Your leadership
has positively impacted all of the Department of Defense from
the civilian workforce to our women and men in uniform.
I appear before you today as the DOD CIO and the Acting
CDAO. With your support, we have made strong progress since I
testified before you last June, and I look forward to updating
the subcommittee on our achievements and the recent
establishment of the CDAO.
Moreover, as we discuss investments today, I want to assure
you that both the CIO and CDAO budgets are fully informed by
the President's vision, policies, and strategies, including the
Interim National Security Strategic Guidance and the
Department's National Defense Strategy.
The Department has made significant strides to unlock the
power of its data, harness AI, and provide digital solutions to
the joint force. Going forward, there is a need for stronger
alignment to accelerate decision advantage and generate
advanced capabilities for our warfighters as we face China as a
pacing challenge, an increasingly aggressive Russia, and as our
adversaries adapt to technology innovation.
In December 2021, Deputy Secretary of Defense Hicks
established a CDAO to serve as the Department's senior official
responsible for strengthening and integrating data, AI, and
digital solutions across the defense enterprise. Integrating
the standalone data and AI organizations into the CDAO is a
multi-step process that began on the 1st of February and will
reach full operating capability on the 1st of June.
While the DOD CIO will continue to lead core infrastructure
functions, including cybersecurity, cloud, transport, and
networks, the CDAO will help set requirements and provide
strategy, policy, and governance of data, analytics, and AI.
This office will provide enterprise-level infrastructure and
services that enable efforts to advance adoption of these
critical areas.
The CDAO will work closely with our team in CIO and other
components within the Department to ensure mission success. As
the CDAO focuses on organizing and carrying out their mission,
I will continue my attention as a CIO on enterprise-level
priorities, such as cybersecurity, cloud computing, software
modernization, and warfighting command, control, and
communications, or C3.
We have been able to move forward in these areas through
robust governance and teamwork, to include with the military
departments. In cybersecurity, I am committed to ensure
protection of the Department of Defense Information Network, or
DODIN, implementing zero trust, hardening the SIPRNet [Secret
Internet Protocol Router Network], addressing 20-plus years of
technical data on our systems, securing the defense industrial
base, and enhancing our cyber and digital talent.
Of course, cloud computing remains a fundamental component
of the Department's global IT infrastructure. To that end, I
will ensure that we provide modern enterprise cloud
capabilities to enable everything from software modernization
to enhanced user experience at every classification level.
Finally, turning to C3, I remain driven to modernize our
positioning, navigation, and timing, or PNT, capabilities; lead
the Department on the electromagnetic spectrum operations, or
EMSO, development; move forward on 5G while ensuring DOD
equities remain protected, and also providing economic
opportunities for U.S. industry, strengthening transport, and
ensuring national leader command capabilities.
In closing, I thank this subcommittee for its consistent
and dedicated support in these and countless other areas. It
would truly not be possible without your strong partnership and
guidance.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning, and
we look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sherman can be found in the
Appendix on page 26.]
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Mr. Sherman, thank you very much
for your remarks.
With that, we will now proceed with questions. Each member
shall be recognized for 5 minutes, beginning with myself.
With that, Mr. Sherman, can you speak to the efforts
underway, not only to define the role and responsibilities of
the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer but also
to account for and revise historical policies and directives
that may designate or outline roles for the CIO, which may now
more appropriately be handled by the CDAO.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. I will start with this, and then
turn to Ms. Palmieri for some amplifying comments. We have had
a robust effort underway since IOC on the 1st of February to
bring the new organization together, identifying leaders,
ensuring employees know where they go in the new structure, and
really getting the most synergy out of this new AI, data,
digital services alignment together with this.
A lot of work, sir, has gone into this in terms of defining
roles, getting our workflow together, and using real-world
opportunities such as with the operation supporting the Ukraine
crisis to bring things like the Advana team to bear, to
supporting U.S. Transportation Command and U.S. European
Command. So real-world operations to drive the way ahead on
that.
Additionally, working with the Director of Administration
and Management, or DA&M, at the Pentagon under Mr. Mike Donley,
former SECAF [Secretary of the Air Force], doing all of the
pick and shovel work, updating the policies, updating the
paperwork that identified CIO previously on some areas, to put
CDAO in the right parts of the documentation, and then also
looking at things like the finances in terms of some of the
former historical relationship with the Joint AI Center and
DISA [Defense Information Systems Agency], and so on, and
making sure we do the blocking and tackling to align and
empower the new CDAO organization.
And, sir, with that, I would like to turn to Ms. Palmieri
briefly, and hopefully your mic is hot there. If not, I will
give you mine.
Ms. Palmieri. Let's see. Yep. Thank you, sir, for the
question. As part of the CDAO standup, we have established a
governance working group, and they are looking through over 40
different foundational documents that reference either the
preexisting organizations before CDAO or other roles and
responsibilities that CDAO is taking over. And so we are
looking at holistically and looking at governance specifically
in all the different working groups in the Department.
I think we found about 21 that had oversight on some of our
issues. We have been able to streamline those in the near term
and take them down, actually reducing the level of bureaucracy
around some of these issues and getting some more clarity on
them.
Thanks.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you.
So in my opening remarks, I noted questions about how the
DOD CIO and the CDAO will collaborate together and deconflict
their work with the military services. So can you elaborate on
that more? Can you speak to your initial thoughts on this
matter, and specifically who the right interlocutors are within
the military departments for the CDAO?
And, you know, if it is the services' CIOs, then how can
the CIO and the CDAO proactively think through how to minimize
the potential for OSD overload given the service CIO's
relatively small size?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. So as a first step is to capitalize
on the very well-established relationships we already have
through CIO channels, as you note, sir, with the services and
MILDEP [military department] CIOs, to be able to use our
established governance processes, the teaming we have,
certainly not to overload them, but to use the very well-
established processes we have in place. Matter of fact, we were
doing something this week on coordinating some material with
the CIOs.
The other thing, the Chief Data Officers who work for the
service CIOs have a very established relationship on the data
side of things through data governance councils that we can tap
into.
Now, with the AI aspect, this is probably an area that we
need to reinforce. There is a lot of AI going on in the
services under the military departments, that we have some
established governance there, much of which goes through the
CIOs but not all of it, and that is an opportunity for us and
we need to tighten that up as well.
So, in a nutshell, working through the CIO so far has given
us a successful ingress point. But when Dr. Martell gets here,
working with Ms. Palmieri, these are the--this is an area that,
as we really get up on our skis with this, need to refine a
bit, ensuring, as you note, sir, that we don't overload a
process and that we are getting to the right humans in each of
the components to get the answers we need on whether it is
operations or responsible AI or unlocking the power of the
data.
Margie, would you add anything to that?
Ms. Palmieri. No. I think that hits it very accurately. I
think the other piece about this is, you know, mission owners
are across the Department and not just within the data or CIO
lane. And so a lot of the work that Mr. Sherman talked about
that we have been able to do in support of Ukraine has been
with the Joint Staff, J4, and the logistics community or with
EUCOM's [U.S. European Command's] team on logistics.
And so the partnerships with the mission owners is also
very critical, and I think we will--we have gotten great
support from people that want to use data and analytics as we
work the broader issues through the CDAO and CIO channels.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you for those answers.
I am going to hold. I have additional questions. Hopefully
we will get to a second round or I will submit them for the
record.
But for right now, I want to yield to Ranking Member Banks
for his questions.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few years ago,
Vladimir Putin proclaimed that ``Artificial intelligence is the
future. Whoever becomes the leader in this sphere will become
the ruler of the world.''
While there have been some useful but limited AI programs,
such as Project Maven, that have gotten to some scale and now
transition, the DOD still needs a scalable enterprise
capability for the integrated deployment of AI technologies for
joint warfighting missions.
Ms. Palmieri, what are your plans as Deputy CDAO to
accelerate, scale, and transition an AI-enabled warfighting
capability?
Ms. Palmieri. Yes, sir. Thanks for the question. Part of
the [inaudible] of the CDAO is to look at both the enabling
infrastructure, the analytic tools, and the tools that people
will use to develop AI, and then the responsible AI ethics and
testing and evaluation processes to make sure that the United
States is doing this in accordance with established ethical
considerations.
So much of our budget in the fiscal year 2023 cycle and
fiscal year 2022 cycle is focused on bringing that core
enabling enterprise capability, so that includes the computing
platform, the tools, and then the data policies that will
enable us to access different data from across the Department
to really bring that together and enable either analytics or
ultimately artificial intelligence to be able to support
decisionmakers with decision advantage.
And so one of the key initiatives under that is the
Secretary--the Deputy Secretary of Defense's AI and Data
Acceleration initiative, or AIDA. This is an area where we have
put significant investment in both talent and money to go out
to the combatant commanders and some of the principal staff
assistants inside of the Department in charge with business
operations and support them with experts, digital experts, data
experts, as well as bringing some of our established
capabilities.
In Advana, this is our business health system, and in
Project Maven on the AI side, and scale that up to combatant
commanders more broadly, share those lessons across COCOMs
[combatant commands], and then bring that back to identify the
barriers that we have to enable across the Department.
Mr. Banks. Very good.
Mr. Sherman, as I mentioned in my opening statement, I am
concerned by the delays in awarding contracts for the JWCC. Has
the Department considered using a rolling date for compliance
for providers instead of one set date, the end of December?
Mr. Sherman. No, sir. We have not considered a rolling
date, but I can assure you getting this right and getting this
done by the end of this calendar year is among my very top
priorities.
Sir, I think you are referencing we had--when I rolled this
out, when I was the acting last year, that we were aiming for
April for an award date, but part of this--and I will own this
here--was we haven't done this at this scale, and when we had--
did the initial review, that we had four vendors make the cut,
that we had estimated too quickly on the date.
So December, working with the team between our team in CIO,
DISA, Washington Headquarters Services, with support from
Acquisition and Sustainment, with all of the advice on the
procurement experts, and the way we are proceeding with the
awards aiming for December, but, sir, we recognize this is
critically important. We appreciate the committee's support
here recognizing with the JEDI [Joint Enterprise Defense
Infrastructure] cancellation and how important this is for the
CDAO efforts, for Joint All-Domain Command and Control, and so
much of what we are doing for warfighting.
So, sir, I will assure you we are getting--we are getting
after this with alacrity.
Mr. Banks. Can you talk a little bit more about the task
order process that you envision for JWCC?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. The way that we are going to do
this, there will have to be on each of--depending upon how many
vendors do make the cut on this, to be able to have--there will
be individual task orders that will have to go in, but the
upshot of what we did learn from JEDI was a process that our
Hosting and Compute Center team, HACC, up at the DISA
headquarters came up with to be able to expedite this, so users
do not have to take an incredibly long time to compete task
orders against whichever kind of best athlete cloud they want
to use.
It is called ATAT [Account Tracking and Automation Tool],
is what they call it. So we do have an established process
there to use these IDIQ [indefinite delivery, indefinite
quantity] contracts, but to be able to have expedited task
orders to depend on what the workload and mission is for that,
sir.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Just a couple more questions. Can you
provide an example of a commercial technology solution that the
Department has adopted that has been successful?
Mr. Sherman. I think we have had plenty. I think a lot of
is in the cybersecurity realm, sir. I will start there, but I
could go to others, such as with Comply-to-Connect, such as
what we are doing for endpoint security, such as what we are
doing on software-defined networks, not only for security
matters but on areas like 5G.
I think there is a number of areas on command and control I
could go into on spectrum hitting on that that have been
commercial technologies we have been able to use, and cloud
already exists extensively in the Department at the service
level, such as with Cloud One, cARMY, Black Pearl in the Navy.
There has been a lot of commercial innovation there, and as
well as with software, quite a bit of commercial software usage
across the Department.
My job as CIO is not only to encourage and cultivate that
but to make sure we can make this work at an enterprise level,
such as with JWCC, such as supporting CDAO. But, sir, there
have been a number of key technologies we have rapidly
integrated and employed for our warfighter and other support.
Mr. Banks. Just one final question. Our national security
depends on resilience across the defense industrial base [DIB].
I know you know that because your office has rightfully taken
on an increased role in this arena. How are you leveraging AI
to grapple with the size and scale of the DIB attack surface
and the speed at which we need to identify and remediate
vulnerabilities?
Mr. Sherman. So that is one area that with the CDAO now
standing up that I want to work with Dr. Martell and work with
Ms. Palmieri on. I can tell you at an unclassified level there
are--some of this is we work with our colleagues at CYBERCOM
[U.S. Cyber Command] and NSA [National Security Agency]
employing AI capabilities to be able to get after some of this.
But this is an area, as we look at big data platform, as we
look across an enterprise--now you are talking about DIB, not
the DODIN, so I need to make sure I focus my remarks on that.
These are areas that we look at the 220,000 companies in the
DIB, and particularly as we look at cyber maturity model
certification employment, I want to make this understandable
and usable, particularly to small and medium businesses.
So while not [inaudible], we are looking at areas to where
we can possibly use some government cloud capabilities to be
able to put data in from these companies if we can do this
properly and with the proprietary considerations to be able to
help these companies out where we can run analytics and lessen
the burden on the small and medium-sized companies out across
the United States and not make this too cumbersome on them.
So this is an area we need to work on, sir, but it is
definitely on my radar to do so.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank the Ranking Member.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Moulton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to pick up with Ms. Palmieri. In answering your questions to--
the questions of Ranking Member Banks, you mentioned that when
you bring forward new AI capabilities you have to ensure their
employment meets our ethical norms and standards. This is, of
course, exactly what we would expect.
But do you believe that our adversaries adhere to the same
ethical standards?
Ms. Palmieri. Yes, sir. Thanks. Not in all cases. We know
that there are nations that do not respect the privacy of
citizens and do not necessarily use that information that they
get in a way that meets our ethical principles.
Our five ethical principles are that we use AI responsibly;
that we take steps for it to be equitable, which means we
minimize unintended consequences associated with our
capabilities; that our methods are traceable. This means that
we can audit them. We know how the AI was developed. It is
reliable, that there are well-defined use cases and we know
what the AI is good at and what it is not good at, and we have
a testing and assurance cycle associated with that. And that it
is governable, and that we know that it does its intended
functions, and if it doesn't do those intended functions, we
can either deactivate the system or take it offline.
Those are very important to us. We are working on a
responsible AI strategy right now in the last few weeks of
coordination across the Department, where we are going to take
those principles and actually put them into implementation
action and so----
Mr. Moulton. I will tell you that, I mean, as fellow
Americans, we certainly agree with those ethical standards, and
this is what we would expect of you and of us. But I think it
is patently obvious to all of us that China and Russia, our
principal adversaries, are not going to adhere to these
standards. They don't, and we can see this playing out in
Ukraine every day.
And, therefore, their AI won't as well. I am confident that
their AI is being trained to do heinous things or at the very
least pay little regard for civilian casualties and collateral
damage, which will almost certainly make their AI more deadly
and effective.
Everything you just described is the right thing to do, but
there are constraints on these AI weapons. So in an AI versus
AI battle, they will have a massive advantage because they
won't constrain their weapons in the ethical ways we do. So the
point that I am making is that we have to do work on developing
an international agreement to codify these standards, so it is
not just us who are following them, and then we at least have
some hope of ensuring our adversaries' worst instincts are at
least to some degree constrained.
Now, not every nation abides by the Geneva Convention, but
we know across the world that it does matter and it does help.
So just as when the world came to terms with the horrors of
chemical weapons in World War I, and the Geneva Convention was
the result, I think this is a second Geneva Convention moment.
Now this is not your responsibility. I get that this is
the--basically falls under the State Department. But I don't
think enough people in State appreciate how important this is.
And as one of the leaders in our government on the use and
employment of AI, I would strongly encourage you to help mount
an effort to work on this broader problem.
Do you have any comments on that?
Ms. Palmieri. Yes, sir. Absolutely. In fact, we have a
partnership for defense organization right now with 16 nations.
They include our Five Eyes partners, many of our partners out
of NATO, and some others like Israel, Finland, Sweden. This is
absolutely an interest area of all of those nations that we
have started with, but absolutely take your point on a broader
effort, and that is worth pursuing. Thanks.
Mr. Moulton. I mean, this is one of the principal
recommendations that came out of the Future of Defense Task
Force that Representative--Ranking Member Banks and I co-
chaired.
And, look, ultimately, if you do this right, we are not
only doing the right thing in terms of humanity, but we are
figuring out ways that we do this to our advantage, because I
think, as I have just described, we are at a disadvantage right
now because our adversaries will not be so constrained.
I had another question coming from the results and the
recommendations of our Future of Defense Task Force report on
the need to update our acquisition process for this new era of
technology where we are not just acquiring hardware but
acquiring software. And our acquisition system is really not
built to acquire software. It is a different animal.
We won't have time to answer that question right now, but
that is something that I would like to take for the record and
look forward to your response.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Franklin is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. Actually, my line of
questioning was going to be right along with what
Representative Moulton was starting to get into there with the
acquisition process.
And, Mr. Sherman, I notice in your testimony you talked
about the CDAO offering five decentralized procurement vehicles
for rapid AI delivery and purchasing of key AI services and
enabling tools, a mouthful but sounds like a lot of new ways to
try to improve this process.
We know, as has already been noted, AI is so integral to
the future, our future success, it cuts across all areas of
DOD, but the struggle is, how do we innovate fast enough to
keep up with the threat? And we don't have--traditionally, our
acquisition system just is not tailored to that.
I would love for you to take the time that I have here to--
you and your team--maybe expand on these five different
vehicles and help us understand that this is a good thing and
we are not just creating more bureaucracy.
And particularly for small businesses, because I speak with
a lot of them who have great ideas, but it is just so difficult
to navigate the process that by the time they could get
something to market it has already passed them by.
Mr. Sherman. Sir, I will start with that and then turn to
Ms. Palmieri and Dr. Fletcher for amplifying comments. Software
acquisition and working on that, of course, it is both within
the CIO and CDAO realm to be a driver for that, but it really
is going to be a team effort, working with Acquisition and
Sustainment, Research and Engineering, with our colleagues in
the military departments and services. But to use the
authorities that Congress has already granted us in terms of
how we can use kind of different approaches to this, but also
how we think differently about employing software, acquiring
software, developing software ourselves, moving to development,
security operations, DevSecOps, approaches, leveraging open
source software, and moving at pace; as you have noted, sir, to
not have historic ways of coming at this but to be able to move
at high speeds.
And then, really, what I see sitting up at OSD, there is so
much innovation occurring within the Department, in the
military services, at the commands, to jump on that, not try to
recreate the will but elevate that. And there has been so many
great examples we have seen.
Out at the very tip of the spear, too, out in--out at the
sub-unified commands, and so on. So that is one thing we are
trying to do is not over-govern this but take these great
examples of this.
And looking from the acquisition optics, sir, as I
mentioned earlier on Ranking Member Banks' question about small
and medium businesses, this keeps me up a lot, making sure not
to take away from the ``bigs,'' but those companies out--all
throughout the United States and not to have high barriers of
entry, where we can get their products, their capabilities into
the system quickly. So this is a priority for me as CIO.
If I can, I would like to turn to Ms. Palmieri briefly from
the CDAO optic on the five areas, sir, you were noting.
Margie.
Ms. Palmieri. Yes, sir. First of all, thank you very much
for section 808 in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act] that gave acquisition authority to the JAIC. That is now
inherited by CDAO. We owe an implementation plan to Congress
which will come this summer on how we are going to go after
that.
But the five vehicles that the JAIC created were
specifically focused on the areas of data and AI, all with an
agile approach, and this idea that organizations outside of
CDAO could come and leverage these contracts, these enterprise
contracts.
And so real briefly, the first one is at Tradewinds. It is
another transaction agreement which gives us a very agile
approach to focus on mission capabilities. We have about 63
percent of those awardees right now that are either small
business or non-traditional defense contractors.
There is another one for data readiness, that's
specifically on data engineers, data labelers. This one is
really great because you can customize the different
performance work statements based off of your needs, and we see
about 50 percent of those awardees right now being small
business or non-traditional.
There is a vehicle on test and evaluation that provides
simplified acquisition procedures for test and evaluation, and
we have about, you know, 40 or so--about 50 percent small
business versus large business there.
We have a contract vehicle for acquiring contract talent to
support AI development, six vendors on that one. It is
relatively small now--all small businesses--but we have a lot
of interest there, and so we are looking at how to scale up
that vehicle.
And then the last one is a commercial solutions offering,
which is generally no money involved, but it allows businesses
across the board to come in and pilot or demo their
capabilities on government data, which is a huge asset to small
companies. The government is able to provide feedback on their
capabilities, and they get access to our data to test out their
ideas.
We have about 4,000 different companies that are eligible
for those types of contracts, and then we are doing more with
outreach and partnering with non-profits to try to do a better
set of market research on who is out there, so we are not just
going to the same vendors.
Mr. Franklin. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Moore is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, witnesses, for
being here. Thanks for your context. I think we can all agree
that artificial intelligence is rapidly transforming our world,
even sometimes without our knowledge. Industry is on the cusp
of some very key scientific breakthroughs. These will disrupt
our daily lives, and disruption in a good way should be
celebrated.
Autonomous vehicles, smart homes, all this type of stuff,
this is going to be ubiquitous. And while much of it gives us
something to look forward to, there is an inherent risk that
can be mitigated if the United States--if we are the global
leader in AI, we can--we can mitigate the risk that is
essentially going to come from this. And just don't trust other
nations to properly fill this role.
Mr. Sherman and Ms. Palmieri, welcome comments from either
of you. America's greatest strategic advantage against near-
peer competition, one of the major advantages is that we remain
a country that--the world's number one destination for
immigrants and a strong immigrant workforce. As long as
talented people want to come here, and to innovate and start
their businesses, the U.S. can't be beat.
While primarily technology focused organizations, the CIO
and CDAO require that people are proficient in policy,
economics, ethics, data science, and the law. How do both
organizations ensure they are optimally staffed, considering
increased competition in recruitment and retention?
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, sir. I will start with that, and
then I will ask Ms. Palmieri to chime in.
So, looking at digital and cyber talent writ large, which
all is kind of coming together on this, both between CIO and
CDAO, as I mentioned to this committee last year, recognizing
talent is so critical. I launched a new cyber talent strategy,
which we are aiming to publish in the August/September
timeframe of this year, which will have a close nexus to CDAO.
It is going to help us think differently about not only
using the authorities this committee and the rest of Congress
has granted to us on areas like cyber excepted service and also
capitalizing on what we have done to think about our current
workforce through the defense cyber workforce framework and
using our 8140 policy series and doing all of this blocking and
tackling behind the scenes work we need to do.
But also, as we have a more dynamic workforce that is going
to come in and out of government in a way that may not go to a
30-year career, how do we compete with industry partners with
whom we need to have a partnership on to be able to have
digital advantage to very sophisticated adversaries as you note
in a near-peer and peer competitor fight.
So that is what we are doing from the CIO side. CDAO
specifically is going to be looking at AI, data, and digital
talent in that regard, so it is going to be a close partnership
with CIO.
So for that I would like to turn to Ms. Palmieri to talk to
what we are doing on the CDAO front.
Ms. Palmieri. Sure. Absolutely. So the CDAO, as it has
brought together these different organizations across the
Department, is about 200 to 300--it is about 250 people total,
more than half of whom are technical in some way. They have
digital services expertise, computer scientists, or some level
of AI or data science background.
And so I am actually very excited about where we are right
now as an organization and the talent that we have in that
organization. On the military side as well, we are leveraging
existing communities like the operational research community,
which is heavily data and analytic focused, but then we also
have an element of our team that is specifically looking at
talent management for the entire Department and how we go after
talent management there, things like how we first train and
educate our people to be, you know, data literate, but then
also develop skills and developing analytic and AI skills as
well.
But then, also, how do we track them throughout the
Department and work that into promotions and the things that we
value for opportunities for leadership. Thanks.
Mr. Moore. And can you also touch on, does the DOD and the
intelligence community have adequate information about--
obviously, we are in a--we are in an open setting, so it is not
a classified setting, but do we have adequate information about
the state of foreign military AI applications and the ways that
those could be harmful to U.S. national security?
And are we--and, more importantly, are we investing in ways
to defend us and defend our Nation against these applications?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, at a high level, as you noted, an
unclassified session, I can say that working with our
colleagues, and Intelligence and Security, in I&S under
Honorable Moultrie, and with the intelligence community, this
does remain a key topic and robustly focused on. That is what I
can say with that.
And in terms of working with adversary--or not working
with, but defending against adversary capabilities, that is
something that is very much on our radar, both on the CDAO
side, but as I implement on the CIO side, things like zero
trust cybersecurity and getting after technical debt that is
critical, that is very much something we focus on.
And our partnership with the intelligence community, for
example, working with my colleague General Nakasone at NSA and
CYBERCOM, is something that is very prominent in our
discussion. So we do work on this a lot together.
Mr. Moore. Awesome. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
Is Mr. Kim there?
Okay. So that is our first round of questioning. I am going
to go to a second round in concurrence with the ranking member.
So with that, let me recognize myself.
With regards to structuring the CDAO, can you speak to
initial views on possible constructs, how much is notional at
this point, particularly with the incoming CDAO? Mr. Martell is
reportedly only a few, you know, weeks from starting, what are
your thoughts on that?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, our organization is pretty solid at this
point. And, actually, it doesn't look terribly dissimilar from
CIO where we have deputy CIOs. We have--in addition to Ms.
Palmieri as the Principal Deputy CDAO, we have five deputy
CDAOs organized functionally on areas like acquisition, policy,
enterprise capability, warfighting support, and digital
services. Those are the five, as well as a separate unit under
Dr. Pinelis just looking at responsible AI, artificial
intelligence.
And then this is bringing these organizations together--CDO
[Chief Data Officer], the Joint AI Center, Defense Digital
Services--and then organizing functionally on these areas. We
have already begun to do this with the officer, the employees,
going to their new integrated units to get after some of the
things Ms. Palmieri talked about on support to the Ukraine
crisis.
So actually, sir, we have a pretty well-honed organization
now. We are still working on some final pieces of that, but the
organization has come together. And, again, the point that Dr.
Martell and Ms. Palmieri will be working is creating a team of
teams.
It is a new organization, breaking down some institutional
barriers we had, bringing folks together, and we are seeing
this, for example, with the AI and Data Accelerator, the AIDA,
teams that Ms. Palmieri noted, supporting the commands and also
back at the Pentagon.
So the wheels are turning on this, and we do have a very
strong foundation for the new organization.
Margie, anything you would like to add?
Ms. Palmieri. No. I think that is great. Thanks.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. So I know we talked about cloud in
some of the line of questions that you touched on. Is there
anything else you want to do in terms of give us some sense of
where we are to creating and shifting over to an enterprise
cloud system, obviously, since, you know, the JEDI failure to
execute, you know, to come up with a final decision there and
now we are moving into something hopefully similar but without
the challenges and protests and all of that. But anything you
want to add there?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, only that--just to amplify what I said.
This is so critical. Sir, you brought this up from here and
your position. We have gotten that message loud and clear. And
also, not only would--not having protests, but a multi-cloud/
multi-vendor approach, which is more consistent with industry
standard at this time.
And then, once we have the procurement completed, using it,
using the capabilities, using the tasking mechanism that
Ranking Member Banks asked me about for the task orders, and
really having something that spans the entire enterprise, from
the continental United States to the tactical edge, and having
that compute capability to support warfighting needs as well as
AI and other needs on that with world-class capabilities from
U.S. vendors, which I really do see as a national advantage for
the United States, whether it's in an INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-
Pacific Command] scenario or EUCOM or anywhere else, to get
this in place and really figure out all the capabilities.
And this will be a little bit of a journey of learning,
same as our intelligence community partners are doing in their
multi-cloud environment with whom we are working closely on
lessons learned and how that is working. So this is critically
important, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Good. Well, it is a higher priority for me
and the subcommittee, and I know it is for you. So I look
forward to following the progress on this over time.
If I could, over the last few years, the cybersecurity
maturation model certification, or CMMC, received significant
public attention. However, in the last year, we haven't heard
much about the program's development. So can you please update
us on where CMMC stands and how it is progressing?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. I will make one brief comment, and
then I would like to turn to Dr. Fletcher because she has been
instrumental in helping guide this. We realize we are at what
is called CMMC 2.0, which we launched last fall after the
initial startup of this.
One of my main goals as CIO is to make sure this is
rationalized, understandable, and back to the earlier points
that Representative Franklin and others brought up about small
and medium businesses all across the U.S., to make this
understandable, so this is not overly burdensome, but also is
able to protect the controlled unclassified information, CUI
data, in contracts.
Dr. Fletcher, would you like to add to that, please?
Dr. Fletcher. Yes, sure. Thank you, sir. So right now we
are reworking the rules. So there is a lot of work happening,
but it is behind the scenes. Those rules will go to OMB [Office
of Management and Budget], and then they will be available for
public comment in March of 2023. So folks will have the
opportunity to say, you know, this is onerous or this is about
right. And then we may see CMMC in contracts as early as summer
of 2023.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Dr. Fletcher. Appreciate that.
So for my final question, I am concerned that the
Department is not adequately focusing on electromagnetic
spectrum operations. I think it's a concern for many. The
fiscal year 2022--I am sorry, the 2022 NDAA required the
Department to designate a senior official to be responsible for
the electromagnetic spectrum superiority strategies
implementation plan.
Can you tell us, what is the status of that implementation
plan and the leadership structure? And what barriers do you see
to the strategy's successful implementations?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. So within CIO, we took the baton on
this from Joint Staff last fall in terms of being the overall
integrator and lead in the Department. But as you note, EMSO,
electromagnetic spectrum operations, is so critical for near-
peer and peer competitor fights, as we potentially have to
ready our forces to fight in highly contested environments--
that we haven't had to do for many years--and also, bringing
together the electronic warfare community and the spectrum
operations community into a very necessary integration.
So to your question, what we are doing from our Deputy CIO
for Command and Control, Communications, as the overarching
lead on this, to make sure we are looking at governance,
funding, standards, very important as we are working with this,
but this is a team of team efforts, very diverse here.
Working with the services, the weapons platform leaders and
owners, and then, for example, working with U.S. Strategic
Command. I was just talking to Admiral Richard about this very
topic last week about how we need to be hand in glove working
together, given his combatant command responsibility on this.
So, sir, we have moved out on this. We are setting the
governance structures in place and making sure that we have all
the different wheels turning. This will--this necessarily can't
be hypercentralized, but we do need someone to quarterback
this, which will be us. But it is going to require extensive
coordination, to include with Joint Staff as well, to make sure
all of these different pieces--and, again, the marriage of EW
[electronic warfare] and spectrum operations--which I don't
think we have really ever quite done at this level--get fully
implemented.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. I appreciate that, and thank you
for those answers and the testimony here today. Those are the
questions that I had at this point.
So with that, let me just thank you, Mr. Sherman, Ms.
Palmieri, and Dr. Fletcher. Appreciate the work you are doing
on behalf of the men and women of DOD and the warfighting
effort. We are working hard together on these issues. Look
forward to future and further conversation and engagements.
And with that, I believe that there are no further
questions from members. If that is correct, I will stop here.
And as of now, the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:02 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 18, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON

Mr. Fallon. How are the offices of the CIO and CDAO working to
expand access to 5G on military installations? What can be done to
speed up these efforts?
Mr. Sherman, Dr. Fletcher, and Ms. Palmieri. The office of the CIO
is currently working with OUSD R&E in their lead role for 5G to
transition the responsibility of implementation oversight to the Office
of the CIO by 1 October 2023, in accordance with FY21 NDAA Section 224.
The Office of the CIO is engaged in the DOD 5G Cross Functional Team
(CFT) as the principal organization responsible for 5G Policy and
Enterprise Infrastructure Programs to deploy secure and interoperable
5G Wireless Networking across all DOD departments and agencies. The
coordinated and concurrent actions that would have the greatest impact
to reduce the timeline to establish 5G communications on military
installations would be to consider increased funding to the Services
for transition and implementation.

[all]
