- A P P E N D I X

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-46]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE

FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 16, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-821                      WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

ADAM SMITH, Washington, Chairman

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island      MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
RICK LARSEN, Washington              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JOHN GARAMENDI, California           ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JACKIE SPEIER, California            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona               MO BROOKS, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          SAM GRAVES, Missouri
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland,          SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
RO KHANNA, California                TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 DON BACON, Nebraska
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       JIM BANKS, Indiana
JASON CROW, Colorado                 LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia, Vice      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Chair                            C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York          LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              JERRY L. CARL, Alabama
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington       BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                PAT FALLON, Texas
JIMMY PANETTA, California
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Paul Arcangeli, Staff Director
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Ryan Tully, Professional Staff Member
Natalie de Benedetti, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Ranking Member,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     3
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Brown, Gen Charles Q., Jr., USAF, Chief of Staff, United States
Air Force......................................................     6
Raymond, Gen John W., USSF, Chief of Space Operations, United
States Space Force.............................................     7
Roth, Hon. John P., Acting Secretary of the Air Force............     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Roth, Hon. John P., joint with Gen Charles Q. Brown, Jr., and
Gen John W. Raymond........................................    65

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Letter from Acting Secretary Roth............................    97

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Dr. DesJarlais...............................................   101
Mr. Garamendi................................................   103
Ms. Houlahan.................................................   101
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   102
Mr. Larsen...................................................   101
Mrs. Luria...................................................   102
Mr. Waltz....................................................   102
Mr. Wittman..................................................   102

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Fallon...................................................   117
Ms. Houlahan.................................................   115
Mr. Horsford.................................................   118
Mr. Kelly....................................................   115
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   111
Mr. Moore....................................................   116
Mr. Morelle..................................................   115
Ms. Sherrill.................................................   119
Ms. Speier...................................................   112
Mr. Turner...................................................   107

.
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 16, 2021.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:01 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Adam Smith (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. Good morning. We will call the meeting to
order.
Once again, as members are now aware, we are back to
allowing as many members who want to come into the committee to
come into the committee. We are, however, still doing it
remotely for those who prefer to participate virtually. So,
towards that end, we have rules for that virtual participation,
which I will read to get us started.
Members who are joining remotely must be visible on screen
for the purpose of identity verification, establishing and
maintaining a quorum, and participating in the proceeding and
voting. These members must continue to use the software
platforms's video function while in attendance, unless they
experience connectivity issues or other technical problems that
render them unable to participate on camera. If a member
experiences technical difficulties, they should contact the
committee staff for assistance.
A video of members' participation will be broadcast in the
room and via the television/internet feeds. Members
participating remotely must seek recognition verbally, and they
are asked to mute their microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on the entire [time]
they attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding. If members depart for a short while for reasons
other than joining a different proceeding, they should leave
the video function on. If members will be absent for a
significant period or depart to join a different proceeding,
they should exit the software platform entirely, and then
rejoin it if they return. Members may use the software
platform's chat feature to communicate with staff regarding
technical or logistical support issues only.
And finally, I have designated a committee staff member to,
if necessary, unmute unrecognized members' microphones to
cancel any inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the
proceedings.
Thank you.
This morning we are having our full committee hearing on
the Department of the Air Force for fiscal year 2022. And with
us this morning we have John Roth, who is the Acting Secretary
of the Air Force; General Charles Brown, Chief of Staff of the
Air Force; and General John Raymond, Chief of Space Operations.
Let me say, right off the bat, you have the coolest flag
back there. I don't know if it is because it is new, or
whatever, but it pops. So, we look at that, and it is like it
has got that new flag smell to it.
[Laughter.]
Good luck.
Welcome, gentlemen. We appreciate it.
And these are very challenging times, as we know, and I
think the dominant theme that has come out of the Biden
administration is to really focus on Russia and China, and
China, in particular, as the phrase has gone, the ``pacing
threat'' that we face.
And I think the most interesting challenge in all of this,
as we're dealing with--the other challenges haven't gone away:
the transnational terrorist threats, Iran, North Korea, climate
change, instability throughout the globe. They are still there,
and your job, and the job throughout the Pentagon, is how do
you continue to meet those ongoing threats while making that
pivot to recognize the rise of China and, to a different
extent, the challenges that Russia presents.
And you will hear a lot this morning about all that you do
not have. There is considerable concern that there is not
enough money in this year's Pentagon budget. I will say I have
been doing this for a little over 25 years now; I have not yet
met the Pentagon official who would not like to have more
money, and I understand that. And sometimes that is the case,
and sometimes that is necessary.
But what I really want us to focus on, or what I have
written about here recently, is how we can get more out of the
money that we are spending. I think there is a considerable
concern, when you look at the last 20 years, and you see a
number of the big-ticket programs that haven't worked out as
planned, that have been over budget. In many cases, they have
wound up being cancelled before they were even used. We need to
get better at that.
Even if we had all the money in the world, it is not a good
idea to waste it, to not have products and platforms that are
actually doing what we intended them to do. In this area,
certainly, we have had the conversations about the expense of
the F-35. Recognizing how important that platform is to our
future, what can we do to get it at a more cost-effective rate?
The cost of maintenance, the operating costs that come with it
are much higher than we expected; and also, we have not, as
yet, achieved the capability that we were hoping to get.
So, what happened? How are we doing better? And what is the
future of fighter attack aircraft? As we know, the NGAD [Next
Generation Air Dominance] program is in development now. How
does that mix? We have had conversations about, then, how to
use the--I forget; F-15EX, I think it is--to extend the life
and capability of some of our older platforms. How is that mix
working out?
We have also, of course, had trouble with the tanker
program. What have we learned from all of that and what are we
doing better now? Because, I will tell you this much, I am
absolutely convinced, if we could go back the last 20 years and
get after those programs that wound up being incredibly
wasteful, did not perform, way over budget, we wouldn't have
anything to worry about in terms of money.
Now I do understand that waste is part of all human
endeavors. It is not like you can't go over to the Medicaid/
Medicare programs and find waste. Or we all experienced what
happened with unemployment this past year. It happens. But we
have to do better going forward to meet those challenges.
And in particular, I want to emphasize the work of the
Future of Defense Task Force, and now, the Supply Chain Task
Force that is focused on how we can meet the emerging threats
and the emerging needs--aside from Russia/China, the
information warfare environment that we find ourselves in that
makes the simple massing of firepower not the be-all and end-
all anymore. If they can shut down, if our adversaries can shut
down all of our systems by taking out one satellite or by using
one cyberattack, then we have got a problem. We have got to
update those systems, make them more survivable, and we also
have to increase our capability of making the information
systems of our adversaries vulnerable. We would love to hear
how that works out going forward.
On the Space Force side, obviously, it is a new entity. I
really want to thank Ranking Member Rogers and subcommittee
Chairman Jim Cooper for their leadership in creating this. I
think it was absolutely necessary. As mentioned, space is
central to everything we do. We have to make sure that our
satellites are survivable, redundant, and that, basically, they
continue to do the critical work that they do. So, we would be
really interested in hearing how we are doing on improving the
quality of those satellites, space launch, everything that goes
into making sure that we have the architecture up there that we
need and that we can protect it, even in times of conflict.
So, I appreciate you all being here, look forward to
testimony. There is a lot to work on, a lot to talk about, and
I know the members will have a lot of questions. So, we will
look forward to that discussion.
And with that, I will turn it over to Mr. Rogers for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ALABAMA,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I really appreciate the witnesses being here and taking
the time it takes to prepare for this. It is very helpful to
us. And I appreciate your service to our country.
I remain gravely concerned about the President's defense
budget proposal. The defense top line constitutes a cut of over
$4 billion in real dollars. With this budget, it appears risk
is being driven by the top line instead of the top line being
driven by risk. That means our warfighters are being deprived
of the resources they need to deter and, if necessary, win a
war against China or other adversaries.
Even with an overall increase, the Department of the Air
Force is still forced to make unnecessary sacrifices due to an
inadequate top line. The Air Force is slashing its procurement
budget by more than 12 percent and divesting over 200 aircraft.
They tell me this will produce $4.5 billion in so-called
savings--savings the Air Force says it needs to invest in
modernization, except that is not what is actually happening.
Only half of the $4.5 billion is invested in research and
development of modernized systems. I am not sure what is
happening with the other part of that $4.5 billion. I guess it
is being spent on school bus electrification or some other non-
defense priority the President has.
These cuts and divestments greatly increase near-term risk
by exacerbating gaps in capabilities. To put it bluntly, we are
gambling that China, or some other adversary, won't force us
into a conflict before 2030. That makes many of us uneasy.
Making matters worse is the lack of a Future Years Defense
Program. Without it, Congress and the American people have no
way of knowing whether these risks are being properly balanced.
I strongly encourage the witnesses to produce a FYDP as soon as
possible.
Acting Secretary Roth, I continue to be disappointed with
the slow implementation of the acquisition changes for the
Space Force. Not only have you failed to get us the required
reports, but the space acquisition position required by law
remains unfilled. I remain very focused on these issues and
expect to hear today how you plan to make it up for lost time.
This budget does have a silver lining: the bipartisan
agreement to invest in and modernize all three legs of the
nuclear deterrent seems to have held with this budget. Key
programs such as the B-21 bomber, the Long Range Standoff
Weapon, and the Ground Based Strategic Defense [GBSD] are fully
funded. I also understand that GBSD will now be $38 billion
cheaper than extending the aging Minuteman III. Obviously, this
is good news.
These programs began under President Obama and continued
under the last administration. Now, the bipartisan support from
both Democrat and Republican Presidents for these programs
speaks volumes. I look forward to working with Chairman Smith,
Chairman Reed, and Ranking Member Inhofe to ensure that
continues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Roth, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN P. ROTH, ACTING SECRETARY OF THE AIR
FORCE

Mr. Roth. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Rogers,
members of the committee. It is a pleasure to be here today.
I am also honored to have General Brown and General Raymond
join me here in representing the nearly 700,000 airmen and
guardians that defend our Nation. We are thankful for your
consistent and persistent support over the years that has
enabled us to build the world's greatest Air and Space Forces.
As an integrated force, our airmen and guardians stand
ready, willing, and able to meet responsibilities to our Nation
and continue defending the high ground. From 300 feet to 300
miles off the ground, we protect the homeland; we project
power, and we defend democracy.
The long-term strategic competition with China and Russia
demands that we focus on the capabilities we need to invest in
today to win tomorrow. Our Nation's competitive strategic
advantage relies on air and space superiority which is
underpinned by rapid technological advancement and the
extension of space as a warfighting domain.
In line with Secretary Austin's priorities to defend the
Nation, take care of our people, and succeed through teamwork,
our fiscal year 2022 budget is the beginning of a journey to
the Air and Space Forces of 2030. It builds the capabilities
that allow the Department to modernize while continuing to meet
national security objectives and defend the high ground.
Specifically, we are committed to investing in, one, empowering
airmen and guardians; two, capability-focused modernization;
three, connecting us to the joint force; and four, expanding
partnerships.
First, our airmen and guardians remain the heart of our
ability to deter and, if necessary, defeat our competitors. We
are transforming our talent management systems to ensure we
develop and train leaders with competence, character, and
skills required to win high-end fights. And we remain devoted
to recruiting and retaining a diverse corps of multi-capable,
innovative talent to outmaneuver our adversaries today and in
the future. We owe it to our force to provide them with an
environment where all can thrive. That is why we are directing
critical resources to rid of our ranks of any corrosive
elements and injustices that degrade our ability to provide a
lethal, ready force.
Second, to remain the world's greatest Air and Space Force,
we must look to the future through a lens of capability-focused
modernization. Evidenced by nuclear modernization and the next-
generation air dominance platforms, our digital acquisition
approach revolutionizes how we design and field capabilities to
the warfighters. Moving forward, we will expand on these
digital revolutions while also investing in next-generation
space systems that are resilient and defensive. Space is no
longer a benign domain. Our U.S. Space Force is purpose-built
to deter and protect free access to space.
Third, combatant commanders require an agile military that
operates seamlessly across all domains at both speed and scale.
That is why we continue to invest in capabilities like the
Advanced Battle Management System, our contribution to the
Joint All-Domain Command and Control, which will connect every
sensor to every shooter across all domains.
Likewise, access to and freedom of action in space is
central to connecting us to the joint force. In its second
year, the U.S. Space Force is laser-focused on integration.
Investments in space capabilities increase the effectiveness of
operations across all domains. The result is a U.S. military
that is better connected, better informed, faster, and more
precise.
Finally, U.S. Air and Space Forces do not fight alone. We
benefit from the expertise and capabilities of our sister
services and coalition forces, as well as from the whole of
government, commercial industry, and academia. We will continue
to invest in enduring relationships while expanding new
partnerships to transform how we fight future wars.
Members of the committee, thank you for inviting us to
testify. I look forward to your support and am confident that,
with your help, the Air and Space Forces will be armed with the
capabilities necessary to protect our Nation and defend the
high ground. We welcome your questions and ask that this
opening statement be entered into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Roth, General Brown,
and General Raymond can be found in the Appendix on page 65.]
The Chairman. General Brown, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GEN CHARLES Q. BROWN, JR., USAF, CHIEF OF STAFF,
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE

General Brown. Good morning, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member
Rogers, and distinguished members of this committee.
I am humbled to serve as the Nation's 22nd Air Force Chief
of Staff and to represent the 689,000 total force airmen
serving today. The support of our airmen and their families is
greatly appreciated.
It is an honor to appear before you today with Acting
Secretary Roth and my fellow service chief and long-time friend
of many years, General Raymond.
As a general officer, I have spent the last decade-plus in
joint positions overseas and/or supporting operations in the
Middle East, Europe, Africa, and most recently, the Indo-
Pacific. With this context, and being able to look at the Air
Force from varied perspectives, I have personally seen the re-
emergence of strategic competition and how the character of war
has changed. The strategic environment has rapidly evolved and
we haven't changed fast enough.
The People's Republic of China has recognized that modern
warfare is a contest among systems, not individual units or
platforms. Accordingly, Secretary Austin has prioritized China
as our pacing threat. Meanwhile, Russia continues to modernize
its armed forces, increasing the capability of its missiles,
strike aircraft, warships, artillery systems, and nuclear
weapons. Competition in future warfare will be conducted across
all domains simultaneously. It will be transregional and a
global undertaking with complex actions and actors intertwined.
To account for these changes, our Nation and our Air Force
must change faster than we have been. If we continue on a path
of incremental change, our advantage erodes and losing becomes
a distinct possibility.
The Air Force recently updated our mission statement to
fly, fight, and win anytime, anywhere. To execute this mission
now and into the future, we must transition our Air Force and
our operational concepts from today to tomorrow, and we must do
so much faster. That is why I wrote ``Accelerate Change or
Lose,'' to call attention to the changes in the strategic
environment, because the mix of the capabilities that our Air
Force has now that were good enough yesterday or good today
will likely fail tomorrow. Our future Air Force must be agile,
resilient, and connected, with the ability to generate near-
instantaneous effects anytime, anywhere; not just sometime in
some places, but anytime, anywhere.
The Air Force is the only service that provides our joint
teammates, allies, and partners the assurance of air
superiority, the advantage of global strike, and the agility of
rapid global mobility, through a range of capabilities most
requested by today's combatant commanders. Additionally, the
Air Force's ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance] and command and control capabilities provide
the ability to sense, make sense, and act.
But, while our past and current capabilities have sufficed
for the last three decades, they will not effectively perform
in tomorrow's highly contested environment. To address these
challenges that will endanger our national security tomorrow,
the transition to the future Air Force design must start today.
Finally, we must have a foundational responsibility to our
airmen and their families. I remain focused on ensuring we are
ready and that we have the tools and infrastructure and talent
management systems to provide an environment where all can
reach their full potential. The future Air Force design
advances our core missions and new approaches to warfighting
that will holistically support every combatant commander and
benefit every service chief. Investing in the Air Force is an
investment in the joint force. Ladies and gentlemen, the bottom
line is simple. We must modernize for the future and focus on
capabilities that maintain our advantage both today and
tomorrow.
For decades, we collaborated with Congress and our industry
partners to modernize for the future. Now, to fulfill our
responsibility to ensure our national security, we must be
willing to change--to make the tough choices required to
deliberately transform our Air Force to the future force we
need to compete, deter, and win. We have done it before and I
am confident together we can do it again.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today,
and I look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
General Raymond.

STATEMENT OF GEN JOHN W. RAYMOND, USSF, CHIEF OF SPACE
OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES SPACE FORCE

General Raymond. Thank you, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member
Rogers, and distinguished members of this committee. It is an
honor to appear before you today with Secretary Roth, the
Acting Secretary of the Air Force, and General C.Q. Brown, the
Chief of Staff of the Air Force, a long-time friend and
teammate. On behalf of the guardians stationed worldwide, let
me begin by thanking you for the continued leadership and
strong support that you have provided to the Space Force.
The United States is a space-faring nation. We have long
understood that our Nation is strongest economically,
diplomatically, and militarily when we have access to and
freedom to maneuver in space. For the past three decades, we
have been able to take that access and freedom to maneuver for
granted.
Unfortunately, as the National Defense Strategy and the
newer Interim National Security Strategy identified, this is no
longer the case. Both China, our pacing threat, and Russia are
doing two things to eliminate the lead that the U.S. currently
enjoys in space.
First, they are rapidly developing their own space
capabilities for their own use, giving them that same advantage
that we enjoy.
And secondly, they are building weapon systems specifically
designed to deny U.S. capabilities in space and our access to
space. These threats include robust jamming of GPS [Global
Positioning System] and communication satellites; directed-
energy systems that can blind, disrupt, or damage our
satellites; anti-satellite weapons, both in space and launched
from the ground, that are designed to destroy U.S. satellites
in orbit; and cyber capabilities that can deny our access to
the domain.
Thankfully, with the strong support of this Congress, and
especially this committee, the United States seized on the
opportunity to make needed changes to stay ahead of that
growing threat by establishing the United States Space Force.
This leadership is resonating globally and is already
delivering results for our Nation.
We have slashed bureaucracy at every level in order to
empower our guardians to move at speed and to increase the
accountability necessary to operate in this domain. We have put
together a forward-leaning human capital strategy, allowing us
to build a more highly trained, educated, and developed
warfighting force while taking care of guardians and their
families throughout their career.
We wrote our first doctrine to clearly articulate the
independent value of space power to joint and coalition forces,
and this importance is fully captured in the Department's new
joint warfighting construct that is being developed.
Our international partnerships are stronger, with many of
our partner nations following our lead by elevating space in
their militaries.
We have created a new end-to-end capability development
process from force design and requirements to acquisition and
testing, enabled by a digital thread to move at speed while
driving unity of effort across the Department.
We have rejected stovepipes by actively working with the
joint force, other government agencies, and industry to
compete, deter, and win at an affordable cost.
The Space Force cannot, and will not, tolerate business as
usual. Our demanding mission and lean force demand nothing less
than a new standard of efficiency. This budget reflects the
shift of many Department of Defense space activities into the
Space Force. Yet, we remain roughly 2.5 percent of the overall
Department of Defense budget. We are committed to stretching
every dollar to its limit to buy as much capability as possible
for our Nation.
Our joint force does not close on its warfighting
requirements without space. Space is the force multiplier that
we must continue to invest in, so we can compete, deter, and
win, and without it, we risk losing.
This fiscal year 2022 budget balances the need to protect
capabilities that we have on orbit while shifting and
modernizing to a more defendable architecture in the future. It
is an investment that provides assured space capabilities to
our sister services, our Nation, and our coalition partners.
These demanding tasks would not have been possible without
the sustained support from Congress, including this committee,
and for that, I thank you. Again, we cannot afford to lose
space.
I am absolutely honored and humbled to serve as the first
Chief of Space Operations and to have the opportunity to serve
side by side with the incredible guardians that I am privileged
to lead. It is because of them that our Nation enjoys the
benefits of space today, and it is because of them, America's
sons and daughters, that we will compete, deter, and win in the
future.
I look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
General Raymond, on the satellite issue that I raised, in
simplest terms, what do we need to do, what are the most
critical steps necessary to make sure that we have the
architecture in space that we need and that we can protect it?
General Raymond. Yes, sir. We have to shift to a new
architecture. We have to modernize our forces. The capabilities
that we have in space today are exquisite. They are the world's
best. They are expensive. But they are not defendable. They
were built for a different domain. We have to shift, and we
have to shift to a more diversified architecture. And we have
to shift to an architecture that has resiliency built into it
and not bolted on as an afterthought.
As you mentioned in your opening comments, sir, we have got
to figure out how to do this and what we might do differently
to leverage our advantage. And I think there are two things we
can do in space. The first thing is we can leverage a
burgeoning commercial industry to greater capability than we
are doing today, and we need to. The other thing that we need
to do is we need to leverage our international partners to a
greater extent. The way we get after this is by designing a
force structure that allows all to play, to be coalition-
friendly from the beginning, and to allow these small,
innovative companies to have more of a premier role in that
architecture.
The Chairman. What is in the budget this year that you
would point to and say, ``This is what is moving us in that
direction?'' What are your biggest priorities in this year's
budget?
General Raymond. The biggest priorities in this year's
budget, if you look at the budget, we balance four things. We
balance protecting what we have. We have been working on that
for the last couple of years. We balance shifting to a new
architecture, and there are examples in the budget where we are
doing that. Third is we have to develop an offense to be able
to deny benefits to an adversary, to impose costs. And fourth,
we have to look at what other missions that currently are being
done in other domains that should shift to space, and you will
see examples of that as well. It is that balance that we are
trying to get right. And again, by developing an architecture
that is more diversified, we think we can do it in a way that
doesn't break the national treasury.
The Chairman. And, General Brown, as I mentioned in my
opening remarks, what is your vision 5, 10 years--well, from
now through the next 5 or 10 years--for our fighter attack
aircraft, between the F-35, the NGAD, proposals for more F-
15EXes? How does that mix work?
General Brown. What we want to do as an Air Force is have a
mix of multi-role capability across the fleet of fighters. And
right now, we have a seven-fighter fleet going down to a four-
plus-one. And in that four-plus-one, the F-35 is the
cornerstone of that capability. It is the only fifth-gen
[generation] capability that we are building today. Tied to
that is the NGAD.
Then we have a replacement for the F-22. The F-22 we will
continue to modernize to ensure that it has the capabilities to
meet the threat over the next 10 to 15 years, as we bring NGAD
on, which brings on additional systems that provide range and
reach, particularly for air superiority. The F-15E that we
currently have today will be complemented by the F-15EX, and
the F-15EX will be a replacement to the F-15C, again, a multi-
role capability. It will actually be able to carry a much
larger weapons load on this particular air platform and provide
us some additional capability, with a newer platform to help us
drive down our average age of our fleet.
The Chairman. And are you confident that this budget
supports that vision?
General Brown. I am. I am. And as I mentioned in my opening
comments, we are in a position of transition, and that is the
aspect of starting down the path of, really for the F-15EX to
replace the F-15C, because the F-15C has been around for a
period of time and it is starting to really show its age.
The others, the F-16 is part of this four-plus-one. The
newer F-16s will retire some of the older block F-16s, but the
newer block still has another 15 to 20 years of service life on
it as well.
And then, the last one is the A-10. The A-10 has been a
great platform, particularly in the past 20 years in our fight
in the Middle East. We will take a small reduction in A-10s in
this particular budget, and then modernize and re-wing the
remaining A-10s. And the A-10 will be with us really into the
middle of the next decade.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Brown, I have made it pretty clear in my opening
statement that I am unhappy with this top line. Yesterday, we
had your naval counterparts sitting at that table, and General
Berger said, and I quote, ``If our budgets don't even match
inflation, then the risk is high that at some point in the
future we are overmatched, and that's not a place I want to
be.'' Close quote. Admiral Gilday said, quote, ``If the Navy's
top line remains flat or lower, the fleet will decrease.''
Close quote. Do you share their concerns about this top line
and what it would mean to our readiness and capabilities?
General Brown. Ranking Member Rogers, I do. And this is
exactly why I wrote ``Accelerate Change or Lose,'' because I do
see risk if we do not--whether you increase the budget or not,
and realize that increasing the budget will be helpful, but, as
the chairman mentioned, we have got to do things differently,
but smarter in executing the budget we do have.
And part of that is, actually, in this fiscal year 2022
budget, the ability to modernize, which includes retiring and
making a transition from where we are today to a more
modernized fleet in the future--aircraft fleet in the future
and capabilities in the future, to ensure that we do not have
future risk. And that is a balance of risk between where we are
today with today's combatant commanders, in addition to
ensuring not all of the risk is incurred 10-15 years from now,
not only for the Air Force and the joint team, but also for the
Nation.
Mr. Rogers. Yes, well, I completely agree with the
chairman's view about being smarter. And one of the ways we
have got to be smarter is with the F-35 and getting the
problems worked out there where we don't have the problems that
we suffer now.
But, going back to Admiral Gilday and General Berger, both
indicated their support for the National Defense Strategy
Commission's recommendation for a 3-5 percent increase in
defense spending. Do you share their support of that
recommendation?
General Brown. I do.
Mr. Rogers. All right. And I want to ask, you heard me say
in the opening statement that your fiscal year 2022 procurement
request is 12 percent lower than fiscal year 2021. Explain to
me how we are going to be able to maintain readiness to meet
peer threats with that reduction.
General Brown. Ranking Member Rogers, it is combination
of--we have actually increased our RDT&E [research,
development, test, and evaluation] and some of our research and
development. And part of that research and development is going
to help us make that transition to additional capabilities at
the same time we are looking to modernize with our procurement.
It is important that, as we procure, that we are procuring
capabilities that are going to be relevant for the future, and
that is where the RDT&E comes into this as well.
So, from my perspective, to be able to balance between the
procurement and the research and development to ensure we are
getting the right capabilities, particularly as you look at a
more software-focused approach with our digital acquisition,
with digital engineering, open mission systems, and agile
software. Moving down that path is where we will be able to be
very responsive against the threats we expect, that we see
today and the threats we expect to see in the future.
Mr. Rogers. Right.
Secretary Roth, when can we expect to see someone nominated
to fill the Assistant Secretary for Space Acquisition and
Integration?
Mr. Roth. Yes, we need to fill the position. So, I concur
with everybody's concerns that that position has not been
filled. I think as you are aware, it is a Senate-confirmed
political appointee. So, we would have to await a nominee, and
the nominee would have to go through the confirmation process.
Mr. Rogers. When are you going to nominate somebody?
Mr. Roth. Well, as you well know, it is not my call. So, I
would hope sooner rather than later. I mean, for the time
being, we are looking forward to actually getting the Secretary
of the Air Force confirmed, and then, after that, to your
point, filling in the rest of the team. That is an important
position, and we really do need to fill it.
Let me make one point. One issue, perhaps why it wasn't
filled previously, is that position is supposed to be the
service acquisition executive for space, but not until 1
October 2022. And so, our thought is maybe to amend the
language a little bit to say, ``no later than 1 October 2022''.
Because you want the person who takes that position to hit the
ground running in terms of taking charge of space acquisition.
Mr. Rogers. Yes, and not screw it up.
Mr. Roth. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. When are we going to get the FYDP?
Mr. Roth. Yes, that, too, I have to defer to OSD [Office of
the Secretary of Defense]. You have to understand that, as we
prepare this fiscal year 2022 budget with the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, the focus, given the short timeframe--and
we were late to begin with--but given the short timeframe, the
focus was entirely on fiscal year 2022. There were no decisions
made about the outyears. So, there really isn't an outyear FYDP
to be provided at this point in time.
Mr. Rogers. My last question is, Secretary Roth, over half
of the KC-46A fleet is under contract and we still don't have
an aircraft that can reliably hold or deliver fuel. The
earliest these fixes are projected to be ready is 2024. Has the
Air Force considered recompeting that contract?
Mr. Roth. We have not considered recompeting that contract.
We think the best way forward--there are things the airplane
can do today, including refueling, air medical kinds of things,
and also, passengers and that type of thing. So, it is
participating in exercises and doing a real job. But we think
we would be best served taking delivery of the aircraft that
are under contract, and then, proceeding, as you indicated, to
fix the things that need to be fixed.
Mr. Rogers. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Before I do that, we stick to a strict 5-minute thing here.
So, if you are in the middle of an answer, I am not being rude,
but I will cut it off to get to the next person. So, if you can
try to hit that 5-minute mark to the extent possible, that will
be helpful to the committee.
Mr. Langevin, you are recognized.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me
okay?
The Chairman. Got you loud and clear.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony today and
for your service to the country.
I would like to start with General Brown, if I could.
General, the Air Force continues to make great progress with
directed energy. The THOR [Tactical High Power Operational
Responder] system was successfully tested overseas, and I
applaud the establishment of the Directed Energy Utility
Concept Experiment for airborne laser systems. General, how do
directed-energy weapons fit into the Air Force of the 2030s?
General Brown. First of all, I appreciate the question. As
you highlight it, we have made some progress using directed
energy against our small unmanned aerial systems. But what I
think about, this capability has great potential when you look
at the critical infrastructure and base defense in the future.
There is work to be done in the aspect of technology, but the
thing that makes it attractive to me is the cost curves using
directed energy against--much less expensive directed energy
versus a missile interceptor, against the incoming threats we
might have in various locations. So, it is not only putting it
on aircraft, but even for ground-based defense around our
bases, I think it will be important how we develop and continue
to use directed energy.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General. Another area, the Air
Force's written testimony states that the Air Force is
prioritizing ABMS [Advanced Battle Management System] resources
for investment in digital network environment and
infrastructure. However, $150 million of the $203 million
budget is for the Airborne Edge Node. How is devoting two-
thirds of the Advanced Battle Management System budget to a
single communications pod prioritizing network infrastructure?
General Brown. As we do the Airborne Edge Node, that is the
first major step of us putting an ABMS on our aircraft. And it
goes onto the KC-46. It is not just the KC-46, but it actually
starts the process for us to be able to continue to develop
that capability, to put it on other airplanes and other
communication nodes to really drive the aspect of ABMS to
create a network of capability to be able to use and push
information. Because ABMS is really about pushing information
to drive decision-making for the joint force and the Air Force.
Mr. Langevin. In the era of great power competition, where
we are going to be playing the away game on a field that is
tailored to deny our advantages, General, what are you doing to
protect our systems, both from cyber and electronic warfare
threats, but also ensuring and improving the survivability of
assets like tankers and command-and-control platforms that are
high-value and easy-to-shoot-down targets?
General Brown. There is a combination of things, as you
highlight. For cyber, in particular, as we work with Cyber
Command on that capability, but also internal to the Air Force,
the ability as we go forward and work our oncoming systems to
ensure they have the appropriate cybersecurity to be able to
execute the mission. At the same time, from a broader aspect,
how we modernize our force to ensure their survival in the
future will be important, based on the technologies that are
available, as we continue to move forward.
And then, the last piece is our ability now to use Agile
Combat Employment as one aspect, but also, with ABMS, to be
able to connect to increase the situational awareness for our
force helps improve their survivability and their decision-
making, as we work as part of the Air Force, but also with the
joint team on cyber and other areas to protect the force and
execution.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
The last question for General Raymond. Most of our efforts
in directed energy have been focused on terrestrial assets, but
directed-energy weapons are a significant threat and possible
defensive tool for space assets. From your perspective, are we
developing our directed-energy portfolio appropriately to be an
effective capability for space dominance?
General Raymond. Yes, sir, we are. And what I would offer
to you is I would like to come back and get you in a closed
hearing and be able to go into more details on exactly what it
is that we are doing. But it is important. As you said, we have
to be able to protect these capabilities that we rely so
heavily on. The force design work that we are doing takes that
into account and balances our ability to accomplish the
mission, the ability to protect and defend that mission, and
cost, and how fast you can get those capabilities on orbit. I
would welcome the opportunity to go into much more details in a
classified setting.
Mr. Langevin. I would welcome that, too.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Smith.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today,
especially me, for the ``me'' is the son of a World War II Army
Air Corps veteran of the Flying Tigers in China and India. As I
mentioned to you, too, I am also the grateful uncle of a person
serving in the Air Force right now. So, I know firsthand of
your success and capabilities.
General Brown, I am grateful to support the men and women
of the 169th Fighter Wing at McEntire Joint National Air Guard
Base in South Carolina. McEntire has been successful in
limiting their pilot manning gap, maintaining 95 percent of
their fighter pilot requirement. This contrasts with the
overall Air National Guard Component fighter pilot inventory of
76 percent, a gap that has persisted for several years.
What specific lessons can be learned by shared components
to reduce the fighter pilot shortfall across the service, and
how does the fiscal year 2022 request support your pilot
shortfall mitigation strategy?
General Brown. Thank you for the question. And having spent
4 years at Shaw, I am very familiar with Joint Base McEntire.
There are two aspects when we look at our pilot shortfall.
It is production and retention. You highlighted retention, and
that is an area that we are working on. We have had a little
bump during COVID. But the key aspect for me is production, and
not only for the Active Duty, but really for the total force as
well.
And so, in the fiscal year 2022 budget, we are focused on
production, with Pilot Training Next as one of the aspects. How
we will probably work with our civilian sim [simulator]
instructor for locality pay; Accelerated Path to Wings, as
members or individuals come in that actually already have
flying experience, and how we adapt our course to use that.
I will also share with you that during COVID we were able
to maintain the same level of production that we did in a pre-
COVID environment, which, to me, shows the real quality and
dedication from our airmen to be able to deliver in a very
different environment. Our goal is to get to 1,500 a year, and
I think we are on that path.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you for raising your Shaw heritage. I
am really grateful. I somewhat share that with Congressman Jim
Clyburn and Congressman Ralph Norman, but I also appreciate the
cooperation between McEntire and Shaw, how beneficial that is
for both bases.
Also, General, as a former air component commander for the
U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, you understand the increasingly
complex security environment posed by China's peacetime
military buildup better than most. In fact, this is the largest
peacetime military buildup in the history of the world. Our
reliance on well-developed airstrips at established bases is a
vulnerability against China, where their missile arsenal is
capable of neutralizing our major force protection platforms.
How does this budget support efforts to build expeditionary air
launch capabilities throughout the Pacific? How are you
adapting these capabilities to accommodate the logistical
requirements of the F-35 platform?
General Brown. There is a combination of things. First of
all, when you think about the air-launched weapons aspect, we
are focused on--we have reached the inventory for some of our
preferred weapons that we use in today's inventory. But it is
also how we look at some of our more advanced weapons, like
JASSM [Joint Air to Surface Standoff Missile] or hypersonic
capability to provide us the additional capabilities against
that increasing threat.
From the aspect of logistics and working across our force,
Agile Combat Employment and our ability to look at how we
deploy differently, and how we organize a bit differently, and
how we support from a logistics standpoint, will be important.
And then, finally, on the F-35 and its logistics, over the
past 2 years, we have actually had deployments of F-35s. We
have learned quite a bit, particularly in the Middle East, in
how we expand that capability to be able to deploy and
understand the logistics aspects of supporting the F-35. We
have made some progress and done fairly well in the Middle
East. It is now time to expand that and look at how we do this
in the Indo-Pacific as well.
Mr. Wilson. And, hey, as we conclude, in regard to F-35s, I
would like to point out what a wonderful facility McEntire
would be for F-35s. And we have already seen the success of F-
35 deployment in South Carolina at the Beaufort Marine Corps
Air Station, and they are, indeed, appreciated as the sound of
freedom.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
General Brown, the KC-46A tanker question, the Air Force I
believe has requested $73.5 million in RDT&E for the 46A. Is
that funding going to help address the six Category I
deficiencies in the 46? If not, what is the other use for that?
General Brown. It is. Two key areas on the KC-46 that this
will help address is the stiff boom, which is a challenge for
some of our aircraft to get higher altitudes in heavy weapons
loads, and then, the other is increased communications on the
KC-46 to make it compliant with some of the DOD [U.S.
Department of Defense] mandates, international mandates, to be
able to operate in various airspace. And that is where a good
portion of that money is going to.
Mr. Larsen. A large portion of that?
General Brown. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, okay. Great.
The second question for you on a different issue, can you
just outline the AFWERX budget in fiscal year 2022 and the
areas where that can be streamlined or improved? And that might
be for Mr. Roth as well. Maybe Mr. Roth could, or whichever.
Mr. Roth. Okay. Well, first of all, I mean, we are very
excited about AFWERX. I mean, AFWERX is exactly the kind of
thing we think we need to be involved in going forward. I mean,
one word or one phrase for the leader of AFWERX is he is our
chief commercialization officer. And so, the whole point of
AFWERX is to leverage our money with commercial money and to
bring into the Defense Department, bring into the Air Force,
the kinds of actors and players and contractors that don't
normally do business with us.
And so, for example, for the last 2 years, in 2019 and
2020, AFWERX awarded something on the order of 1,400 contracts
worth about $700 million. Seventy-five percent of those
contracts were with new performers, people who had not done
business with the Defense Department before.
And so, again, we are pretty excited about what they can do
and how we can leverage them going forward. In fact, we think
they were such a good idea, we are going to stand up a
SpaceWERX as well to try to see if we can expand the kinds of
initiatives that we have.
Mr. Larsen. All right. That is fair enough.
Last year, Representative Don Young and I had a provision
in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] to submit a
report on upgrading the DEW sites, the defense early warning
sites, in Alaska. And we want to know what the status either of
those upgrades are or the status of the report is for the
record.
Mr. Roth. I will have to follow up in terms of what the
status of the report is. We do have money in the budget to look
at, continue to look at emerging technologies for the North
Warning System. So, we are continuing to get after that. We
will have to follow up and get back to you on exactly where
that report is.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Mr. Larsen. I appreciate that. It was in the NDAA and did
ask you to get back to us on that.
As well, General VanHerck testified at this committee on
his concerns as the commander of NORTHCOM [U.S. Northern
Command] on his inability to have really a full situational
awareness when it comes to threats across the Pole. And perhaps
in that future closed hearing, closed meeting we have with you,
you can, from the Air Force and Space Force perspective, help
us understand how you are working with NORTHCOM to address
those known gaps for detecting threats. Can I get a commitment
on that from you all? I see nodding heads, but can you say
``yes,'' so the clerk can pick that up?
Mr. Roth. Yes, sir.
General Brown. Yes, sir.
General Raymond. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you very much.
And then, finally--and probably for, I don't know, for
Secretary Roth and General Brown--this is a 5G question. It is
not necessarily an ABMS question, just to be clear about it.
But how are you planning to integrate the use of 5G as your
backbone for communications in the structure in ABMS? And are
any of the 12 DOD pilot projects on 5G throughout the bases in
the CONUS [continental United States], any of those related to
learning about how to apply 5G into ABMS?
Mr. Roth. I can start and the general can fill in some
blanks.
Mr. Larsen. Thirty seconds.
Mr. Roth. Yes. Okay. Moving data at speed and scale is the
essence of the Joint All-Domain Operations. It is the essence
of the Advanced Battle Management System. It is the essence of
warfare in 2030. So, capabilities like AI [artificial
intelligence], machine learning, and 5G are all important
aspects of the connectivity that we need to seek for the
future.
General Brown. We are using it, particularly out at Nellis,
to help us with ABMS and to learn more about how to use 5G.
Mr. Larsen. You are talking about Nellis?
General Brown. Right.
Mr. Larsen. That is great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Turner is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, as I have told you personally, I am a big
fan of yours. I appreciate your service and your appearing
before the committee and your answers today. And I want to
thank you for your career of service at DOD.
You come from a finance background. And so, I am going to
ask you a question that relates to that. This year we received
the budget in June, which means that there is no way, of
course, we are going to be able to get any of our work done
before the fiscal year. As you know, there is no real rational
basis as to why we operate under the fiscal year that we do. It
is legislative. We could fix it. We could move the fiscal year
to the calendar year, which would save 3 months annually for
the Department of Defense. Could you please give us some
perspective in your experience as to the effects of continuing
resolutions, both financially and capabilities-wise, for the
Department of Defense? And would moving the fiscal year to the
calendar year help?
Mr. Roth. Well, in terms of managing on a continuing
resolution, I think, for better or worse, unfortunately, we
have a lot of experience managing under continuing resolutions.
So, I would say short term--and I am talking about a matter of
a couple of months--that we have adjusted our spending patterns
in a way that we can probably accommodate a fairly short-term
continuing resolution, 2 to 3 months, and that type of thing.
Anything beyond that, as you know, the restrictions against
new starts or expanding any efforts start to hurt dramatically
and start having both contractual and operational impacts as
well. So, long-term continuing resolutions are very corrosive
and will require a lot of sort of alternative plan B kinds of
things--breaking contracts into smaller pieces, which ends up
costing you money in the long run.
Back to your reference to my many years in this building,
unfortunately, I can actually remember when we shifted to 1
October. Okay? I was a young pup at the time, but I actually
went through the transition. It was back in 1976 and 1977. And
the idea there was to provide more time to get all the
appropriations and authorization acts done in time, because at
the time the fiscal year was 1 July through 30 June. And so,
you can see how that worked out.
So, my only caution is--I don't know--work seems to expand
to fill the vacuum, so to speak, and I am not sure that that is
ultimately a solution. Closing out a fiscal year, in moving the
beginning of a fiscal year to 1 January, you are also, then,
closing out a fiscal year in December, and that gets to be
problematic for the staff. You are talking about Christmas in
December and trying to do all the accounting adjustments and
contracting to end a fiscal year. So, it just becomes a bit of
an administrative burden, but, you know, the track record of
actually getting bills done by the beginning of a fiscal year,
no matter which date you pick, has always been a challenge.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I appreciate that.
General Raymond, thank you for your leadership. You are the
first in the Nation to be our Chief of Staff for Space Force.
You have made it a point to ensure that there is greater
declassification of information as to what our adversaries are
doing. That has had a great deal of effect on our ability to
debate policy. Would you please talk a moment about that
process and how important you believe that is?
General Raymond. I think it is absolutely critical. Our
goal is not to get into a conflict that begins or extends into
space; it is to deter it. And if you want to deter, you have to
be able to message to your adversaries.
We have seen both China and Russia develop capabilities and
test those capabilities in a very concerning way. This past
year, I talked very publicly for the first time about a Russian
anti-satellite weapon that was purpose-built to destroy U.S.
satellites in low Earth orbit. And that satellite is like the
Russian nesting doll; it is the doll inside of a doll inside of
a doll. When the doll launches, it opens up, another satellite
comes out; it opens up and sends out a projectile--not safe and
responsible behavior, not professional behavior. We have called
them out, and since that time, Russia has actually come to the
table and we have had some strategic dialog talks with them.
So, it is extremely important that the average person
understands just how reliant they are on space and understands
just how vulnerable they are with the threat that we are seeing
today.
Mr. Turner. General Brown, we have the past three
administrations who have supported nuclear modernization and
the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent. Could you speak for a
moment how important it is that we support and complete the
nuclear modernization in light of what our adversaries are
doing?
General Brown. Sure. We need to have a safe, secure,
reliable nuclear portfolio that still deters a threat. And so,
we do have an advancing threat, and it is important we keep the
Ground Based Strategic Deterrent and other aspects of our
nuclear portfolio on track.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You have already noted
the stark nature of this hearing. To have General Raymond here
as a coequal service chief is, indeed, a historic moment. I
have the opportunity to speak with General Raymond with some
frequency, so I would like to yield now to Elaine Luria for my
questioning.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you, Mr. Cooper.
So, General Brown, I was looking and, in 2009, there was a
new, but actually an old concept that emerged called the air-
sea battle. And this has the goal of countering what was then
termed the A2/AD [anti-access/area denial] threat in the
Western Pacific theater of operations. And I think it has
already been stated through your remarks here today that you do
consider China as our most immediate threat. Looking at this
threat, would you consider a conflict with China primarily, if
not exclusively, an air-sea battle?
General Brown. I do think, based on where I see the threat
going, it is not just air-sea, but I would also say that the
first mover would probably be in cyber and space, which is why
I am happy to have General Raymond here with me, and really
part of the Department of the Air Force that we can work very
closely.
But, just looking at the environment of how quick things
could happen, air definitely plays a role. To me, that is an
aspect of being able to understand our capabilities in the air
as well as watching how the People's Republic of China has
really advanced their capability in terms of their air force as
well. To me, that is why I really do see both air and sea, but,
really, across the joint team and across all domains is where I
expect a conflict to occur.
Mrs. Luria. But, going further with that, actually, they
say that no good plan survives the enemy. Well, this plan of
developing an air-sea battle, it didn't survive contact with
the Joint Staff. So, in 2015, it was consumed in the name of
jointness, and a spokesman said that ``The missing part of the
air-sea battle concept was the land portion.'' So, just think
about that: the missing part of an air-sea battle concept was
the land portion. So, I guess the spokesman both forgot about
the Marine Corps and, also, the concept within the Western
Pacific. Would you agree that it is not part of our plan or
strategy or thought that we would actually conduct a large-
scale land invasion in any conflict with China?
General Brown. What I really believe, if you look into
where we are today as a joint force, and you look at the joint
fighting concept, you are going to have capabilities across all
domains, across all services----
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, just in the interest of time, do you
envision a large-scale land invasion in a conflict with China?
General Brown. It is kind of hard to predict what would
happen, but I want to make sure we have options in the future
to ensure that we can use all----
Mrs. Luria. Okay. So, since this is a budget hearing, I
just wanted to shift to your budget submission. Yesterday, we
talked to the Navy about their budget submission. One thing
remains true, from year to year, it seems that each service is
getting a one-third share. So, in my opinion at least, it
doesn't seem that the next large-scale conflict in the Western
Pacific, if that were with China, would require a large
standing Army, but that is exactly what we have and that is
exactly what this defense budget submission calls for.
So, do you agree with that current apportionment within the
Department of Defense, one-third, one-third, one third for each
service, or do you believe that the Air Force and the Navy
require more resources in order to deal with this current
conflict?
General Brown. Naturally, I would like to have more, but I
also think it is the analysis that we have to do internal to
the Air Force to make the case for the things that we need to
support not only the Air Force, but also the joint force. But,
as you look at the joint warfighting concept, how we look at
the redundancies between the services, how we look at the gaps
to ensure we have the right capabilities not only for the Air
Force, for the joint force as well.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. I wanted to point out an article that
came out recently called, ``The Budget (and Fleet) That Might
Have Been''--and they include in their ``fleet'' Air Force as
well--by Blake Herzinger. It suggested a small cut in the Army
could yield huge returns for the Navy and the Air Force alike.
And I only have a little bit of time left, but, out of this
air-sea battle came a focus on anti-ship weapons delivered from
the air. So, several quick questions. How many bombers do you
have in the Western Pacific today armed with the AGM-158 and
how many AGM-158s did you request in this year's budget?
General Brown. We don't have a continuous bomber presence
in the Indo-Pacific today. And so, we have a bomber task force
that goes in and out. And I'll have to get you the exact
numbers of the munitions.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And how many Quickstrike mines do you
have in today's inventory?
General Brown. I would have to get back to you on that one
as well.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
Mrs. Luria. Okay. And how many bombers will you remove from
the Air Force's inventory this year?
General Brown. It will be 17.
Mrs. Luria. Okay.
General Brown. That is in fiscal year 2021.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you, and I appreciate your
comments that you feel you need more resources, but the point
of my line of questioning was to say that I really strongly
believe that the Air Force and the Navy have a larger role to
play in the Western Pacific, and was hoping that you would come
here, just as Admiral Gilday yesterday, and advocate for that,
because I think this is truly essential to the defense of our
Nation and what we might face in the Western Pacific in the
future.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you,
Mr. Lamborn is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Secretary Roth, now I agree almost all the
time with my colleagues and friends from Alabama, but there is
one issue I have to raise where we do differ. Colorado Springs,
although the home of Space Command currently, was rejected in
favor of Huntsville for its future home. Now Huntsville has a
great history in rocketry, missile defense, and civilian space,
but military space is an entirely different world. Operating
and defending satellites, both DOD and IC [intelligence
community] satellites, is done almost exclusively now in
Colorado Springs, where seven of the nine Space Deltas, or
space wings, now reside, and one other is nearby in Colorado,
and one other is in California. Ripping the command away from
operations and moving it a thousand miles away makes no
military sense. Our understanding is that this was a political
decision made by the last administration, and the Air Force,
while initially selecting Colorado Springs, had to go back and
scramble to justify a different siting decision.
So, Mr. Roth, last month during testimony, General
Dickinson told us that civilians were the bedrock of Space
Command and he wants to incentivize as many as possible to
move. He also admitted that Huntsville did not have a
survivable communications network, which does exist in
abundance at the current location in Colorado Springs, and that
such a network would have to be built from scratch at great
expense in Huntsville. Despite this, the Department of the Air
Force said of their basing process that they did not consider
the cost of moving civilians or attrition rates and they did
not consider survivable communications as a requirement.
And lastly, when General Raymond commanded Space Command,
he operated out of Peterson's Building 1. American taxpayers
have recently invested millions to upgrade facilities at
Peterson in order to enhance Space Command's capabilities. So,
the command is even more entrenched there, and yet, the Air
Force did not even consider keeping the headquarters in
Building 1.
So, how seriously should we view a process that did not
consider the cost and attrition rate of moving civilians, the
survivable communications requirement, and using existing
infrastructure, among many other significant flaws?
Mr. Roth. The selection of Huntsville as the preferred
location by my predecessor was the result of our strategic
basing process. And that process is an analytically based
process. It uses something on the order of, I think, 21
criteria. In both cases, in both Colorado Springs and in
Huntsville, Alabama, both were going to require new buildings.
Based on the requirement for something north of 1,400 people,
we were going to have to build a building, whether it was in
Colorado Springs or whether it was in Huntsville. And it turns
out the basic construction cost and the maintenance costs, and
the like, in Huntsville was significantly less than Colorado
Springs.
I have personally no evidence that the decision was
politically motivated. It was the result of our strategic
basing process, and we have worked with all the stakeholders to
try to do the analysis and we are now in the process of doing
the environmental analysis.
As I think you are aware, the GAO [Government
Accountability Office] and the DOD IG [Inspector General] are
going and looking at it and analyzing it and investigating----
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
Mr. Roth [continuing]. The basis of the decisions. So, I
will yield to them and see what it is, in fact, they find. I
think the results aren't going to be available until later this
year.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Let me interrupt you because time is
running out.
So, you will commit to providing the committee with all of
the background documents and internal communications of the
Department of the Air Force's Space Command decision-making
process, both the original one that was scuttled and the second
one which was completed in January of this year?
Mr. Roth. Yes. I think, to a large extent, we already have.
We try to make the process as open and transparent as possible.
If requested, we will send you the folks who were involved in
that decision and we will walk you through the criteria and the
math, and all of that. I am more than happy to----
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. Because there are some things
still missing there.
And changing subjects, you mentioned the environment, an
environmental assessment. Redstone Arsenal has been listed on
the EPA's [Environmental Protection Agency's] National
Priorities List as a Superfund site since 1994. Was its status
as an EPA Superfund site considered during the basing decision
process?
Mr. Roth. Yes, I will have to get back to you. I am not
aware of whether it was or was not. We will have to get back to
you with that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here this morning.
I would like to spend a few minutes on airlift, which,
again, at the Projection Forces Subcommittee, myself and my
colleague, Mr. Wittman, have been very involved with the KC-46,
the C-130s programs, as well as the B-1 bombers. So, I actually
think the KC-46 path that is now set is somewhat of a good-news
story. I think Dr. Roper from the Air Force did a good job in
terms of forcing Boeing's hand to get a hardware solution to
the RVS [Remote Vision System] problem. I would just note that
Congress in the NDAA has kind of put some steel in his spine in
terms of making sure that we were not going to accept a
platform that was not adequate for the crew. And now, it is all
about execution.
Our sort of guiding principle was to make sure that we were
listening to TRANSCOM [U.S. Transportation Command] as well as
the Air Force during this whole process. It does seem that now
the two have come together in terms of a way to use KC-46s in a
less sort of intensive, I guess, manner while we are
transitioning the fix over the next few years.
General Brown, is that your sort of approach and do you
support that? Again, we are careful here not to just sort of
accept a half-baked result. We want to get what the taxpayer
paid for, but, nonetheless, we have got to move forward.
General Brown. I am. And the aspect right now with the KC-
46--it does have capability to refuel a good portion of our
fleet, not only the Air Force, but also part of the joint
force, to move cargo, to do air medical evacuation. We are
making that capability available to TRANSCOM. I have had
several conversations with General Lyons, and we have come to
an agreement on how best to do this. It is also helpful because
the airmen that are actually operating our KC-10s and KC-135s
today are the same airmen that are going to have to operate the
KC-46, operate and maintain the KC-46, when it comes off the
line. But we have got to make the transition to be able to
train that manpower, those airmen, to ensure that we can, as
the KC-46 continues to develop its capabilities, we have them
available to be able to continue to execute as the KC-46 gains
its capability.
Mr. Courtney. Well, it makes a lot of sense. Again, it was
clear to all of us, though, who took a ride a few months ago--
and there was about a dozen or so House Members and Senators--I
mean, in a contested environment, though, it is still not ready
for primetime until we get the hardware fixed. So, again, it
sounds like you found sort of a happy medium in terms of
utilization, but we are going to be tracking very closely,
because, as I mentioned, we have been very involved in this.
Secondly, on the C-130s, we in the last NDAA put a floor in
terms of the size of the fleet at 287 C-130s. Again, there was
a little bit of heartburn, I know, from the Air Force when that
was done. However, we wanted to see what the Mobility
Capability Requirement Study, which has been ongoing, in terms
of airlift was going to come back with. We have gotten sort of
a--it is a late-breaking development, literally within the last
24 hours or so, but it does seem to validate that the OPLANs
[operation plans] and all of the studies show that we do need
to have a fleet at roughly that same number.
And we look forward to working with you and your staff as
that report gets digested. And I know there was a discussion
before this morning's hearing. And again, we will sort of leave
it at that for now.
General Brown. Sure.
Mr. Courtney. And lastly, on the B-1 bombers, General Nahom
was over at the subcommittee on June 8th, and he testified
that, quote, ``Until these units''--in other words, the B-21s--
``shake hands with the B-1s, we have no intention of going
below 45,'' in terms of the fleet, ``because the combatant
commanders need that firepower in the next 5, 7, 10 years,
until the B-21s start showing up in the numbers we need.''
So, I just want to confirm his testimony that we are not
going to be retiring B-1s and dip below that 45 sort of minimum
requirement. And again, if you could just speak to that?
General Brown. That is accurate. And that is my intent, not
only in bombers, but other capabilities as well, is to make
sure we have a good transition between the capabilities we have
today and the capabilities we have for the future and minimize
risk to our combatant commanders in today's requirements.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Again, as I said, this has been an
area, also, where Congress has been very involved, and we have
a very compressed schedule, as has been said before, in terms
of markups. So, we look forward to working with you and your
staff.
And with that, I yield back, Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to thank our witnesses for joining us
today.
Secretary Roth, I would like to go to you. Listen, I am
exacerbated. Here we are with an aircraft that should have been
delivered as a working aircraft. That is the KC-46A. And we are
paying $226 million a copy for a lemon. Every month we hear
another Category I deficiency, and we are being told, ``Oh,
don't worry about it. It has some utility. It can fly.'' Well,
you know, there is not much other than that that it has the
utility for. And I am really, really frustrated because, early
on, we said, ``Why are you accepting aircraft that have these
multiple deficiencies, that can't do the mission?'' And now,
you have an additional cost of keeping other aircraft that you
wanted to retire in the fleet.
Listen, the platform is broken. I think the program is
irreparable, and the underlying cause is a bad contract. Now we
learn that an FMS [foreign military sales] partner is being
upcharged up to 1,500 percent for spare parts. That is just
unbelievable.
And I find myself asking these questions continually, and I
have a question for you. This is a bad contract. Have you
thought about recompeting this contract when this contract
ends, the current contract ends? Or have you thought about
recompeting it this year? Something has got to give on this. We
have a number of aircraft that are sitting on the tarmac that
aren't even being flown. And we talk about aircrews; we talk
about, ``Oh, gosh, we're going to get it there.'' I keep
getting promises after promises after promises, and we have
tarmacs full of aircraft. And I understand you have got to
train airmen and move them onto the next platform, but this
aircraft is not fully mission-capable. It is time that
something changes.
Acting Secretary Roth, what are your thoughts?
Mr. Roth. We need to work on the KC-46 and make it the
air----
Mr. Wittman. No, you don't need to work on it. You need to
get it----
Mr. Roth. Okay.
Mr. Wittman. You need to get it to the point where it is
functional----
Mr. Roth. Yes.
Mr. Wittman [continuing]. Fully functional.
Mr. Roth. Well, again, we agree and we have been working
with the contractor, as was responded to before. We are going
to work on the remote visual system. We are going to work on
the boom. And hopefully, they will be ready by fiscal year 2023
or fiscal year 2024.
At this point, we don't see either the economic or business
sense of recompeting the contract. We do think it is a good
idea to keep accepting aircraft, such as they are. They can do
a bit more than I think you give the credit for. And we are
going to use the KC-46 as a node, and as we work out some of
the ABMS technology, and the like.
So, our sense is the best----
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Secretary----
Mr. Roth. I am sorry. Okay.
Mr. Wittman. Listen, with all due respect, you say it can
do a little bit more than we say it can do. We look at Category
I deficiencies. It can't hold fuel. It is supposed to be a
tanker. You have human waste onboard that it can't seem to
hold. The aircraft is full of foreign object debris when it is
being manufactured. Those seem like pretty significant things
to me. The description of the aircraft as a tanker and it can't
hold fuel? I am not sure where you see the utility in saying
that this is an aircraft. Yes, it can fly; you can put people
in it, but I would argue there are a lot of other aircraft out
there that can do the same thing. At some point--at some
point--I think you have to take decisive action for this.
Let me move on to another question while I still have some
time left. I want to get to, also, what our FMS partners are
being charged for spare parts, and potentially, what we are
paying for spare parts. It seems as though this is becoming a
check-writer for Boeing on a bad contract--1,500 percent
upcharge on spare parts. Is this true, and if so, why, and what
are we doing about that? That is another element of this that I
think is highly problematic.
Mr. Roth. I need to get back. I don't have all the details
on that. So, I take your point for the time being. As I
understand, the customer--in this case, Japan--wanted a
contract very quickly. We provided it to them, and they are
relatively satisfied. But, that said, let me go back and check
the facts. Our folks in the acquisition community are taking a
look at what actually played out, and we owe you an answer on
what exactly happened.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
Mr. Wittman. Going back to the contract, it just doesn't
seem like to me that the contract in its current state is good
for the Air Force, and I would argue Boeing should be looking
at this and saying it is not good for Boeing. They have lost
over $5 billion with this contract. It seems like, under those
circumstances, it would make sense to look at recompeting the
contract. It doesn't seem like anybody in this contract is
getting what they need.
Mr. Roth. I take your point. Right now, our business sense
is that recompeting it would not, in fact, be a good move. But
we will take your point under consideration and go forward.
Right now, we think the best thing to do is to try to execute
the program as best as possible and fix it. I take your point.
Mr. Wittman. I would strongly urge you to look at
recompeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. I was hoping that Mr. Turner was here, and
why he has made an assault on Christmas, his opening comment at
all these hearings--the war on Christmas, Mr. Turner, please.
Moving on, General Brown, you have requested $2.6 billion
for the GBSD in fiscal year 2022. The Air Force estimates that
we will spend well over $85 billion in the next decade on this
system. I suspect that that is probably low, given the history
of all of these major platforms. With this price tag continuing
to rise over the next decade, what tradeoffs is the Air Force
making in the relatively flat budget environment that we have?
Perhaps weapons sustainment systems, perhaps the F-35 can be
more than 54 percent fully mission-capable. What tradeoffs are
you making so that you can fund the GBSD?
General Brown. As far as the tradeoffs, it is really across
our budget we will have to make adjustments to ensure to fully
fund the nuclear modernization because nuclear modernization
and the triad is really the rock foundation of our deterrent.
It supports every one of our OPLANs. It supports and allows us
to be able to execute conventionally. And so, there will be a
balance between not only our nuclear, but also some other
conventional capabilities. I don't have specifics I can give to
you to be able to tie one to the other, but as we look across
the entire budget, that is where we have to look and how we
balance.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. So, the GBSD is your top priority, and
the ability of F-35 to actually fly more than 54 percent of the
time fully mission-capable is not a priority?
General Brown. The mission capability of the F-35 is also a
priority. You can try to connect the two together, but I think
it is a fuller aspect across the entire United States Air Force
that I look at. The F-35 is an important program to us as well,
just like our nuclear portfolio is.
Mr. Garamendi. So, you are satisfied with the F-35 at 54
percent mission-capable and you are not going to put any more
money into it? Instead, you are going to fund the GBSD?
General Brown. I am not satisfied with 54 percent. In fact,
I think it is a bit higher than 54 percent. And so, our balance
here is to be able to put not only into our nuclear portfolio,
but also I am focused on sustainment with the F-35. It
increases mission capability. I have had direct engagements
with the CEO [chief executive officer] of Lockheed Martin on
several occasions, as well as worked with the Joint Program
Office to increase its capability, but it is really the aspect
of us working together not only internal to the Air Force, but
with the Joint Program Office and with our industry partner.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, in 2020, which was just 5 months ago,
that entire year full mission capability, 54 percent. If you
are satisfied with that, then fund the GBSD. Don't take any
money out of the GBSD to buy perhaps more engines. I will let
that just hang there.
You have a new warhead for the GBSD, is that correct?
General Brown. We do.
Mr. Garamendi. Could you describe the process of the
development of that new warhead, which I believe is the 87-1?
How is that going?
General Brown. From everything I understand, it is going
well, but it is not only internal to the Air Force, but it is
also working with DOE [U.S. Department of Energy] on that
warhead as well.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, indeed, you are correct, it is the
DOE, but they said in testimony just this week that they will
not be able to develop the W87-1 pits until well into the 2035
decade. So, it won't be available as you develop the GBSD, as
you intend to deploy the GBSD. So, what warhead are you putting
on the GBSD, since the 87-1 will not be available at any time
during your deployment period; that is, to 2036?
General Brown. Well, I have not been privy or been told
about the particular issues with the warhead. I will have to
get back with you on the specifics----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Garamendi. Well, presumably, the GBSD was specifically
designed for a new warhead. The new warhead will not be
available during the implementation of the GBSD; that is, until
2036 and beyond. Are you aware of the additional cost that the
NNSA [National Nuclear Security Administration] is planning for
the development of the pits?
General Brown. I am not aware of the cost.
Mr. Garamendi. Well----
The Chairman. Sadly, the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
The Chairman. Sorry.
Mr. Scott is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Roth, General Brown, I want to, first, thank you
again for your visit at Robins Air Force Base and your
commitment to Robins Air Force Base, the home of ABMS. And I
know that the President's budget just called for the drawdown
of four JSTARS [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System
aircraft]. That is something that I am supportive of, based on
the advancements in ABMS and the Air Force's commitment to the
men and women at Robins and the Georgia Air National Guard.
Could you briefly discuss some of the advancements of the
ABMS program? And the Department has called for, in the fiscal
year 2022 budget request, $204 million in research and
development for the ABMS program. Could you speak to that
issue, please, sir?
General Brown. So, the investment on ABMS, really, aspects
of it bring about parts of the digital infrastructure to be
able to connect and move information for ABMS. So, that is one
part.
The other part that is specific to the capability with the
JSTARS is the Ground Moving Target Indicator [GMTI], and that
is an aspect we are working at space-based capability, working
very closely with the Space Force on bringing that capability
together to be able to help provide additional ISR capability
from other means from what we do day to day traditionally. And
so, it is also one key aspect of it is building out the digital
infrastructure, so we can actually move the information that
comes from our various platforms, and to include our ISR.
Mr. Scott. And so, General Raymond, do you feel, are you
comfortable that, as they pull down the JSTARS, that the GMTI
capability will be there from space, so that our combatant
commanders have that capability?
General Raymond. Yes, sir, I am. That program, two things
in that program. First, it has recently come over to the Space
Force. Secondly, the very first thing that we did was reduce
the classification of it, so we can talk about it, so we can
integrate it better with commercial industry and integrate it
better with our intelligence partners. Our goal is to build a
system and design a system that takes advantage of both of
those partners, and I am comfortable, where I sit today, that
we will be able to do that and deliver on time for the JSTARS
replacement.
Mr. Scott. I am absolutely convinced that it has to happen
and it has to work. Our enemies have systems that their weapons
are significantly faster than they were when our current
systems were developed and they are more powerful than they
were, and they are also smaller. That makes them harder to pick
up, and it means we have got to pick them up further away, if
we are going to intercept them before they do damage to
Americans at home or our interests abroad.
And so, I don't have any further questions, other than,
Secretary Roth, I appreciate your service and your time at
Robins Air Force Base. I enjoyed that with you.
And, gentlemen, I appreciate your service.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield the remainder of
my time.
Mr. Rogers [presiding]. Mr. Norcross is recognized.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
I appreciate you all being here today.
General Brown, much is being said about the four-plus-one,
and one of the key components is the F-35. Yet, in the unfunded
priority budget, you did not list any additional F-35As this
year, which is a noted exception going past the last few years.
Why not? Yet, you included in the unfunded list the power
modules and additional parts. Would you explain why that
decision was made?
General Brown. Sure, Representative Norcross.
What I look at, and one of the things we have talked about
with members of this committee and others, is the sustainment
on the F-35.
Mr. Norcross. Uh-hum.
General Brown. And the other aspect of this is, with the F-
35 we have today, it is not necessarily the F-35 we want to
have that goes into the future that will have Tech Refresh 3
and Block 4 against an advancing--particularly, advancing
Chinese threat. And so, I am balancing between additional F-
35s, driving down our average age of our fleet with F-15EXs,
but also focus on sustainment. And so, it is a balance there
between the F-35s that we already have in the budget, which,
even with the unfunded priority list [UPL], the majority of the
fighters that we are going to buy are going to be F-35s. But I
wanted to put some focus on sustainment as well, because we
have talked about that quite often. That is the rationale
behind the F-15EXs on the budget, on the UPL, not F-35s, but F-
35 sustainment.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Continuing on the four-plus-one, and we are looking at
NGAD, which there is a considerable amount of money going
towards that. And in the past, the Air Force has said time and
time again they want to get away from that single-role fighter.
To the degree you can in this environment, can you tell us, are
you looking at NGAD as a single- or multi-role platform?
General Brown. I would like to have it be multi-role. But
the primary aspect for NGAD is air superiority, and with air
superiority, it is an increased weapons load; it is increased
range, particularly when you look at operating in the Indo-
Pacific and against the threat we expect to see in the Indo-
Pacific. So, I look to the future, but what I really look at
for all of our fighters is to have multi-role capability to be
able to go from a high-end conflict all the way down to
homeland defense, and that drives a combination capability.
But, really, NGAD is really focused more so on a highly
contested environment, to have the weapons load both air-to-air
primarily, but some air-to-ground capability to ensure, one,
that it can survive, but also provide options for our component
commanders and for the joint force.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Just to shift back to the KC-46, and much has been said
over the course of several years on the contracting problem,
but, on the KC-46 and the contract with Boeing now, the
mistakes that are being made are on the dime of Boeing versus
on us, as most other contracts, is that correct?
General Brown. That is correct, particularly for the remote
visual system. The Air Force has some responsibility for the
stiff boom.
Mr. Norcross. And the one we agreed to, the remote visual
system, is now, quite frankly, as everybody has talked about,
is unmatched in the world in terms of its advanced stage of
what it can do, correct?
General Brown. That is correct, and we have done some
outstanding work with not only our engineers, Air Force
engineers, but also Boeing engineers and others that have
provided us some advice on how best to move forward.
Mr. Norcross. It was not pleasant getting here, and we have
now the newest and best system in the world. And I don't think
anybody will talk about making up the time, but, to retrofit a
KC-46 with a new visual system versus going out and trying to
get a brand-new fighter, the time doesn't come close, does it?
General Brown. It doesn't.
Mr. Norcross. Okay. So, here we are, we ran the race. We
are right at the finish line. And somehow, to look at this
again seems to me to be insane. And certainly, I have great
respect for the folks on the other side of the aisle on this
one, but I didn't hear about putting this out for a new
contract in the last 4 years, and I am hearing it now. We are
so close to the end that I think this would be a grave mistake
to do this. Beyond the contract, that is something new.
Especially if we held this high of a standard for all the other
platforms just in here today, we would have nothing out on the
road.
And with that, Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Garamendi [presiding]. Mr. Norcross, thank you.
Mr. Kelly, I believe you are up.
Excuse me, Mr. Kelly. Ms. Stefanik, Mr. DesJarlais, are
they on the screen?
Okay. Mr. Kelly, you are up.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your service and for being here.
I am not a bean counter, but I do know how to count beans.
And as a member of the Budget Committee also, I am deeply
concerned in what, in my view, is deep cuts to our DOD budget
this year. And we rely on your leadership and your advice to
the administration to inform them of what our required needs
are to be ready to fight tonight and, also, fight the fights of
the future. I don't want to go back to planes falling out of
the air, airmen dying, to ships crashing into each other, and
to those things.
So, I just ask that you guys, if you need something, please
stand up and ask. We cannot take these haircuts and 2 years
from now pay for that in readiness, which means service members
dying. And that is our obligation, to protect the men and women
who serve in our uniforms at all costs, regardless of party or
affiliation.
That being said, as you are aware, Columbus Air Force Base
in my district trains a great many prospective Air Force pilots
each year. The 48 T-1A aircraft at Columbus Air Force Base
provide prospective pilots with real-world flying experience.
While the T-1 has a service life to 2050, and $67.2 million has
been spent on upgrades, we have heard the Air Force was
considering retiring this fleet in 2023. I have been told this
decision resided with the Secretary of the Air Force and today
the final decision has not been made. However, upon reviewing
the Air Force's fiscal year 2022 budget where funds are
provided for more upgrades to the T-1A, it also states that
retirements will begin in 2023. Can you please explain where
the Air Force is exactly on the T-1A retirement decision?
Mr. Roth. Yes, let me defer to General Brown because I am
actually not up to speed on this.
General Brown. So, we have actually had conversations back
and forth about the T-1, where we need to go as far as whether
we retire or not. And this is part of our discussion on some of
the initiatives we have associated with the pilot training mix
and others. And so, I would tell you, Mr. Kelly, that we have
not made a final decision one way or another, and that is part
of the analysis that is still ongoing.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, General Brown. And it is my
understanding that the Air Force believes new simulation
technology will require less actual cockpit time in the future,
but most of this technology has yet to be implemented. Do you
believe it is wise to retire a training aircraft with over 25
years of service life left prior to confirming the simulation
technology will be as good as real-world flying? And again,
this comes to airmen's, our pilots' lives.
General Brown. And that is part of the ongoing analysis and
kind of balancing out between the capability and the technology
we have to do today's simulation, at the same time balancing it
off against the cost of modernization for the T-1 and some of
the other aspects. But I am 100 percent with you that we want
to make sure our pilots across our force are well-trained and
we don't put them at risk.
Mr. Kelly. And I would appreciate it if the Air Force would
provide me, this committee, their analysis and finding as it
pertains to the retirement of the T-1. I am concerned with the
speed at which we are moving on this.
And I go back just a little further. General Brown, right
now, we have a real issue retaining pilots in the Air Force.
And I am not a pilot, but I do know that most men and women who
join the Air Force, they join to fly. And if we are putting
them in simulators instead of aircraft, what that means is they
are going to go fly an aircraft for a commercial airline, which
we are already having a hard time competing with. So, I would
just ask that you guys do that.
General Raymond, in short, I feel like we have left you out
today, and I think you are one of the most important--well, I
was a real proponent for creating you guys. What needs do you
have to make sure that our Space Force gives us the great
competitive advantage against our near-peer adversaries? What
can we do in Congress budgetwise to help you with that, General
Raymond?
General Raymond. I appreciate your support. I have
appreciated it for years. Thank you.
As I mentioned, we are trying to balance four priorities.
We have critical capabilities that fuel our American way of war
and our American way of life that are not easily defendable. We
have to make that shift. And so, as we come in with the
analysis that shows how we plan to do that, we are going to
need your support because it is critical to us. We have a
design that is purpose-built for a domain that we don't operate
in today, and we have got to make a shift and we have got to do
it quick.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
And my final point, I am an Army guy and I do not think we
need to divest in our Army platform, although I do think the
Air Force needs more right now and, also, the Navy.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
I am going to lay out the gavel order. Members are coming
and going for multiple reasons. On the Democratic side, Mr.
Gallego, Mr. Moulton, you are up. And then, on the Republican
side, we have Mr. DesJarlais, who has returned, followed by Mr.
Gallagher.
Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I refer and yield to my
good friend from Hawaii, who is going to let me stay at his
place a couple of times, for a question.
Mr. Kahele. Mahalo, Mr. Gallego.
And thank you so much for coming today to testify.
I am going to piggyback off of Mr. Kelly's question, as a
proud graduate of Columbus Air Force Base, to General Brown in
terms of the pilot shortage that you discuss in your testimony
and the inability to properly address that. You talk about
production and retention, and I want to focus on the production
piece.
What has the Air Force done, or is looking at, to address
that pilot shortage? We know for a fact the commercial airlines
are heavily recruiting our military pilots. There is a pilot
shortage in the commercial U.S. domestic airline fleet, and
they are going to continue to pull Air National Guard and
Reserves and Active Duty pilots from our forces. Are we looking
at other ways to raise the age for UPT [undergraduate pilot
training] candidates to increase more applicants to the United
States Air Force Academy, to recruit more from our ROTC
[Reserve Officers' Training Corps] campuses throughout the
country? What are we doing to address that pilot shortage, so
we have pilots to fly these aircraft in the future?
General Brown. Well, there are several initiatives that we
have ongoing that are tied to introducing young people to
aviation much earlier in high school, junior high school,
through junior ROTC, Civil Air Patrol, and summer programs, to
create that interest.
Once we have got their attention, part of that is also the
techniques we use in different initiatives, different from the
way I went to pilot training. And I recall when I went to pilot
training, if you were doing well and you were going too fast,
you sat down.
But, by being more individually focused and using some of
our virtual reality and other techniques to increase our
throughput, but at the same time looking to ensure we have the
right level of quality, and that is the thing I am proud of,
the quality of the young people that we are getting into our
Air Force.
On the retention side, it is not only the flying aspect,
but it is how we take care of our airmen and their families.
Because, often, it is not just the member who loves flying,
but, also, particularly, they have a family, to make sure their
spouse and their children have those resources. So, it is a
combination of things that we have to do as an Air Force, not
only produce, but also to retain that talent, not only in the
Air Force, but also in the total force.
Mr. Kahele. Are we seeing at the UPT bases across the
country, because of the pilot shortage, that we are not flying
or we are not teaching enough students? We are not flying
enough airplanes to sustain the four, five UPT bases that we
have? That is the appropriate level that we have right now for
training?
General Brown. What I would tell you is that, as I kind of
described, in fiscal year 2019, in the numbers we had in fiscal
year 2020, particularly during the height of COVID, we were
pretty much equal, and COVID actually had a slowdown a bit. And
as we come into fiscal year 2021 and continue, we are starting
to see our numbers increase.
I think we are on a good path, based on not only just the
production initiative we have today, but the additional
initiatives we have on Pilot Training Next, UPT 2.5. Also, with
our civilian sim instructor locality pay, it allows more of our
service members to actually get in the cockpit and fly a bit
more. While we have more sim instructors, we are not having
them doing the sim. So, we have several initiatives ongoing to
help increase our throughput to get to the 1,500 a year, which
is our goal.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Great.
The last question is for the Space Force. General Raymond,
the Maui Space Situational Awareness Lab over on Maui, a
critical facility, and they are looking at expanding the tech
park there, building a new facility that will support test
integration, prototyping for electrical optical sensors, and
remote control of those telescopes on Haleakala. Can you share
the status of the Maui Space Situational Awareness Lab?
General Raymond. Well, first of all, that is a very
important lab and a very important capability. One of the great
things, when we stood up the Space Force, we also have an
operational squadron on top of that mountain.
Mr. Kahele. Yes.
General Raymond. And they didn't talk to each other. And
now that we have put everybody under the Space Force, we have
consolidated and we are going to consolidate them in one unit.
So, we will be able to develop the technology and hand it over
to operators, and be able to generate capability much, much
quicker.
That facility that you are talking about is going through a
design review by the Army Corps of Engineers. I think they just
completed last November a 35 percent design review. There's an
environmental assessment going on as we speak that is supposed
to finalize this November, and then, we will have to secure
funding for it. It is currently unfunded.
Mr. Kahele. Okay. Thank you so much.
And I yield back. Mahalo.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Roth, in your posture statement, you indicate
that the Air Force is investing heavily in hypersonic weapon
systems, and I would like to focus on the testing and
evaluation of these systems and the infrastructure that
supports this testing. In order to field these weapon systems,
we need to test them and ensure that they actually work.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record the
Department of Air Force's 2021 assessment of the Air Force Test
Center.
Mr. Garamendi. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Dr. DesJarlais. Mr. Roth, in this report you indicate that
the current testing capability and capacity available is wholly
inadequate to accomplish National Defense Strategy required
hypersonic weapon testing to meet rapid acquisition timelines.
What are we doing to address this testing shortfall?
Mr. Roth. I will have to get back to you with a little more
details. But we work with our OSD partners as best we can to
try to keep up with the test and evaluation infrastructure. To
be honest, it is my experience we always lag by some amount of
money.
So, we need to get after it. In order to be able to test
the hypersonics, we need the capabilities to exercise them to
their maximum extent possible. So, we will look into that and I
will get you a more fulsome answer for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Dr. DesJarlais. Well, as you may know, my district is home
to the Arnold Engineering Development Complex, where most of
the testing takes place. I have seen the poor condition of
these facilities firsthand. And as I understand it, if some of
these facilities like 16S, 16T, or Tunnel 9 were to go offline
due to mechanical failure, we would see many of our most
important emerging weapon systems delayed, including the B-21,
NGI [Next Generation Interceptor], GBSD, and our hypersonic
systems. Are you personally concerned about the condition of
our aging and rundown testing infrastructure?
Mr. Roth. The short answer is yes.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Can you just put a fine point on how
important it is that we modernize these facilities in the
context of meeting the goals laid out in the National Defense
Strategy?
Mr. Roth. Again, I mean, if we are going to go to high-tech
capabilities, we are going to go to fifth-generation, sixth-
generation aircraft, hypersonics and the like, we need to be
able to test them.
Dr. DesJarlais. And, yes, I share your concern, obviously,
and the folks at Arnold have been sounding the alarms on this
issue for years now and are making best of an awful situation,
where they are understaffed and underresourced. I think they
are being failed.
A lot of people pay lip service to importance of fielding
hypersonic weapon systems as our top priority, and if that is
truly the case, then we need to invest in our testing
infrastructure to resolve this bottleneck and fortify our
critical testing facilities. I believe the Department of
Defense needs to be doing more and we on this committee need to
be doing more as well. I hope that we can continue this dialog
and that you can provide this committee with a path forward to
address these issues.
I will also be submitting some questions for the record on
FSRM [facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization]
funding at Arnold and look forward to your responses on that.
And for anyone who hasn't visited there, it is a gem. There
is really nothing like it in the United States, maybe a similar
facility in Europe, but it is almost a one-of-a-kind in this
country. And some of the architecture and facilities have been
working the same for 50-60 years. It is impressive to see how
almost archaic some of it looks in terms of the machinery and
how the wind tunnels work, but I think it is really essential
that we get these upgraded, because, again, everybody talks
hypersonic, hypersonic, but it all starts on the ground. If it
doesn't work on the ground, it isn't going to work in the air.
So, thanks for your attention to this matter, and I yield
back.
Mr. Roth. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
The gavel order on the Democratic side is Moulton,
Carbajal, Brown; on the Republican side, Gallagher, Bacon,
Cheney.
We now turn to Mr. Moulton. He is not here. Mr. Carbajal,
you are here.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Acting Secretary Roth and General Raymond, this committee
has engaged with the Department many times regarding the
development of a Space National Guard and Reserve Component.
Hundreds of guardsmen in California operate space missions for
the Air Force and the Army. In my district at Vandenberg Space
Force Base, there are two critical Cal [California] Guard
squadrons with space missions. From my understanding, Air Force
and Space Force leadership are in agreement on the path forward
on establishing a Space National Guard, but yet, no proposal
has been submitted to Congress yet. When do you intend to
submit the report required in the fiscal year 2021 NDAA and
send over the necessary legislative changes for the fiscal year
2022 NDAA?
Mr. Roth. I will start the answer, and General Raymond can
fill in some blanks as well. We are still working it with our
leadership and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and
ultimately, with the Office of Management and Budget as well.
So, it has been an active topic. We concur with you. We are
working it as best we can, and it is just a matter of trying to
get people's time focused on it. And as soon as we get some
clearance, if we get the clearance from the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, we would be forwarding it.
I don't know if, General Raymond, you want to----
General Raymond. We have been operating with the Guard for
25 years. It provides critical capability, both people-wise and
equipment-wise. We can't do our job without them today and we
can't do our job in the future without them.
So, what the law said when we stood up the Space Force was,
might you do it a better way that could even increase our
ability to use those capabilities? We have done the report. It
is complete. It is all through coordination. It is waiting for
a final briefing. Once approved, it will get submitted to OMB
[Office of Management and Budget] to get submitted to Congress.
I think we are very close to getting that submitted.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Raymond, I appreciate your leadership in developing
the ``range of the future'' plan to invest in our launch
capabilities. Can you provide additional insight into how the
fiscal year 2022 Space Force budget is supporting the ``range
of the future'' concept? What aspects of your plan will be the
most difficult to accomplish?
General Raymond. The range of the future is vital to us to
increase the transaction rates and get more things launched
into space. We are launching almost on a weekly basis, not
quite that, but the launch rates that we are seeing across our
Nation are high.
We have got to reduce the bureaucracy of the range. We have
to flatten the range. We have to make it more digital, and we
have got that funded and we have got the architecture agreed
to. And you are seeing that in throughput through the ranges
that is pretty remarkable. We are leading the world in launch,
and it is vital to us as we move forward.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. I appreciated your and Secretary
Roth's insight that you provided us up on our visit to Cape
Canaveral a few weeks ago. So, thank you very much for that.
General Raymond, to conclude, one of the major focuses of
the Space Force was ensuring that space systems can be
developed and acquired at the speed of innovation. What are
your perspectives on how to fix the space systems' unique
acquisition challenges?
General Raymond. Yes, we are working that really hard. We
have to go faster. We have to go faster, and that has been our
focus. With the help of this committee, we stood up a Space
Rapid Capabilities Office. They are just 2 years old, and they
are already delivering at speed.
In fact, the Space and Missile System Center has been re-
architected. I gave them a challenge less than a year ago to
build a space domain awareness capability and develop it in
tactical timelines and be responsive in its launch. In less
than a year, they have built the satellite. We have put it on a
shelf. We gave them a 21-day call-up, and they just launched it
successfully yesterday.
We have to drive unity of effort across the Department. We
have to reduce duplication. We have to reduce cost, and we have
to push authority down to the lower level to be able to move at
speed.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, General.
I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher is recognized.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
General Brown, do you share the assessment recently
expressed by Admiral Davidson about a potential PRC [People's
Republic of China] action against Taiwan within the next 6
years?
General Brown. I don't know if I would characterize it the
same way Admiral Davidson would. But I do believe that we are
at risk in the next 6 years, into the next decade, you know,
that PRC may have the capability. One of my goals, as the Air
Force Chief and as one of the Joint Chiefs, is to ensure we
have the capability to deter any type of action like that in
the next 6 years, and really for the long term as well.
Mr. Gallagher. Deterrence I think is the keyword there. So,
if you were to make the case in simple terms that this budget
advances us down the field in the direction of a deterrence-by-
denial posture, not by-punishment posture, in the Indo-Pacific,
what would you highlight as far as what we are doing in order
to deter by denial on a 5-year timeframe, not a two-decade
timeframe?
General Brown. One of the areas that particularly the PRC
looks at is how they use information, and for us, how we use
information as well. And this is the importance of an advanced
Federal management system to be able to move data, to drive
decision-making, so we can stay one step ahead of our
adversary. It is not normally what we do from a Department of
Defense aspect, but it is what we do as a nation to understand
the environment, the dynamics, and how we are able to use our
military capability to sow a bit of doubt into our adversaries.
So, the day they decide to do something, it is not going to be
that day, based on the capabilities we present and the
information we understand, and how we move and react, and
really more to be proactive in our approach.
Mr. Gallagher. In terms of, I mean, aircraft and sort of
physical kinetic things, I would be curious to--expand upon
that a little bit.
General Brown. Sure. Well, really, on the kinetic things,
for our weapons aspect, instead of investing in the preferred
weapons that we have been using for the past 5, 10, 15 years,
it is shifting that investment into different weapons
capability, hypersonics, JASSM [Joint Air to Surface Standoff
Missile], LRASM [Long Range Anti-Ship Missile], LRSO [Long
Range Stand Off Weapon] on the nuclear side; moving forward and
putting more RDT&E into those type of capabilities versus the
capabilities that we use today that will not be as effective in
the future.
Mr. Gallagher. I think LRASM is critical. Just quickly on
that, when do you anticipate the B-52 will be LRASM-capable?
General Brown. I don't have those specifics here in front
of me, but I will get those back to you.
Mr. Gallagher. So, how has the end of continuous bomber
presence in Guam impacted Air Force bomber presence in the
Indo-Pacific theater more broadly? Has it stayed flat? Has it
gone up? Has it gone down?
General Brown. It has provided options. And I will tell
you, I was the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command] air
component commander when that decision was made. And we now
have more flexibility with our bomber task force and our CONUS-
to-CONUS missions. And so, what we end up doing is about three
times a quarter we will do a bomber task force for anywhere
from 1 to 3 weeks at different locations across the Indo-
Pacific as well as three to four CONUS-to-CONUS missions
internal to INDOPACOM. That also provides flexibility for the
other combatant commands.
It also provides an opportunity to go to locations we don't
traditionally go to. For example, we had a bomber in India just
this year, the first time we have got a bomber in India since
World War II. It is aspects like that that provide us a bit
more flexibility as an Air Force. It also helps to increase our
readiness as an Air Force as well.
Mr. Gallagher. So, has bomber presence increased in other
combatant commands now that the assets are no longer tied to
Guam?
General Brown. It gives us more flexibility to be able to--
the way I would describe it is we have more flexibility to not
have all of our capability in just one location. Our
adversaries have to be thinking about the aspects that we can
move our capability anytime anywhere very quickly. And that is
one aspect that I am very proud of that the United States Air
Force provides.
Mr. Gallagher. Are there any basing and infrastructure
needs in INDOPACOM that are going unaddressed in this year's
budget?
General Brown. Well, from a MILCON [military construction]
perspective, there are some things that we--I would have to get
you some more details. But, just based on the look at how we
invest in infrastructure for weapons storage, for airfield
improvements as well, these are key areas that we want to
continue to work on to provide us options to be able to operate
in the Indo-Pacific.
Mr. Gallagher. I would love to follow up with you on that
and a couple of other questions. I remain preoccupied with what
I am now calling the ``Davidson window,'' and how we can plan
on that narrower time horizon, on that shorter time horizon,
rather than a two-decade time horizon. And so, I look forward
to working with you on that.
General Brown. Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Brown in recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for hosting
this important briefing. I wanted to thank Secretary Roth,
General Raymond, and General Brown for being here today.
There's been a lot of conversation around strategy and
structure and platforms and programs, I want to focus my
questions on the people, our airmen and guardians.
Secretary Roth, the fiscal year 2021 NDAA included many
provisions that promote greater diversity, equity, and
inclusion in the Department, in the services, and those
provisions enjoyed broad bipartisan support. So, I just wanted
to ask you the status of some of those provisions. One was that
we directed each military service to ensure that its promotion
boards represent the diversity of its force. So, can you share
with us how the Air Force has implemented that requirement, and
if it has not, what is the plan to do so?
Mr. Roth. Well, we have, in fact, taken the guidance from
both the authorization act and we actually had initiatives that
were ongoing before that to address exactly the kinds of
concerns that you are alluding to. So, first and foremost, let
me begin by, we took a diversity-inclusion task force and have
institutionalized it. Part of what the authorization act called
for was a senior advisor. And so, we now have an Office of
Diversity [and] Inclusion, and the head of that office is a
direct report to me, to the Secretary, as well.
We have also increased the training for everybody who is
involved in the process, everything from selection panels to
promotion panels, and the like, to ensure that folks are taking
a broader view in terms of how they address both promotions and
performance reviews, and this type of thing.
We have a Barrier Analysis Working Group that looks at the
kinds of things that might be barriers and any anomalies that
might be holding us back.
And what we are doing is taking a very data-driven approach
to these kinds of things. We are doing climate surveys. We have
something called DEOCS, the Defense Equal Opportunity Climate
Survey, and other like kinds of things, to give us some
information on exactly how we are doing and where the kinds of
issues and problems might be.
So, we are taking a hard look at climate. We are taking a
hard look at promotions, as you allude to. We are taking a hard
look at how we manage the force across the board.
Actually, in preparing for the hearing, there was the list
of all NDAA requirements, and for each one of those, we have an
initiative ongoing to implement them.
Mr. Brown. Well, I appreciate that, and I also do want to
commend the Air Force. I have not looked at the Space Force on
this issue, although since it is at the service level, the Air
Force is the service that covers both the Air Force and the
Space Force.
I commend you for establishing that office and appointing
the senior advisor.
The Air Force Inspector General found in its independent
racial disparity review that black airmen are 72 percent more
likely to receive Article 15 non-judicial punishment and are 57
percent more likely to be referred to court martial. And
moreover, it found that young black airmen are twice as likely
to be involuntarily discharged. It is not the inviting
environment, I think, that reflects our values and what we
should expect of the Air Force and Space Force, and I have said
the same thing to the Army, Navy, and the Marines. What is the
Air Force doing to address some of these racially disparate
treatments that we are seeing under the UCMJ [Uniform Code of
Military Justice] and administrative procedures?
Mr. Roth. Well, it is a point well-taken. We are familiar
with the data and the information that you outlined. We
actually have a command justice climate tool that we are using
to get after that, again, as part of our overall effort to have
a data-driven approach to this. So, it probably should have
been one of the areas I highlighted when I went through my
quick summary, but we are also taking a hard look at our
judicial and legal processes as well and trying to incorporate
to see where we need to change our approach to those.
Mr. Brown. Well, I appreciate that. I am actually glad you
didn't include it in the quick summary because, given what we
are seeing under the Uniform Code of Military Justice and
administrative procedures, I mean, black and brown airmen are
not being treated the way that they ought to be. So, I do
commend the Air Force for taking a look and certainly want to
see the movement in the metrics, in the numbers, to support
that you are committed to making some change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Bacon is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank Mr. Roth for being here, and it is
great to see General Brown and General Raymond, who I served
with in multiple assignments in various capacities. And you
guys are doing a great job.
I want to make a statement about passthrough funding, which
the Air Force is straddled with, and then, a couple of
questions.
First, on the passthrough funding, both services here have
vital missions. You have two to three legs of the nuclear
triad, strategic warning, air and space mobility, ISR, and most
importantly, the ability to hold any target on earth at risk
within hours or minutes. And this is why you exist.
The reason why this committee exists is to ensure that the
limited dollars the Nation invests in national defense are put
to the best possible use. This necessarily involves tough
decisions, relies on clear and transparent budget information
on where this money is going.
So, Mr. Chairman, I just want to note for my colleagues
that the fiscal year 2022 request states that the top-line
request for the Department of Air Force is $212 billion. What
DOD's budget does not reveal is that $39 billion of that, of
the Air Force top line, 18 percent, in fact, is not actually
controlled by the Department of the Air Force, which means it
neither implements nor advances the force design and
operational readiness needs of our Air and Space Forces. So,
when you subtract that non-blue amount from the Air Force top
line, the actual top line is closer to $173 billion.
So, I submit that this is a Cold War era passthrough
budgeting practice, and I think it distorts the public's
understanding of our defense investments in air, land, sea, and
space. I would guess that most members of the committee aren't
even aware of this budgeting practice. I just think it is
wrong. Now, more than at any time in our history, every defense
dollar must deliver maximum deterrent value, and for this
reason, we need to have absolute clarity and transparency.
So, last year, this committee and our colleagues in the
Senate both raised this passthrough budget processing as a
concern, and we tasked the Department of Defense to find a
better way. So the Department of Defense still owes the
committee an answer on how to clean this up, and we are still
waiting to hear how they plan to do it.
So, with that, my first question here is for General Brown.
The budget request seeks to retire the E-8 Joint STARS along
with some of the RQ-4s. Can you tell us how the Air Force plans
to ensure ISR requirements are met while retiring a significant
portion of the ISR fleet?
General Brown. I appreciate the question. And I would
really characterize it as a small portion of the ISR fleet as
we move forward, JSTARS and the RQ-4. What we require for the
future, not only for what we see today, but also require for
the future, is an ISR capability that is connected, persistent,
and survivable. Right now, I have something that is very
persistent, less connected, and less survivable. And so, for us
as an Air Force it is to be able to transition to that greater
capability we require in the future.
An important aspect of that is a dialog I have with the
combatant commanders, and I have talked to every single one of
the combatant commanders, before they testified, about where
the Air Force is headed and how we will actually do our best to
help mitigate an incredible demand signal for ISR from the
combatant commands and the capabilities the United States Air
Force provides, in concert really with the Space Force as well,
because the Department does the lion's share of the ISR for the
joint----
Mr. Bacon. Right. Going to the MQ-9 and a related question,
you are going to stop procurement on the MQ-9. With such a
large number of MQ-9s retiring each year due to reaching their
maximum flight hour limits, how does the Air Force plan to keep
this high-demand fleet viable until they can bridge to a new
capability?
General Brown. So, one aspect with the MQ-9 is it is,
again, a very popular platform, particularly in the uncontested
environment. Based on the previous budget cycles, we will still
have MQ-9s coming into our inventory into fiscal year 2025,
fiscal year 2024. So, we are not doing so much retirement. We
are really going to stop some level of procurement.
The other aspect is our transition to a future capability
as well, at the same time modernizing the remaining of the MQ-9
fleet with a multi-domain operation capability that will have
the MQ-9s well into the next decade, really to about 2035, or
so.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you.
I want to segue to electronic warfare for a moment, but I
only have about 40 seconds left. I appreciate General Brown's
comments that the Air Force has been asleep at the wheel for
about three or four decades in this area. For both the air and
the space side, do you plan on submitting an electromagnetic
spectrum operations strategy or implementation plan?
General Brown. Really, under the Department of the Air
Force, we actually have a strategy that was published in April,
and our implementation plan for both services will be published
here in the fall.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I think it is important we catch back
up with where the Chinese are at.
And I will just close with a comment, since we don't have
time for a question. I know how important Block 4 on the F-35
is. I hope you keep pressure on the JPO [Joint Program Office]
and the other committees to get this fielded on time, and how
much we need it.
Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Houlahan is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am assuming that I
can be heard.
And thank you, gentlemen, for joining us today.
I serve on the Military Personnel Subcommittee, where we
have been closely examining the allegations surrounding
substandard housing conditions in the privatized housing,
including infestations of rodents and exposure to mold, and the
impact that that consequence has to morale and readiness. So,
this is really personal to me because I was a military brat
myself. I moved constantly as a child and frequently lived in
military housing.
So, my question for Secretary Roth is, in your budget
material there are 12,000 units that are assessed to be in good
or fair condition, according to the Facility Condition Index.
And I would like to know what fair living conditions consist of
on a military installation. Are these housing units for the
enlisted or for officers, do you know? And have you done an
evaluation of who is experiencing more maintenance and more
poor housing conditions? So, how are you addressing this sort
of discrepancy?
Mr. Roth. Well, based on the findings and the discussions
we have had in the last couple of years, what we have done is
increased our focus on the quality of the housing that we have.
And so, in each base now, we, essentially, have a housing, you
know, a resident advocate or a housing advocate who reports to
the base commander in terms of the issues that would come up
with the members who live on base, and these kinds of things.
So, we are working on that. We have tried to increase our
focus on it. And working with the contractors, we have
implemented the Housing Bill of Rights. Out of the 18, I think,
elements, we have got 14 out of the 18 that are in effect, and
we are still working on negotiating with the contractors on the
last 3 or 4.
So, it has become a priority. The Air Force Materiel
Command, we are working with the major commands and the bases,
and have put renewed focus on that. And the short answer to
your question is we plan to get after it as best we can.
Ms. Houlahan. And, sir, there are more than 3,500 units
that are considered to be poor or failing in their assessment
of their condition. And so, my question is, do you know, are
there tenants who are asked to live in those poor or failing
conditions, or have they been moved? And if they have been
moved, where have they been relocated to?
Mr. Roth. Yes, I would have to get back to you on exactly
how many moved and all. I am not familiar with how many have
moved. So, we owe you that and we will get back to you with
more----
Ms. Houlahan. If it is okay, sir, I would love for you to
get back to us on that. And I will ask my next question, and
maybe we could have that information provided for the record
for the last one.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Ms. Houlahan. My next question, sir, is also for you, and
it has to do with STEM [science, technology, engineering, and
math] talent. Recruitment and retention of people is, of
course, one of your priorities, and finding ways to encourage
talent to remain in the Air Force is a high priority. During my
time in Congress, I have been advocating for investment in STEM
education and programming for children and young adults in my
community to make sure that we are meeting the demands of the
future workforce.
Secretary Roth, as the needs of the Air Force and Space
Force adapt to demand to new technical skills for recruits and
airmen and guardians, how does the budget reflect meeting the
needs for STEM recruitment from our high schools and colleges?
Have you been looking, as an example, into the ROTC applicants
from minority-serving institutions to address the lack of
diversity within STEM fields?
Mr. Roth. The short answer is yes. And in both services,
both Air and Space Force, we value the STEM. We want a digital-
savvy workforce in both areas. So, as an example, in the fiscal
year 2022 budget, we have $175 million for additional advanced
degree programs to try to encourage STEM graduates who might
have an interest in the Air Force. We have what we call a
Premier College Intern Program as well, where we also are
trying to frame a population that will serve us well. We have
intern programs like PALACE Acquire and COPPER CAP as well that
cross 20 career fields.
So, we are taking a focus on it. At the end of the day, we
want a digital-savvy workforce, both civilian and military. And
so, it is, in fact, a focus for us.
Ms. Houlahan. And that brings us to last year's NDAA, where
we were able, my office was able to get in the Armed Forces
Digital Advantage Act, which was included and established a
policy to recruit, retain, and promote tech talent. Can you
share what steps the Air Force and the Space Force have taken
since to develop policy on tech talent management that allows
us to recruit the right people for our workforce within the
Department?
Mr. Roth. Again, in general, I will have to give you more
details. But, in general, it has been an emphasis. It is
something that we value going forward. And so, we are taking a
hard look at all alternatives and all options we would have
along those lines.
Ms. Houlahan. I look forward to getting that in more detail
from you for the record. And I appreciate it.
And I yield back. Thank you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Mrs. Luria [presiding]. Thank you.
Ms. Cheney, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much.
Thank you to our witnesses.
First, I just wanted to clarify something I believe Mr.
Garamendi was concerned about or discussing, and that was the
timing of the pit production for the GBSD warheads. Dr. Vernon
has actually briefed the committee that the first pits for
these warheads are going to come out of Los Alamos. So, the
delays at Savannah River should, in fact, have no impact on the
production of warheads for the GBSD.
Further on the GBSD, I think this is probably one of the
most bipartisan systems that we have in the United States Air
Force today, approved by President Obama at the time when I
think, Secretary Roth, you were in the comptroller's office. It
was, then, fully funded by President Trump. Now President Biden
has requested $2.6 billion for this program in fiscal year
2022. So, it is a crucial program. Nice to see such bipartisan
support for it and for the funding, which I think will be
important for us to continue.
As we look at the alternative of some of the life extension
programs, when General Dawkins testified before the Strategic
Forces Subcommittee last week, he had a figure of $38 billion;
that basically, doing an additional life extension program on
the Minuteman III would cost the taxpayers $38 billion
additional dollars beyond the GBSD cost and, actually, produce
a much less capable system. So, I would like to ask both
Secretary Roth and General Brown if you have had a chance to
look at those figures and if you could comment on the extent to
which we are facing, in fact, the ability at much less cost to
the taxpayers, if we move forward on the development of the
GBSD.
Mr. Roth. Well, going all the way back to when the analysis
of alternatives was done back in 2014, every time we have
looked at the numbers and done the analysis coming forward, the
conclusion we have drawn is trying to do any kind of service
life extension program for the Minuteman III will be more
costly, will result in a missile that is not as capable, and
with a missile that would be more expensive to maintain.
To date, the GBSD has hit all its significant milestones.
It is using the most modern digital engineering processes and
procedures in order to go forward. It will have first flight,
if the program continues on its current trajectory, it will
have first flight around fiscal year 2024, and we will hit
initial operating capability in fiscal year 2029. It will be a
more capable, a more dependable, a safer, and more secure
missile.
So, our inclination is to continue with the GBSD program.
If we have to do a SLEP [service life extension program] for
the Minuteman III, we have to go back to square one. The
industrial base doesn't support that missile yet. It will
involve an enormous amount of redesign. And our sense is you
will get a less capable missile likely later than you would the
GBSD.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you.
General Brown, do you concur with those views?
General Brown. I do. I do. Secretary Roth hit all the key
points. I have nothing else to add.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you.
Can you advise, if we were to find ourselves in the
position where we had to go back and look at a SLEP, what do
you see on the horizon that would be the most likely factor to
cause us to have to do that? Would it be Congress refusing to
appropriate necessary funds at this point?
Mr. Roth. I don't know what the circumstances would be,
but, again, we think what that result--our responsibility--we
own two-thirds of the nuclear triad--our responsibility as a
force provider, and as to organize, train, and equip, is to
provide a safe, secure, and reliable nuclear deterrent. And
that is the path we are on. If others want to adjust that, then
we will have to have that discussion going forward. But our
sense is GBSD in this particular area is the best way forward.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much.
And I would just add, I think it is critically important
for us in Congress to make sure that we are fulfilling our
responsibilities and obligations, not to set us back, and make
sure that we continue to provide the funding necessary to move
forward in this timely fashion.
And I thank very much all the witnesses, and I yield back.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And, General Brown, I wanted to continue on our previous
conversation. I can understand why you would not want to just
come out and say that we need a smaller Army. But if we look at
the role of Congress and the Constitution, it is to raise and
support armies, and we currently have a very large All-
Volunteer Army which is a standing army. And so, in the current
situation we are in, and the constraints on the budget, with
the current split within the departments, it seems as though we
can only work around the edges as far as force structure is
concerned.
But I was referencing earlier the air-sea battle, and
basically, a plan for that. But no one had any objections to an
air-land battle, which we have used over the course of time in
preparing for the Cold War and the ground conflicts that we
have had over the last several decades.
It seems that that construct is just blind to the current
threat and the current environment we have today. And I would
say that I continue to feel that both the Air Force and the
Navy cannot be funded for the force structure they need and the
mission using that construct.
And so, I wanted to go back a little bit to the things you
mentioned before. You said that we do not have a continuous
bomber presence in the Pacific. Notably, we, obviously, have
ships present continuously in the Pacific. And I know that you
were the PACAF [Pacific Air Forces] commander before coming to
your current role.
I was wondering if you could comment a little bit on how we
got to not having that presence in the AOR [area of
responsibility].
General Brown. There were a combination of things that
drove that, and part of it was the readiness impacts we were
having on the bomber requirements, not only in the Indo-
Pacific, but also, particularly, in the United States Central
Command. In thinking about our bombers, it is not the
conventional capability we have, but it is also their nuclear
responsibility as well. And it was a balance between those that
drove the discussion on not having too much bomber presence.
Mrs. Luria. And so, this year, further reducing the bomber
fleet is going to further exacerbate that, I would gather?
General Brown. Not necessarily. And part of it, as we
looked at the B-1 fleet, in particular, there is an aspect of
having a number of bombers that have a mission-capable rate
that is much lower or having a smaller fleet of bombers, where
we put our energy and effort in our manpower against those to
make sure they are at a higher mission-capable rate.
Mrs. Luria. Okay.
General Brown. And we have seen improvements based on the
approaches we have taken.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you, and I would love to gather
more information in a different forum about that.
So, some things that I think of, when we think about the
Pacific, and we think about what strategy do we need if there
is a conflict in the Pacific, some things that are game-
changing are a standoff anti-ship cruise missile, like the
LRASM, and the ability for mine-laying from a distance, both
capabilities that we touched on earlier. So, it seems as though
those were not things that you highlighted in this year's
budget when I asked about them earlier. You did mention LRASM.
But, you know, those are game-changers in the Pacific. And we
say China is the focus of this budget and the efforts of the
service.
So, I just wanted to close out by saying that, you know,
not having a bomber presence there, not really leaning in on
these capabilities that will be game-changing in the Pacific, I
think that our adversaries, potential adversaries, need to know
that they are continuously targeted; that we have the resources
there and we have actual not only platforms, but weapons to do
that and put them at risk. I don't find that present in this
budget submission. It is not just that we can be there, that we
can send a bomber from CONUS and will be there soon, but they
need to know that there is a persistent threat and a persistent
presence. Can you comment on the ability of this budget to meet
that?
General Brown. There is a combination of things that are in
the budget that will provide us the capability beyond just
LRASM, and Quickstrike mining is focused on maritime. I am also
focused on the ability to provide advanced weapons like JASSM
and JASSM-ER [Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile-Extended
Range]. ARRW [Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon], which is our
hypersonic munition, and the Air Force is, I would say, leading
the way on hypersonic development. The other aspect is the B--
--
Mrs. Luria. Development? It is not a fielded weapon?
General Brown. It is not fielded yet. But we are leading
the way. And I will tell you, and when you look in competition,
our adversaries are actually doing hypersonic capability at a
faster rate than we are, which is why we have got to pick up
the pace in that.
The other is our B-21, not only from a nuclear aspect, but
also from a conventional aspect. So, it is a combination of
those capabilities that provide us, not just in the maritime,
but, as you talked about the air-sea battle, the combination of
the capabilities between the Air Force and the Navy to be able
to hold targets at risk, both in the maritime environment and
in other areas as well.
Mrs. Luria. So, just to clarify, these are not capabilities
that we currently have on hand or will have at full operational
capability within the next 5 to 6 years?
General Brown. For ARRW, I suspect here--I would have to
get you the exact, but, based on the testimony, I do see that
within the next 5 to 6 years we will have hypersonic
capability.
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Thank you. My time has expired, and I
yield back.
And I will call on Mr. Waltz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chair, and General Brown,
everyone, for coming today.
General Brown, I certainly appreciate your expertise as the
commander of Air Force Pacific, and understanding the geography
and the requirements there is critical. I think it is also
important that we continue to recognize, this committee
continues to recognize, that we have a need for close air
support for our special operations community that will remain
in 60 to 70 countries on any given day, that are there right
now as we speak. So, I appreciate your continuing the work of
your predecessor in General Goldfein and supporting the Armed
Overwatch Program and supporting Special Operations Command's
procurement of that program; the need for a platform that is
light, cheap, particularly as we are having a budget
conversation; rugged, and able to be colocated with those
special operators. And I think, credibly, it is useful to point
how much it helps you continue that shift of your fourth- and
fifth-gen fleet to where it rightly belongs, in great power
competition, by having this platform continue for special
operators.
I also want our colleagues to be aware that we just had a
third-party study. Thank you for your staff's support of the
RAND study that showed the A-10 to be 1,000 percent more costly
than an Armed Overwatch Program, the MQ-9 to be 200 percent
more costly. I just want to confirm for the record that you
still support SOCOM's procurement, which is in the President's
budget, of the Armed Overwatch Program.
General Brown. I do. As a matter of fact, I met with
General Clarke, the commander of the United States Special
Operations Command, just last week where we had a conversation
on Overwatch and where I also talked to him my commitment to
continue to support his development of----
Mr. Waltz. That is great. We still seem to be running into
some doubts in Congress, but we now have two Air Force Chiefs,
and the Special Operations Command commander named it as his
number one priority, and a third-party independent validation
of that program. So, hopefully, we can overcome that resistance
and get those special operators the armed overwatch that they
need.
Switching to ISR, has the Air Force, or have you, discussed
your ISR modernization plan with the combatant commanders? And
what was their feedback? What effect do you think your
proposals in divesting ISR capability will have on the
geographic combatant commanders?
General Brown. I have. As a matter of fact, I have taken
the opportunity to speak to each of the combatant commanders,
particularly those that are probably the most affected or have
the most interest in the IRS capabilities provided by the
United States Air Force. What I have articulated to them is
exactly what I have articulated to this committee, is we have
to make a transition to the future. And I understand that they
have requirements, but I will tell you their requirements well
outstrip the capacity of the United States Air Force and the
joint force as well. And so, what I have talked to them about
is how we together make a transition from where we are today to
make sure their successors, the combatant commanders that will
be here 5, 10, 15 years from now, have the capability that they
will require.
Mr. Waltz. I would just encourage you to keep a close eye
on it. We are the next terrorist attack, and I think, with the
withdrawal from Afghanistan, that could increasingly be likely
from that spotlight and those demands shifting right back in
that direction. Right now, we are preparing for, and hopefully
deterring, a future conflict, but that conflict we are still
in. I don't think Afghanistan is done with us, even though we
are pretending to be done with it.
And just in the interest of time, General Raymond, I just
want to talk to you very quickly about Tactically Responsive
Launch had a successful launch. I think it is incredibly
important that we have backup capabilities to Cape Canaveral,
to Vandenberg. I love Cape Canaveral; it is on the edge of my
district, but between hurricanes or some type of conflict, if
we lose that platform, we need alternatives.
My question, though, is it doesn't seem to be supported in
the budget. So, you are affirming that it is a need, but I am
looking at where the request is, and would certainly support
you in that request, but where is the disconnect?
General Raymond. It is very important to us. We have got
money and contract mechanisms with eight different small launch
providers. We used--we utilized one of those just a couple of
days ago for that responsive launch. We have money to modernize
our ranges, both at Vandenberg and at the Cape, the range of
the future. That is funded; that architecture is funded. We are
working on policies with the FAA [Federal Aviation
Administration] to reduce duplication of bureaucracy, which we
have done. And so, there is a whole litmus test or a whole
laundry list of things that we are doing. They didn't require
big budget items. It was just making it happen.
Mr. Waltz. Madam Chair, if I could just----
General Raymond, if you could give me a more fulsome
answer----
General Raymond. I will.
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. For the record of when we are going
to get--you know, the importance of it, but, then, when you
plan to push for funding.
General Raymond. Yes, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. I yield, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And I now recognize Mr. Moulton for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Let me start by just thanking my colleague and Future of
Defense Task Force member, Representative Waltz, for his
comments on making sure we are making smart investments in the
future. And when the study comes out and says that one platform
costs 1,000 times more than another, it certainly should raise
some eyebrows, but it should also provoke some different
decisions.
I think one of the best things, most important things, that
members of this committee--indeed, Members of Congress--can do
to support our national security and the future of our defense
is to be willing to make tough sacrifices when it comes to the
equities that we have in our parochial interests in our
districts. I will tell you that the largest employer in the
largest and toughest city I represent makes the new engines for
the A-10, but I am not afraid to sit here and say that we need
to get rid of Cold War era aircraft to make room for new ones.
Now just last week, we saw a Senator attack the Department's
request to retire 42 A-10s.
General Brown, tell me what can you do with this money?
What will you do with the dollars that you can save if you
retire these old aircraft?
General Brown. I appreciate the question. And as you
described, what we will be able, then, is be able to put that
money into future capability and really drive down all sorts of
standing costs. As was just mentioned, when it costs 1,000 or
200 percent more to operate, we are able to take that money and
that savings and put it into modernization; we put it into
sustainment, and will be able to put into manpower, to be able
to operate the new capability.
Mr. Moulton. And do the alternative systems that can
replace the A-10 have the same capabilities?
General Brown. By and large, they do. And I'll tell you
from my experience--not only as the INDOPACOM commander, but I
was also the air component commander for the second year of the
Defeat ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] campaign--when a
JDAM [Joint Direct Attack Munition] comes off an airplane, it
doesn't matter whether it is an A-10, a B-1, or a B-52; it is
still going to have the same impact. And it is those things
that we are able to do a bit differently and use all of our
capability, and to be able to be multi-roled, which is
important to me, not only as an Air Force officer and an air
component commander, but I also think for the joint force as
well.
Mr. Moulton. What is the risk of not retiring old legacy
systems to be willing to invest in new capabilities?
General Brown. I put it in really four categories, which I
have kind of already highlighted. It would be in modernization,
manpower, maintenance, and operational risk.
We need to be able to modernize to make sure we have the
capabilities against the future threats that we already foresee
that are coming our way, particularly with the People's
Republic of China.
From a manpower standpoint, many of those airmen that are
operating and maintaining the equipment we have today are the
same airmen that we are going to need to put on that modernized
equipment. And we have got to make a transition because they
don't get trained overnight to be able to bring on that
capability.
From a maintenance and sustainment piece, the longer we
hold onto older aircraft--and what we have seen is our aircraft
break more often; they take longer to fix, and it takes more
money to maintain them--that is also costing us.
And then, last, but not least, is operationally. It impacts
our readiness. It impacts and puts airmen and other joint
teammates and our allies and partners at risk when we have
substandard equipment, or substandard to the threat, their
capability. And then, most importantly, it puts some of our
national security objectives at risk as well.
Mr. Moulton. Well, yesterday, we heard from numerous
colleagues of mine on this committee how shameful it is that
our Navy fleet is so much older than the Chinese fleet. Well,
here we have an opportunity to modernize our aircraft, and I
think we should take it.
General Brown, hearing this from the Navy and the Marine
Corps as well, General Berger called for a hearing on
modernization, where we can discuss the risks and benefits of
freeing up resources from less relevant systems for future
modernization. Do you agree that such a hearing would be
useful, and if it is scheduled, would you agree to participate?
General Brown. I welcome the opportunity and I would be
very happy to fully participate in that.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you.
Someone is not muted, but I shall continue.
In your joint statement, you highlighted suicide prevention
as one of your top priorities for the airmen and guardians
within your service. I am personally very passionate about
mental health/suicide prevention in the military, and later
today, I am formally introducing the Brandon Act, which would
create a mechanism for service members to seek help about
suicidal ideation outside of their chain of command. I am under
no delusion that the Brandon Act will solve all the military's
problems regarding suicide, but it is a step in the right
direction and has a signoff from organizations like TAPS
[Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors], American Foundation
for Suicide Prevention, and others. We have received pushback
from DOD about the Brandon Act, but no alternative suggestions
have been put forward.
Will you give your support to measures like the Brandon Act
that provide a release valve in the worst-case scenarios?
General Brown. I will.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, General Brown.
I yield back.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
And, Mr. Johnson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Roth, it was great having you at Barksdale
recently to see firsthand the great work our airmen are doing
in northwest Louisiana. And as you are aware, the work done on
base is critically important to maintaining our national
security, especially as we continue our ongoing nuclear
modernization efforts.
As you know, one issue I am particularly interested in is
the ongoing struggle to construct the new entrance gate and the
access road at Barksdale. The State and local governments have
invested considerable amounts to construct the interchange that
will allow traffic to flow to the new gate from the
interstates. The point is that the State and local governments
have held strong to their end of the bargain and committed
millions of dollars to the project, based on assurances that
the Air Force will see the project through. To be frank, the
Air Force has fumbled the ball on this critical project.
First, the project was severely underbid, and then there
was an unwillingness to reprogram funds to solve that
shortfall. So, I certainly appreciate that the new gate was
listed on the Air Force's unfunded priority list for this
fiscal year; I am grateful for that. And I am going to work
with all my colleagues to make sure we get this squared away
once and for all.
But my question is, Mr. Roth, will the Air Force commit to
seeing this project through and to reaffirming to stakeholders
that they can trust, when the Air Force says it is going to do
something, that that promise will actually be kept?
Mr. Roth. Yes. I mean, we are committed to working with our
partners here to make sure that the project happens.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for that.
And on a different note, I was very pleased to see the line
item in the fiscal year 2022 budget request to construct our
Weapons Generation Facility at Barksdale. That has been a big
focus of mine and many in the Louisiana delegation for some
time now. Can you or General Brown comment on the strategic
value that a WGF at Barksdale will bring to our country and the
versatility that it will provide to the Air Force in ensuring
that we have a strong strategic deterrent?
General Brown. Sure. The Weapons Generation Facility will
actually make it much easier for our airmen to be responsive in
how we actually generate combat power, particularly from our
bomber bases and from our nuclear bases that support ICBM
[intercontinental ballistic missile] fields. And so, not only
for Barksdale, but for the other locations where we actually
build out Weapons Generation Facilities and modernize our
capability to match up with not only the technology and
platforms we are providing, but also to make sure it actually
works well to support us against whatever threats might come
our way.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you for that, General.
On the strategic importance of the aircraft itself, in the
past year we have seen B-52s from Barksdale and elsewhere
deployed all over the world, from Europe and the Middle East
over to the Indo-Pacific. And according to the Air Force, the
current B-52 engines will become unsustainable by 2030.
Secretary Roth, what is the Air Force doing to ensure the B-
52s' engines are replaced before that looming deadline?
Mr. Roth. We have an ongoing acquisition program to replace
the engines, and not only that, but we have actually put that
program on the new, modern, accelerated acquisition kind of a
process. We are using some of the authorities that we have
gotten over the last couple of years. And so, our estimate is,
using some of the so-called mid-tier acquisition authorities,
that we will be able to shave about 3 years off the acquisition
lead time in order to make that happen.
Mr. Johnson. We are very grateful for that prioritization.
And as you and I were walking beneath those big birds, the B-
52s, not long ago, I remarked about the engineering marvel.
That that will be a 100-year aircraft it is projected, that is
really amazing.
General Brown, in the limited time I have left, with the
limited availability of the B-1 and the B-2 bombers right now--
and the B-21 is still in development--what would be the impact
of a significant delay to the B-52 re-engining effort from an
operational perspective?
General Brown. It will actually decrease our operational
availability. And that is why going down the path of the
modernization in the engine as well, as you described, nearing
100 years old, it is important that we make the right efforts
to continue the modernization, so we have that operational
availability and the flexibility to provide air power anytime
anywhere in support of our combatant commanders.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I am out of time. I will yield back.
But I just thank you all for your service very much, and
thanks for your time today.
I yield back.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford, appears frozen. Do you want to test your
audio, Mr. Horsford?
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you hear me okay?
Mrs. Luria. Yes. Mr. Horsford, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much.
And thank you to our witnesses for testifying. General
Brown, thank you for being here today; General Roth, as well.
I wanted to start, first, regarding the MQ-9 Reaper. I was
disappointed to see that, for a second year in a row, the Air
Force is trying to end procurement of the MQ-9 in the fiscal
year 2022 Presidential budget request. As I am sure you know,
the MQ-9 plays a critical role in my district. Creech Air Force
Base is the central hub for global intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance operations, as well as hunter-killer
operations. The airmen of the 432nd Wing play an irreplaceable
role as the eyes and ears of our deployed commanders,
protecting our troops and interests 24/7 365 days.
Last year, despite the Air Force's attempt to, first
attempt, to end production, MQ-9 combat lines were the number
one unfunded priority for the U.S. Central Command. So, it is
with good reason that in the last NDAA Congress prevented the
Department from ending MQ-9 production, and instead procured an
additional 16 aircraft. This procurement was a positive step
towards meeting the needs of the joint force, but the demand
for MQ-9s by combatant commanders still far outweighs what the
Air Force can currently resource. Many of our combatant
commands have very little persistent surveillance capability
and are leasing contractor-owned, contractor-operated MQ-9A
combat lines to mitigate their ISR collection gap.
So, I am concerned that shutdown of the MQ-9A production
line or a reduction of the MQ-9 combat lines, with no fully
funded followup capability at scale, leaves the Nation's
warfighters to make do with an already insufficient number of
MQ-9As and poses a risk to the combatant command's ability to
conduct operations.
So, General Brown, is there currently a program of record
to replace the MQ-9?
General Brown. There are several programs of record that
actually, as we look at our ISR portfolio, that will not only--
I wouldn't say ``replace'' the MQ-9 because the MQ-9 will
actually be in the force into the middle of the next decade,
but it is the force mix of capability that is required that
includes the MQ-9, but other platforms. What likely we will be
able to do is come back to you in a classified briefing to
provide you some details on those other programs.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. And again, I understand the
constraints the Air Force is grappling with in this year's
budget. I further understand and support the bias the services
must have towards modernizing to win in the future operating
environment. And while I support any efforts the service may be
making towards the next-generation capability, we cannot
overlook the incredible value the MQ-9 platform provides to
commanders today. The MQ-9 is the most cost-effective platform
the Air Force owns. It flies 11 percent of the total Air Force
flying hours at only 2.6 percent of the Air Force's total
flying hour cost. So, no other aircraft provides this much
capability at this cost point--none.
So, this leads me to my second question, General Brown.
Would continued procurement of the MQ-9 at levels consistent
with the fiscal year 2021 NDAA place potential development of
next-generation unmanned capabilities at risk?
General Brown. I appreciate the question, but I would say
it would. And this is where, as the Air Force Chief of Staff,
and as I look to the future, it is how we balance between our
current capabilities to support today's requirements with the
MQ-9 that will be here until the middle of the next decade, but
also having capabilities so that we can actually still be able
to operate into the future. It provides ISR capability that is
not only persistent like the MQ-9, but it is connected, and
also survivable in what I expect potentially to be a highly
contested environment in the future.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, General Brown. And I look forward
to following up with you and working closely with the Air Force
to protect this vital capability.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Horsford.
Mr. Carl, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking Member
Rogers.
Gentlemen, I would like to talk about the KC-46. Although I
am a freshman to Congress here, I am not a freshman in the KC-
46 program. I was actually part of the team that put together
the package with Airbus to bring it into Mobile, Alabama, which
we do have it there now, Airbus USA. So I am very familiar. We
won the contract; we lost the contract; we won the contract; we
lost the contract.
So, here we sit 10 years later, we are 7 years behind
delivery on this project so far. Now we are being told it is
going to 2024 before it is ever delivered--2024 before it is
ever delivered. That is going to put it, roughly, another--it
is going to put it 10 years behind, roughly, not to mention all
the upcharges on the spare parts.
My question is to you, General Brown. Our fleet, our
fighters that are in Europe, do I understand it correctly that
we are refueling those in behind an Airbus tanker in Europe
right now?
General Brown. Actually, our fighters and aircraft all
across the world operate with their allies and partners. The
bulk of our air refueling is done by----
Mr. Carl. But we do have an Airbus that can refuel it?
General Brown. We do.
Mr. Carl. Okay.
General Brown. But we also have a number of other
capabilities, mostly the United States Air Force using the KC-
135 in Europe.
Mr. Carl. Okay, the KC-135. But we are paying right now for
a KC-46 being delivered, and it has got practically no use for
what it was actually being built for at this moment.
So, my next question is, Mr. Roth, knowing that we have got
an aircraft that can be built in America, that could have been
already delivered because we are up to about three a month
coming out of Mobile right now--not this particular plane, but,
basically, the same scale--why are we not bringing this back up
for a bid? We are 4 years down the road today, or 3 years down
the road today, according to Boeing's numbers, which could
easily change to another 3 years.
Why are we not looking at splitting this contract up? Where
is our sense of loyalty here? Are we more loyal to--and I don't
mean to put you on the spot, talk down to you this way, but the
taxpayers are paying for something we are not receiving. So, I
show no loyalty to what Boeing is doing to us here. So, my
question is, why are we not rebidding this and looking at it
again?
Mr. Roth. Again, as we discussed this morning, our sense
from both an operational and from a business management
perspective right now is to try to make the current contract
work as best we can. I take your point in terms of the history
of the contract, but we think we would be best served. We are
concerned that, if we try to go into a new contractual vehicle,
that that would put additional delays into the program that we
simply don't think would be efficacious for us. We are in a
mode of accepting the KC-46s. We are trying to rightsize the
tanker fleet by retiring older tankers while we bring the KC-46
in. I will take your point. We will look at it. But, right now,
our business sense is that we need to work with all our
stakeholders to make the KC-46 program work as best we can.
Mr. Carl. In all due respect, sir, I have been in business
for my entire life. If I had a contract with somebody and I was
4 years behind delivering or 10 years behind, I think they
would have a right to even ask for a discount. I brought that
up at one point, which everyone laughed at me on the discount
idea. But we are dealing with--yes, that is okay. I have had
several laugh at me about that.
But, please, let's take a look at this. It is not just
building the aircraft in Mobile. It is not just building the
aircraft with a company that is in my district. It is about
building an aircraft. I am worried about our Air Force and our
refueling possibilities of our aging aircraft. It is a huge
issue that I think we really need to push to the front of
profits of anybody--anybody.
And I respect you all's job. I respect you being here today
and I appreciate your service to this country.
And, General Raymond, I am sorry we don't hit you with
tough questions today. You get a free ride.
Okay. Well, thank you, and I return my time back. Thank
you.
Mrs. Luria. And thank you, Mr. Carl.
Mr. Franklin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
A number of my previous questions have been asked. So, I
have got one that may be a little unfair for you, but I want to
ask it anyway, just because it is something that I am curious
about as we get all these posture hearings.
But a lot of talk in both written and oral testimony about
the threat of China. We all know that. That is not just what we
are hearing here today. It has come from all the other services
as well. But I notice in the written testimony, and as we have
seen in all the other services, the talk of climate change. I
am curious, Secretary Roth, is there money allocated within
this current year budget for climate change programs or
anything that the Department of the Air Force or the Space
Command have any purview over?
Mr. Roth. There is money in our budget. For example, we
budgeted $68 million to, essentially, improve our installation
resilience, taking a look, for example, at power sources and
water sources, and see if there is some targeted investments we
can make to improve our resilience in that area. We also have,
as part of that $68 million, we will look at where our
cybersecurity vulnerabilities are on bases, and we also look to
see where we can make some improvements in our emergency
management procedures, and when something does happen, what are
some improved procedures and processes that we can put in
place. So, that is the only money I am aware of that is
explicitly targeted for climate change installation resilience.
I would also say, in terms of our operational requirements,
operational resilience is very important to us as well, and
particularly, aircraft engines. In the total DOD enterprise,
we, the Air Force, use about two-thirds of the fuel that is
spent by the entire DOD enterprise, largely driven, obviously,
by our airplanes. And so, to the extent that we can invest in
new technologies as we re-engine, for example, the B-52, or as
we look to the next-generation aircraft, if we can reduce the
fuel consumption by some significant percentage, that would be
an enormous readiness improvement because it would reduce our
logistics footprint, as we try to do agile basing and moving
people around as well. So, we also have some targeted
investments that predate some of this to look in terms of, can
we reduce our fuel usage and reduce our logistics footprint as
well?
Mr. Franklin. All right. Thank you.
It is just a concern to me that our Commander in Chief says
that the number one threat to the United States national
security is climate change, and yet, I am not hearing that
coming from the services. I am just glad to know that, even
though the top-line budget isn't what most of the services
would like, that you are not specifically feeling the haircut
on that with climate change initiatives. But thank you.
And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Green has rejoined us. Mr. Green, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Dr. Green. Thank you very much. I thank the chairman and,
of course, ranking member.
And I want to thank our witnesses for being here today.
The United States Air Force is clearly the best air force
in the world, and I think it is a combination of Congress
making sure that you have the resources that you need and great
predecessors and your work. To the generals who are here for us
today, General Brown, your work, your predecessors' work in
leading the institution of the United States Air Force to
greatness--I have deployed many times as an Army physician and
infantry officer with the support of the Air Force. And I must
tell you, when you talk about cutting A-10s, we Army guys get
really scared about that, but I understand.
I also want to thank you. I have listened in and out today,
because I have had to go back and forth between HASC [House
Armed Services Committee] and Foreign Affairs, to the comments
about China and the pacing threat, and I really appreciate the
recognition of that.
My first question is really about their increased activity
in Taiwanese airspace, you know, the invasions of Taiwan's
airspace. We built our military to deter first, and then, when
they can't deter, then fight and win the wars. Do you feel as
if this increase in Taiwan shows that perhaps our deterrent
effect with China has deteriorated or isn't where we need it to
be?
General Brown. What I would tell you is there is probably a
combination of the two, in the fact that, as you see, the
People's Liberation Army Air Force continue to increase its
capability and its operational tempo, which I saw as the PACAF
commander in watching how they were, actually, in some cases
based on world events or regional events, will increase their
tempo to put pressure on our partners in the region. We see
that with Taiwan. We saw that recently with Malaysia. And it is
a technique that has been used by the Chinese to put pressure
on us.
At the same time, though, I think the ability of the United
States Air Force with our joint partners, particularly being
able to operate in international areas to fly, sail, and
operate whenever international law allows, is an important
aspect to discredit the activity by the Chinese.
Dr. Green. Yes, the question is deterrence, of course, and
we want to make sure that that mission of deterrence is--that
you guys are excelling at that. So, I just want to make sure
you are properly resourced to do that, so that these kinds of
escalations don't occur, because that is where the danger is.
A quick question, and I know the point has been made
earlier, but, you know, if a cut in inflation-adjusted dollars,
you know, if you have a spending increase and it is less than
inflation, you have a real dollar decrease. And it looks like,
according to our analysis, you are going to wind up with, at
DOD at least, a $4 billion cut. I know that President Biden is
not a fiscal conservative. They are increasing the non-DOD non-
discretionary spending by 16 percent, significantly above
inflation. Yes, I have a real--you know, going back to that
question of deterrence, going back to this pacing threat, I
mean, are these cuts going to cause you an inability to do that
deterrence mission, and that, if deterrence fails?
General Brown. I will tell you it makes it more
challenging. And the aspect of not having adequate funding or
having an Air Force the size that is required to execute what
has been asked of us, does create additional challenges. And
this is why it is important for us to really do the right
analysis, wargaming, to lay out the best capability for the
best force mix for the United States Air Force in support of
our joint teammates and working, also, with the rest of the
other services, to ensure we have the capabilities to be able
to deter, as you describe.
Dr. Green. If I could get to that sensitive topic of the A-
10s, and I really just would love to hear assurance that, as we
downsize that force to make it more cost-effective from a
maintenance standpoint, we are still able--that close-air
support mission that we rely so much on the Air Force for and
the Army, I want to know that it is on your radar screen and
what your plans are to make sure that that mission is still
excelled.
General Brown. It is definitely still on our radar screen.
This is why the A-10s that we will have remaining--and they are
really the bulk of the A-10s that we will have remaining
because we are only reducing a small percentage--will still be
modernized. And that mission set for close air support is not
only with the A-10, but it is other capability that the United
States Air Force provides to do close air support as well. So,
it is definitely on our radar.
Dr. Green. Understand.
Thank you. Chairman, I yield.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Green.
Mr. Jackson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Rogers, for holding the hearing today.
I also want to thank Secretary Roth, General Brown, and
General Raymond for being here today. Thank you, sir. During my
brief tenure in Congress, I have met many people, more people
than I can count, from DOD. However, the Department of the Air
Force, including all three of you, have been phenomenal in
working with my team. And I want to tell you, thank you.
General Brown, you were the very first DOD senior leader to
reach out to me and introduce yourself, once I was elected, and
I really appreciate that. Thank you, sir. Your leadership has
set an example for the rest of the Air Force, as has the team
at Sheppard Air Force Base. They directly welcomed me with open
arms from the base, from base leadership all the way down to
the young airmen that I got to speak to when I was there just a
few weeks after being sworn in. So, thank you, sir, for that,
and the leadership there.
General Brown, I greatly appreciate your offer to come
visit Sheppard Air Force Base with me, I think to see the NATO
[North Atlantic Treaty Organization] jet pilot training program
on the base later this year. I look forward to seeing that
happen. My staff is going to work with your staff, and
hopefully, we can find a time and get that scheduled. Thank
you, sir.
My first question, the current child development center
[CDC] at Sheppard Air Force Base was constructed in 1973 as a
military detainment facility initially. Earlier this year,
Secretary Roth sent me a letter stating that Sheppard CDC was
going to be the number one priority for CDC MILCON [military
construction], and the Air Force. I have the letter here. Madam
Chair, I ask unanimous consent that this letter received from
Secretary Roth be entered into the record.
Mrs. Luria. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Roth. I greatly appreciate your
engagement. Thank you, sir.
I also appreciate the follow-through, as I was glad to see
full funding for the Sheppard CDC military construction project
in this year's budget request.
Mr. Roth, I just wanted to confirm that this is still a top
CDC MILCON project for the Air Force.
Mr. Roth. Yes, sir, the fact that it is in the budget I
think answers your question.
Dr. Jackson. Yes, sir. Thank you.
My second question, I want to shift to the CV-22 nacelle
improvement modifications. This work will increase overall
aircraft readiness and availability. It will reduce platform
operating lifecycle costs and mitigate the impacts to the
aircraft performance and survivability. These all sound like
critical improvements to me. So, we need to bring as much of
this work forward as we can.
Mr. Roth, could you explain to the committee exactly what
the CV-22 nacelle improvement program hopes to accomplish, and
does the Air Force support accelerating the CV-22 nacelle
improvement program?
Mr. Roth. Yes, to the best of my understanding. I had to
learn a little bit about this, but, yes, for this hearing, but
it is, in fact, a critical area for the CV-22, providing the
unique ability to fly vertically and horizontally. So, the
improvement effort, which is occurring at Bell's Amarillo
Assembly Center, will improve our readiness and it will reduce
our repair time associated with the nacelle. So, we structured
a contract to accommodate and accelerate its purchase, and if
additional funding becomes available, we will accelerate it
perhaps even further.
Dr. Jackson. Thank you, sir. The workforce at Bell in
Amarillo stands ready to complete that work.
The last thing I would like to talk about real quickly is
the Advanced Pilot Training Program and the new T-7A Red Hawk,
which will be replacing the aging T-38 fleet. Some of these T-
38s have been flown in my district over 50 years, and we have
seen too many of these aircraft with serious safety issues.
When I was reviewing the budget request for this year, I
noticed that funding for the Advanced Pilot Training Program
was decreased relative to what last year's Future Years Defense
Program had laid out.
General Brown, is this program that has seen a cut because
of the proposed overall budget decrease that is not in line
with the National Defense Strategy? And can you tell us what
has changed regarding the new request or requirement, and what
are the potential consequences of this decrease in funding?
General Brown. Well, the decrease in funding, particularly
on the T-7, was based on milestone C and some technical issues
that had that slide a bit to the right. Our focus and
commitment to the T-7 has not waned. We just want to make sure
the money aligns with where the program is.
Dr. Jackson. Yes, sir, well, I appreciate that. And I will
do my part on the committee here to try to make sure that we
meet our commitment there.
Thank you all for your responses. I am in favor of finding
ways to save money where we can, but investments in our Air
Force and our people are going to be critical to ensuring we
are able to compete and win on the global stage. I look forward
to working with each of you and my colleagues here on the
committee to address the pacing threats and the accelerating
threat that we face, and to provide our young men and women the
training and the resources they need to accomplish their
mission.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you, Mr. Jackson.
And I will now recognize our last member to ask questions.
Mr. Moore, thank you for your patience. And our witnesses as
well, thank you for staying to answer all of the members'
questions. Mr. Moore, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am last on the list,
but number one in our hearts, I think, right?
[Laughter.]
I am going to echo what Representative Jackson said. In my
6 months, the three of you stand out as being extremely
available and willing to be collaborative, as we solve
problems, as we work to celebrate wins, and interact. I view
our role as that from Congress with the Department of Defense.
And you three exemplify that. So, thank you for that time that
you have spent with our team.
I will be very plain here. The budget is inadequate. That
has been discussed. One thing that I was excited to see was
that the GBSD program is funded, fully funded, through fiscal
year 2022. As I have dug into this issue, I also keep it very
simple, in that nuclear deterrence has saved lives on this
globe; it has reduced conflict; it is a part, and should be a
part, of our strategy going forward. And if that is the case,
we must invest in it. It is very simple and very clear to me. I
get that there is a lot of complexity with it, and we are
willing to dig into those details, again, in that collaborative
way, but the data are clear and we have seen too much success
to let that go by the wayside. So, it is an area that we are
focused on. I will ask a couple of questions on that to
Secretary Roth.
Can you just share with us anything, in particular, as we
wrap up today's hearing? What is being done to ensure that that
stays on track?
Mr. Roth. Well, again, you and I had the opportunity to
visit the program offices on both the government side and on
the contractor's side. And what I walked away very impressed
with is on both sides they are using the most modern
techniques, the most modern digital engineering, the digital
trinity in terms of using open systems architecture, agile
software, using the digital engineering, and the like. So, so
far that has been working out extraordinarily well, and both
sides claim that they are committed to going forward. So,
they've hit every significant milestone to date, and that is a
good sign, early in the program to be sure, but they are
hitting every milestone so far.
And to your point, we take very seriously our piece of the
nuclear triad. We own two-thirds of the nuclear triad. This is
the ground portion of that. And so, it is in all of our
interest.
We have lost margin in terms of delaying this as long as we
have delayed it. So, we need to get on with it. If there is any
significant delay in the program, it increases risks
dramatically, and that is not what we want to do.
Mr. Moore. Okay.
Mr. Roth. So, it is incumbent now on the program managers
to keep the program on track, and I am very confident that we
have excellent leadership on both sides.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. And that was the next question: are
there any additional consequences by delaying it--some members
have suggested doing that--to allow for less pressure on the
Air Force budget? What would you see as any particular
consequences in delaying it?
Mr. Roth. Well, again, in a sense, you are where you are.
We have delayed making a decision on the Minuteman III and its
follow-on for a decade or more. And so, we have lost margin,
period. And so, if we want a safe, secure, and reliable nuclear
deterrent that is an ICBM, GBSD is it.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Thank you.
And, General Brown, every time I visit the Ogden Air
Logistics Complex, the depot work that is being done in my
district, I learn something new. There is a lot of discussion,
also, around the F-35, but I find it worth highlighting that
the F-35 has the best mission-capable rate of fighters in the
Air Force, and that has improved from 61 percent to 76 percent
between fiscal year 2019 and fiscal year 2020, an important
thing to note.
And my question, in a more broad sense, is I am proud of
the resiliency and the patriotism displayed through the
pandemic, and the fact that depots suffered little to no delay
in aircraft maintenance and contributed to the success,
building off of the great work from our air logistics
complexes. Can you provide an update on the Air Force organic
industrial base plan and what the Air Force is doing to invest
and improve in our depot facilities?
General Brown. Sure. It is part of the organic industrial
base masterplan. It is how we take a look at how we reduce
cost. And so, it is really a 20-year look to not only look at
how we keep up with what the capacities are required today,
catch up where we are behind and really leap forward.
Over the course of the past four budget cycles, we have put
about $2 billion into our three depots around the Air Force.
But the key part is now, how do we look to the future and kind
of lead up? And some of this is actually how we restructure
some of our depots, how we do robotic aspects of our depots, to
include like, for example, laser paint removal for some of our
fighters, and it is using the technology to help work that
process. At the same time, we have got an outstanding workforce
and they have done great work throughout the pandemic as well
to keep us on track.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Thank you.
And my time is up, but I would just like to also comment,
General Raymond, no one would care more about their guardians
and that workforce than you, and I see that exemplified. We
would love another chance to dig into some of the issues and
the developments that you would like to see there. So, sorry we
ran out of time.
General Raymond. No worries. Thank you.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you, Mr. Moore.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for your thoughtful
testimony and taking the time to present the budget to the
committee.
Just a few closing words as we wrap up. I just wanted to
say that I agree with Mr. Moore and his comments. I think that
the nuclear deterrent remains the cornerstone of our national
defense and appreciate the Air Force's role in maintaining that
critical deterrent for our Nation.
And secondly, just pivoting back to the comments that
Admiral Davidson made to the Senate earlier this year, I think
you heard many members reflect on the fact that we think there
is a sense of urgency and immediacy to making sure that we can
counter any threats in the Pacific today.
So, I will close there and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:01 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 16, 2021

=======================================================================

?

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 16, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.001

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.002

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.003

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.004

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.005

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.006

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.007

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.008

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.009

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.010

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.012

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.013

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.014

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.015

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.016

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.017

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.018

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.019

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.020

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.021

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.022

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.023

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.024

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.025

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.026

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.027

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.028

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.029

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.030

.eps?

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 16, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7821.031

.eps?

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 16, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN

Mr. Roth. The Department of the Air Force has programmed $42
million for environmental studies and surveys at potential sites for
modern, 6th-generation Over-The-Horizon Radars (OTHR) in Fiscal Year
2021 (FY21) and Fiscal Year 2022 (FY22). These environmental and site
surveys will further define the requirements and future for the Alaska
NWS radar sites. The Department of Defense (DOD) also recently
contracted for a feasibility study of communications architecture
improvements for these NWS radar sites, to include terrestrial
linkages. Currently, the site surveys are on-going.   [See page 16.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY DR. DesJARLAIS
Mr. Roth. Due to cost and the desire to prevent Service duplication
of efforts, the Department's OSD/Test Resource Management Center (TRMC)
is the lead for all hypersonic test infrastructure investment. Using
its hypersonic investment roadmap, OSD/TRMC is funding in FY22 a new
high temperature aeroshell materials test facility at Arnold
Engineering Development Complex (AEDC). This facility will address the
test capacity issue as cited in the 2021 AF Assessment of the Air Force
Flight Test Center.   [See page 33.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Mr. Roth. No families are living in poor or failing Department of
the Air Force housing units. Any units that are unfit for occupancy for
various reasons (pending demolition, pending renovation, pending
remediation, being used as model units, being used as storage
facilities) are offline and families are not assigned to these units.
[See page 42.]
Mr. Roth. We appreciate your support in helping us remain
competitive in recruiting and retaining tech talent. The recent
expanded direct hiring authorities in the FY21 NDAA have been very
helpful in improving our efforts. The DAF is investing in robust talent
management and dynamic modern, scalable training to attract, develop,
motivate, and retain qualified personnel to build a modern, innovative,
and agile cyber warfare workforce. Of note is the former SECAF's
Premier College Intern Program. This initiative focuses on hiring and
recruitment of summer interns with possible follow on employment and
supplemental training into a DAF formal developmental program. The DAF
hires 500 PCIP positions each fiscal year in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), Cyber, Acquisition, Intelligence,
and other mission critical specialties. Additionally, the DAF has
established a Talent Acquisition Division to fill mission critical,
hard to fill positions. This division is successfully filling a large
variety of critical positions via virtual recruiting fairs. A recent
virtual event for the Air Force Life Cycle Center resulted in filling
all 77 vacancies targeted for hire. The Office of the Under Secretary
of Defense, Acquisition and Sustainment with support from the Defense
Digital Services recently submitted to Congress the ``Fiscal Year 2020
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) Section 230 (Policy on the
Talent Management of Digital Expertise and Software Professionals)
Strategy & Implementation Plan''. The DAF is currently waiting on
further policy guidance from DCPAS. A kick-off of the Section 230
Digital Talent Management Forum is planned in late July and members
from across DOD including the services have been invited. The United
States Space Force (USSF) is leveraging existing personnel hiring
authorities to tap directly into the digital labor workforce for
technical talent that can be strategically infused into our force
structure. To maximize our ability to attract digital talent USSF will
work to offer compensation and/or incentives tied to a person's
experience and/or technical competency, for both the military and
civilian workforce.   [See page 42.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
General Raymond. Regarding Tactically Responsive Launch, the US
launch industry is the envy of the world and the Department of Defense
is in step with our industry. The US Space Force has a dedicated office
for enhanced coordination with emerging launch providers, and we are
actively pairing research and development satellite requirements with
cutting edge domestic launch technology--some of which may utilize
responsive launch opportunities. The USSF currently has eight small
launch providers on contract through our existing contracts (Small
Rocket Program-Orbital and Orbital Services Program-4), and the plan is
to on-ramp new qualified vendors every year to continue to leverage
industry innovation. This procurement line (PE RSPL00--PSF--P-18) has
historically budgeted for launch services every other year and the USSF
intends to increase this cadence to annual launch services. Regarding
ranges, the Department of Defense continues to evaluate the space
architectures and their supporting capabilities to meet warfighting
requirements. A 2019 RAND study, Assessing U.S. Space Launch Locations
to Support the National Security Space Launch Program, found there are
sufficient capacities at the Eastern and Western Ranges, as measured by
the annual launch rates supported by the ranges, to meet current and
forecasted demand by National Security Space, civil, and commercial
customers. RAND also found risks from natural hazards are manageable,
and a limited proliferation of spaceports is unlikely to enhance
resilience to manmade threats. Their recommendation, which we support,
is to ensure adequate funding for Eastern and Western Ranges (see PE
1203182SF--RDT&E, SF--R-41 and Budget Line SPRNGE--Procurement, SF--P-
21) and to leverage the capabilities of commercial and state-owned
spaceports for DOD and NRO missions where launch requirements match the
Spaceports' capabilities.   [See page 47.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. LURIA
General Brown. In FY22 the Air Force plans to procure 525 JASSM
(Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile), which includes 280x AGM-158B,
210x AGM-158B2, and 35x AGM-158D. While I cannot talk to numbers of
bombers in the Western Pacific and their load-outs in an unclassified
setting, I would like to offer you a classified briefing as a follow
up. We can cover USAF capabilities supporting USINDOPACOM in further
detail. NAVSEA would be the most appropriate source to answer questions
on quickstrike mines, and that conversation may require higher
classification levels.   [See page 20.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Roth. The Department of the Air Force is aware that Redstone
Arsenal is on the EPA's National Priorities List as a Superfund site.
Initial analysis indicates that the Superfund site does not impact the
site chosen as the preferred location for the U.S. Space Command
Headquarters (USSPACECOM HQ). The Department is currently in the
process of conducting an analysis in compliance with the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and the final decision for the
USSPACECOM HQ will be informed by the NEPA-compliant analysis and
documentation.   [See page 22.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Mr. Roth. Yes. Boeing proposed the Honeywell Navigational Light
(HNL) for the KC-46 Japan Spares contract at a unit price more than
1500% above the previous unit price. Boeing's specific price
information is proprietary information protected from release. The Air
Force could not make a fair and reasonable price determination on
approximately 12% of Boeing's total proposed contract price due to the
lack of information from Boeing to support cost or price analysis
related to commercial spares. However, Boeing's total proposed price
did not exceed the Letter of Offer and Acceptance amount agreed to by
Japan for this requirement. After nearly 18 months of requests for
information to support negotiations, all Government actions failed to
elicit the requested information from Boeing. Therefore, Major General
Cameron Holt, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Contracting within the
Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition,
Technology & Logistics) and the Air Force Head of the Contracting
Activity determined, in accordance with 10 U.S.C Section
2306a(d)(2)(A), that award of the contract was in the best interest of
the Government given the unsuccessful efforts made to secure adequate
pricing information, the Government of Japan's need for the spares, and
the increased costs and harm to the United States Government if the
award was not made. The KC-46 program is planning to procure spare
parts through competitive contract.   [See page 25.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI
General Brown. There is no impact to GBSD fielding based on the
current W87-1 development and fielding plan. The W87-0, currently
deployed on Minuteman III, will be the initial warhead deployed on
GBSD. The W87-1, which the Department of Energy's National Nuclear
Security Administration (DOE/NNSA) is scheduled to deliver its first
production unit warhead in 2030, will be the second warhead deployed on
GBSD. Program management for GBSD and W87-1 is tightly coupled to
ensure these two systems meet their own individual program requirements
as well as U.S. national security goals and objectives. A key element
supporting warhead development is the DOE/NNSA pit production strategy.
Production of new pits to support the W87-1 will come from Los Alamos
National Laboratory. The first W87-1 pit will be produced in 2023,
seven years ahead of the W87-1 first production unit date. NNSA is on
track to achieve a 30 plutonium pit per year production capacity at Los
Alamos National Laboratory by 2026.   [See page 27.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 16, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. Research and development of offensive and defensive
hypersonic weapons systems has skyrocketed over the last several years,
with the service aiming at delivery to the warfighter in early 2020s.
Ongoing development of these systems is critical if we are going to
maintain parity with China and Russia. Recently, there has been
increasing interest in reusable hypersonic flight as the next step of
development. These are traditional, though very fast, aircraft with
both military and commercial applications. Can you describe the current
direction of reusable high Mach and hypersonic flight development and
some of the lines of effort you plan to pursue over the next few years?
At current resourcing levels, when might we see first flight of a
reusable hypersonic flight system? How might an increase in budget
accelerate this timeline? And are there any particular lines of effort
where additional resources would be most impactful?
Mr. Roth. Reusable high-Mach systems are in early development for
commercial transportation by several aerospace companies. The
Department of Defense and NASA are conducting long-term science and
technology activities that are complementary with the industrial
developments. Reusable high-Mach systems have the potential to provide
the military with flexible on-demand strike, surveillance, and
targeting in highly contested environments, feeding the joint force
with critically needed information and promptly accessing targets in
defended areas and responsive space launch to rapidly reconstitute
critical space-based assets.
The Department of the Air Force (DAF) is working with the Office of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and NASA to
develop a national strategy for High Mach and Hypersonic Aircraft. The
strategy will leverage previous and ongoing investments in expendable
hypersonic weapons to develop the future technologies required for
reusable hypersonic flight. The DAF also plans to pursue technology
development in aerodynamics, propulsion, structures and power
generation that enable future expendable and reusable hypersonic multi-
mission platforms. For example, DAF is collaborating with DARPA and
NASA to develop turbine-based combined-cycle propulsion technologies
for hypersonic aircraft. The Department of Defense does not currently
have a program to field reusable hypersonic aircraft. Reusable
hypersonic aircraft could one day enable military ISR/strike,
commercial point-to-point transportation, and dual-use responsive space
launch. The Department of the Air Force is working with DOD and NASA
partners to develop a national strategy to determine the cost,
schedule, programs, and test and evaluation infrastructure to develop
and field a reusable hypersonic aircraft. Additional resources are
required for advanced technology development to mature technologies for
propulsion; materials and structures; advanced fuels, thermal
management, and power generation; and mission systems for ISR and
strike payloads. Additional prototyping resources would permit system
development, manufacturing, and flight tests. Additional test and
evaluation resources would modify existing test and evaluation
facilities or build new facilities to conduct large-scale aerodynamic,
propulsion and structures ground testing.
Mr. Turner. What is the state of our hypersonic testing
infrastructure? What additional investments are needed to ensure that
we can accommodate the testing needed across the spectrum--from
expendable weapons systems to reusable hypersonic aircraft? Many of the
technologies developed for expendable hypersonic weapons, like
materials and hypersonic test facilities, have crossover applicability
to reusable hypersonic flight. Others, like propulsion, require unique
development activities. In the near-term, what steps are being taken to
transfer expendable weapons program gains into reusable high Mach
flight programs? And what can this committee do to better support
continued research and testing progress on technologies unique to
reusable high Mach flight? Hypersonic Space Launch--Service leaders
have been discussing responsive space access for many years, looking to
rapidly reconstitute critical space based assets degraded by an
adversary in a conflict. Yet the primary challenge remains--we have a
limited number of rockets to launch from a limited number of sites.
Recently there has been increasing conversation in the public and
private sector about the utility of reusable hypersonic aircraft to act
as the first stage of a launch to low earth orbit. Can you discuss the
potential of reusable hypersonic aircraft based space launch and steps
you are taking to ensure research efforts are appropriately funded and
policy and regulatory issues are being addressed?
Mr. Roth. As reflected in the March 2021 Air Force's Assessment of
the Air Force Test Center, the hypersonic test capabilities are at max
capacity as well as in need of investment to meet emerging DOD
requirements. The most notable test capacity shortfall is the aeroshell
material testing area. The current hypersonic thermal test facility was
originally designed for limited capacity use. As the DOD's investment
lead for hypersonic test capabilities, OSD/Test Resource Management
Center (TRMC) will fund in FY22 a new aeroshell material test facility
at Arnold Engineering Development Complex (AEDC). The AF has provided
additional funding for facility sustainment, repair and modernization
for hypersonic test facilities at AEDC starting in FY22. The most
critical areas of hypersonic test infrastructure in need of
modernization or development are aeroshell material test capacity,
improved flight test capabilities, air breathing propulsion ground test
capability, hypersonic ground testing via the high speed test track,
end game lethality testing, seeker and sensor test capabilities when
exposed to hypersonic flow, and weather effects on hypersonic weapons
while flying through snow/rain/ice at hypersonic speeds. The OSD Test
Resource Management Center is the Department's hypersonic test
infrastructure investment lead and will be able to provide more
detailed responses on the aforementioned test capabilities needs. The
Department of the Air Force (DAF) is working with our DOD and NASA
partners to develop a national strategy for high Mach and hypersonic
aircraft. The strategy will leverage today's investments in expendable
weapons design, aerodynamics, gas turbine propulsion, scramjet
propulsion, endothermic fuels, high temperature materials, and high
temperature structures required for reusable hypersonic flight. DAF
also collaborates with DARPA and NASA in developing hypersonic
combined-cycle propulsion technologies for hypersonic flight that are
benefiting from past technology advancements in expendable, supersonic
turbine engines and hydrocarbon-fueled scramjets. The Committee can
enable continued research and testing progress on technologies unique
to reusable high Mach flight by supporting the President's Budget for
science and technology in key areas such as hypersonic propulsion; high
temperature materials and structures; advanced fuels, thermal
management, and power generation; and high speed mission systems.
Hypersonic aircraft can serve as the first stage of a two-stage-to-
orbit launch system to rapidly reconstitute critical space-based assets
by delivering up to 20,000 pounds of payload to low earth orbit.
The benefits of aircraft-based space launch systems include more
flexible basing, fail-safe launch abort capability, and improved
airspace integration. The Department of the Air Force is presently
working with OUSD(R&E) and NASA to develop a national strategy to
determine the cost, schedule, and test infrastructure to develop
Hypersonic Aircraft that provides aircraft-based, responsive space
launch capability by 2040. The Department of the Air Force currently
does not have a program for an aircraft-based responsive space launch
system, but will continue to assess the need and alternatives for
responsive space launch and will consider additional resources for
reusable hypersonic aircraft technology and system development in
future program reviews as appropriate.
Mr. Turner. Research and development of offensive and defensive
hypersonic weapons systems has skyrocketed over the last several years,
with the service aiming at delivery to the warfighter in early 2020s.
Ongoing development of these systems is critical if we are going to
maintain parity with China and Russia. Recently, there has been
increasing interest in reusable hypersonic flight as the next step of
development. These are traditional, though very fast, aircraft with
both military and commercial applications. Can you describe the current
direction of reusable high Mach and hypersonic flight development and
some of the lines of effort you plan to pursue over the next few years?
At current resourcing levels, when might we see first flight of a
reusable hypersonic flight system? How might an increase in budget
accelerate this timeline? And are there any particular lines of effort
where additional resources would be most impactful?
General Brown. Reusable high-Mach systems are in early development
for commercial transportation by several aerospace companies. The
Department of Defense and NASA are conducting long-term science and
technology activities that are complementary with the industrial
developments. Reusable high-Mach systems have the potential to provide
the military with flexible on-demand strike, surveillance, and
targeting in highly contested environments, feeding the joint force
with critically needed information and promptly accessing targets in
defended areas and responsive space launch to rapidly reconstitute
critical space-based assets.
The Department of the Air Force (DAF) is working with the Office of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and NASA to
develop a national strategy for High Mach and Hypersonic Aircraft. The
strategy will leverage previous and ongoing investments in expendable
hypersonic weapons to develop the future technologies required for
reusable hypersonic flight. The DAF also plans to pursue technology
development in aerodynamics, propulsion, structures and power
generation that enable future expendable and reusable hypersonic multi-
mission platforms. For example, DAF is collaborating with DARPA and
NASA to develop turbine-based combined-cycle propulsion technologies
for hypersonic aircraft. The Department of Defense does not currently
have a program to field a reusable hypersonic aircraft. Reusable
hypersonic aircraft could one day enable military ISR/strike,
commercial point-to-point transportation, and dual-use responsive space
launch. The DAF is working with DOD and NASA partners to develop a
national strategy to determine the cost, schedule, programs, and test
and evaluation infrastructure to develop and field a reusable
hypersonic aircraft. Additional resources are required for advanced
technology development to mature technologies for propulsion; materials
and structures; advanced fuels, thermal management, and power
generation; and mission systems for ISR and strike payloads. Additional
prototyping resources would permit system development, manufacturing,
and flight tests. Additional test and evaluation resources would modify
existing test and evaluation facilities or build new facilities to
conduct large-scale aerodynamic, propulsion and structures ground
testing.
Mr. Turner. What is the state of our hypersonic testing
infrastructure? What additional investments are needed to ensure that
we can accommodate the testing needed across the spectrum--from
expendable weapons systems to reusable hypersonic aircraft? Many of the
technologies developed for expendable hypersonic weapons, like
materials and hypersonic test facilities, have crossover applicability
to reusable hypersonic flight. Others, like propulsion, require unique
development activities. In the near-term, what steps are being taken to
transfer expendable weapons program gains into reusable high Mach
flight programs? And what can this committee do to better support
continued research and testing progress on technologies unique to
reusable high Mach flight? Hypersonic Space Launch--Service leaders
have been discussing responsive space access for many years, looking to
rapidly reconstitute critical space based assets degraded by an
adversary in a conflict. Yet the primary challenge remains--we have a
limited number of rockets to launch from a limited number of sites.
Recently there has been increasing conversation in the public and
private sector about the utility of reusable hypersonic aircraft to act
as the first stage of a launch to low earth orbit. Can you discuss the
potential of reusable hypersonic aircraft based space launch and steps
you are taking to ensure research efforts are appropriately funded and
policy and regulatory issues are being addressed?
General Brown. As reflected in the March 2021 Air Force's
Assessment of the Air Force Test Center, the hypersonic test
capabilities are at max capacity as well as in need of investment to
meet emerging DOD requirements. The most notable test capacity
shortfall is the aeroshell material testing area. The current
hypersonic thermal test facility was originally designed for limited
capacity use. As the DOD's investment lead for hypersonic test
capabilities, OSD/Test Resource Management Center (TRMC) will fund in
FY22 a new aeroshell material test facility at Arnold Engineering
Development Complex (AEDC). The AF has provided additional funding for
facility sustainment, repair and modernization for hypersonic test
facilities at AEDC starting in FY22. The most critical areas of
hypersonic test infrastructure in need of modernization or development
are aeroshell material test capacity, improved flight test
capabilities, air breathing propulsion ground test capability,
hypersonic ground testing via the high speed test track, end game
lethality testing, seeker and sensor test capabilities when exposed to
hypersonic flow, and weather effects on hypersonic weapons while flying
through snow/rain/ice at hypersonic speeds. The OSD Test Resource
Management Center is the Department's hypersonic test infrastructure
investment lead and will be able to provide more detailed responses on
the aforementioned test capabilities needs. The Department of the Air
Force (DAF) is working with our DOD and NASA partners to develop a
national strategy for high Mach and hypersonic aircraft. The strategy
will leverage today's investments in expendable weapons design,
aerodynamics, gas turbine propulsion, scramjet propulsion, endothermic
fuels, high temperature materials, and high temperature structures
required for reusable hypersonic flight. DAF also collaborates with
DARPA and NASA in developing hypersonic combined-cycle propulsion
technologies for hypersonic flight that are benefiting from past
technology advancements in expendable, supersonic turbine engines and
hydrocarbon-fueled scramjets. The Committee can enable continued
research and testing progress on technologies unique to reusable high
Mach flight by supporting the President's Budget for science and
technology in key areas such as hypersonic propulsion; high temperature
materials and structures; advanced fuels, thermal management, and power
generation; and high speed mission systems. Hypersonic aircraft can
serve as the first stage of a two-stage-to-orbit launch system to
rapidly reconstitute critical space-based assets by delivering up to
20,000 pounds of payload to low earth orbit.
The benefits of aircraft-based space launch systems include more
flexible basing, fail-safe launch abort capability, and improved
airspace integration. The DAF is presently working with OUSD(R&E) and
NASA to develop a national strategy to determine the cost, schedule,
and test infrastructure to develop Hypersonic Aircraft that provides
aircraft-based, responsive space launch capability by 2040. The
Department of the Air Force currently does not have a requirement for
an aircraft-based responsive space launch system, but will continue to
assess the need and alternatives for responsive space launch and will
consider additional resources for reusable hypersonic aircraft
technology and system development in future program reviews as
appropriate.
Mr. Turner. Research and development of offensive and defensive
hypersonic weapons systems has skyrocketed over the last several years,
with the service aiming at delivery to the warfighter in early 2020s.
Ongoing development of these systems is critical if we are going to
maintain parity with China and Russia. Recently, there has been
increasing interest in reusable hypersonic flight as the next step of
development. These are traditional, though very fast, aircraft with
both military and commercial applications. Can you describe the current
direction of reusable high Mach and hypersonic flight development and
some of the lines of effort you plan to pursue over the next few years?
At current resourcing levels, when might we see first flight of a
reusable hypersonic flight system? How might an increase in budget
accelerate this timeline? And are there any particular lines of effort
where additional resources would be most impactful?
General  Raymond. While the Department of Defense does not
currently have a requirement for reusable hypersonic aircraft, the
Department of the Air Force is doing early work with our DOD and NASA
partners to determine the projects, programs, and test and evaluation
infrastructure needed to develop and field a reusable hypersonic
aircraft. The resultant strategy will leverage today's investments in
expendable weapons design, aerodynamics, gas turbine propulsion,
scramjet propulsion, endothermic fuels, high temperature materials, and
high temperature structures required for reusable hypersonic flight.
Additionally, organizations such as AFWERX are pursuing advancements in
supersonic or hypersonic aircraft through the SBIR/STTR program.
Further, AFWERX and partner organizations are investigating teaming
with industry on supersonic or hypersonic transport technologies with
the resurgence in commercial interest, investment, and development. The
Department of Defense does not currently have a program to field a
reusable hypersonic aircraft. With our planning work just beginning, it
is too soon to reasonably predict a first flight date or how additional
funding might accelerate that date. Additional resources would be
impactful for advanced technology development to mature technologies
for propulsion; materials and structures; advanced fuels, thermal
management, and power generation; and mission systems for ISR and
strike payloads. Additional prototyping resources would permit system
development, manufacturing, and flight tests. Additional test and
evaluation resources would modify existing test and evaluation
facilities or build new facilities to conduct large-scale aerodynamic,
propulsion, and structures ground testing.
Mr. Turner. What is the state of our hypersonic testing
infrastructure? What additional investments are needed to ensure that
we can accommodate the testing needed across the spectrum--from
expendable weapons systems to reusable hypersonic aircraft? Many of the
technologies developed for expendable hypersonic weapons, like
materials and hypersonic test facilities, have crossover applicability
to reusable hypersonic flight. Others, like propulsion, require unique
development activities. In the near-term, what steps are being taken to
transfer expendable weapons program gains into reusable high Mach
flight programs? And what can this committee do to better support
continued research and testing progress on technologies unique to
reusable high Mach flight? Hypersonic Space Launch--Service leaders
have been discussing responsive space access for many years, looking to
rapidly reconstitute critical space based assets degraded by an
adversary in a conflict. Yet the primary challenge remains--we have a
limited number of rockets to launch from a limited number of sites.
Recently there has been increasing conversation in the public and
private sector about the utility of reusable hypersonic aircraft to act
as the first stage of a launch to low earth orbit. Can you discuss the
potential of reusable hypersonic aircraft based space launch and steps
you are taking to ensure research efforts are appropriately funded and
policy and regulatory issues are being addressed?
General  Raymond. As reflected in the March 2021 Air Force's
Assessment of the Air Force Test Center, the hypersonic test
capabilities are at max capacity as well as in need of investment to
meet emerging DOD requirements. The most notable test capacity
shortfall is the aeroshell material testing area. The current
hypersonic thermal test facility was originally designed for limited
capacity use. As the DOD's investment lead for hypersonic test
capabilities, OSD/Test Resource Management Center (TRMC) will fund in
FY22 a new aeroshell material test facility at Arnold Engineering
Development Complex (AEDC). The AF has provided additional funding for
facility sustainment, repair and modernization for hypersonic test
facilities at AEDC starting in FY22. The Department of the Air Force
can adequately test existing hypersonic prototypes, to include the Air
Force AGM-183A Air-launched Rapid Response Weapon (ARRW). Future
testing needs are being addressed through the Test Resource Management
Center's (TRMC's) strategic planning process. The TRMC process, in
coordination with the Services, allows the Department of Defense to
anticipate the increased demand for testing hypersonic systems and
prioritized $768 million (Fiscal Year 2021 President's Budget) to
address the most important hypersonic test infrastructure capability
and capacity needs. The Department of Defense is considering an
additional investment of $548 million to support the acceleration of
expendable hypersonic weapon systems. Investments under consideration
include increased capability and capacity at important ground test
facilities, airborne test instrumentation platforms to improve flight
test data collection, and additional long-range flight test corridors
to augment the existing Trans-Pacific corridor. The Department of the
Air Force (DAF) is working with our DOD and NASA partners to develop a
national strategy for high Mach and hypersonic aircraft. The strategy
will leverage today's investments in expendable weapons design,
aerodynamics, gas turbine propulsion, scramjet propulsion, endothermic
fuels, high temperature materials, and high temperature structures
required for reusable hypersonic flight. DAF also collaborates with
DARPA and NASA in developing hypersonic combined-cycle propulsion
technologies for hypersonic flight that are benefiting from past
technology advancements in expendable, supersonic turbine engines and
hydrocarbon-fueled scramjets. The Committee can enable continued
research and testing progress on technologies unique to reusable high
Mach flight by supporting the President's Budget for science and
technology in key areas such as hypersonic propulsion; high temperature
materials and structures; advanced fuels, thermal management, and power
generation; and high speed mission systems. The Department of the Air
Force is working with our DOD and NASA partners to develop a strategy
for high Mach and hypersonic aircraft that will provide technologies
for aircraft-based, responsive space launch by 2040. The primary
challenge to rapidly reconstituting critical space-based assets
degraded by an adversary remains the nation's limited number of rockets
to launch from a limited number of sites. A hypersonic aircraft can
serve as the first stage of a two-stage-to-orbit launch system to
deliver up to 20,000 pounds of payload to low earth orbit. The benefits
of aircraft-based space launch include more flexible basing, fail-safe
launch abort capability, and improved airspace integration.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. China and Russia have publicly announced that they've
entered into a MoU on establishing a lunar International Research
Station.
Although this was publicized as a scientific effort, some perceive
this as a thin veil for military corporation on the moon. What is the
Space Force doing to look ahead at potential military needs and
capabilities beyond our traditional orbits and near the lunar region?
General  Raymond. The United States Space Force's (USSF) mission is
organizing, training, and equipping the forces needed to support the
combatant commands and ensure unfettered access to, and use of, space
by the United States and its allies and partners. We are in discussions
with NASA, NRO and industry to determine the necessary communication,
Position Navigation and Timing, Space Domain Awareness, and logistics
required to support routine cis-lunar operations. We also continue to
uphold and support existing international treaties that encourage the
peaceful use of space for all nations. Further, we will continue to
collaborate with allies and partners to develop, uphold, and encourage
other nations to uphold commonly accepted standards of responsible
behavior in space, to improve safety and transparency for all space
activities.
Mr. Lamborn. In the Space Force's Unfunded Priority List, you
submitted a set of requests for an additional $431M to get after
`Developing a Warfighting Punch'.
If Congress does not fund this set of requirements, how will it
impact the service's ability to stay ahead of China and Russia's
advancements in Space?
General  Raymond. The 21st century space domain is, and will be a
more complex and dynamic environment than anything we've experienced
before. As China and Russia attempt to gain an advantage in space, we
need to invest in order to maintain our national advantage in space.

We need to model and simulate the enemy's scheme of
maneuver and emulate the possible effects those systems may have
against our force.

The Space Force needs an advanced technology
infrastructure that allows live and virtual training spanning vast
geographic distances that serve as a catalyst allowing our innovative
space professionals to develop cutting-edge tactics and validate
tactical procedures.

We also recognize we have a need to test and refine our
warfighting practices. A major space range expansion is needed to
transition the Space Test and Training Range from its Space Electronic
Warfare roots into a National Space Test and Training Range that
incorporates testing and training of advanced threat simulation
environments and delivers all-domain integration training for all
warfighters.

Additionally, the Space Force is investing in our human
capital by providing expanded educational opportunities for our
Guardians at all ranks to sharpen their technical acumen and also
broaden their strategic and operational apertures making them
invaluable assets throughout the Joint force. The combination of
advanced technical training, exercising, and education with our Joint
partners under realistic conditions preserves freedom of action,
intensifies joint lethality, and enhances our decision advantage during
a conflict.
Failure to provide the funds necessary to transform our force would
result in a 20th century force fighting a 21st century battle. We will
be ill-prepared to operate with the speed, agility, and ability to
integrate with the broader Joint force--all areas our enemies will
exploit by operating inside our decision space and outpacing our
ability to seize the initiative in a future fight. I have only skimmed
the surface of the exact nature of the specific technological
investments we seek and I am happy to come back and discuss those
efforts in a classified forum.
Mr. Lamborn. In your opening statement, you mentioned that the
Space Force is driving ``unity of effort'' across the department in
capability development. Can you tell us a little about how you're doing
that and how it's going, especially as it pertains to the force design
work the SWAC is doing?
General  Raymond. The Space Force is driving unity of effort across
the department in capability force design by performing integrated
analysis, integrating DOD space requirements, streamlining governance,
and consolidating across the space acquisitions enterprise for agility.
The Space Warfighting Analysis Center (SWAC) plays a foundational role
in leading analysis, modeling, wargaming, and experimentation across
the DOD to generate new concepts and force design options for the
Department. SWAC's coordination across the national security space
enterprise is key to achieving governmental unity of effort in building
a more resilient architecture. The JROC recently identified the Space
Force as the lead integrator for space requirements across the DOD. The
Space Force has established a Program Integration Council to facilitate
cooperation and deconfliction between National Security Space
enterprise stakeholders and ensure planning, alignment, execution,
delivery, and optimization of capabilities that inform the Space
Acquisition Executive and Council. In the summer of 2021, the Space
Force will establish the Space Systems Command to align the former
Space and Missile Systems Center, Space Rapid Capabilities Office, and
Space Development Agency (as of FY23), combining traditional
acquisition with disruptive approaches and non-traditional vendors.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Please provide details about the Department's
initiatives to counter extremism in the force and how these initiatives
are supported by the FY22 budget request.
Mr. Roth. The Department of the Air Force is taking a comprehensive
approach to addressing extremist behavior and ideology within the
force. We utilized the SecDef directed ``stand-down'' day to create a
dialogue with our members, not only making them aware of the threat
posed by extremist behavior and ideology, but also reinforcing our
values and principles as a military service. Subsequently, we
incorporated feedback from our personnel in developing future
initiatives. We are also conducting a thorough review in conjunction
with OSD and the other Services across multiple lines of effort to
include fostering greater transparency and accountability through
military justice and personnel policy, expanding screening capabilities
to better vet potential recruits for previous participation in
extremist activities, countering potential insider threats, and
education and training for the force as a whole. Further, we are
implementing focused training for our separating and retiring members
during our Transition Assistance Program to assist these members in
guarding against recruitment efforts by extremist organizations upon
their departure from the military. Thus far, all initiatives have been
executed within existing budget authority, as further initiatives are
developed and scoped, cost assessments will need to be factored into
the equation.
Ms. Speier. Despite having more than 70 Department of the Air Force
Child Development Centers (CDCs) listed as being in ``poor'' or
``failing'' condition as of June 2020, the Air Force's FY22 budget
request only included one CDC Military Construction project, while
another 4 were on the unfunded priorities list.
1. Given that the Air Force has, by far, the largest number of CDCs
in poor or worse condition, why has the Air Force not requested more
CDC MILCON projects in the budget and unfunded priorities list?
2. What is the Department's, plan, including a time horizon, to
improve all Child Development Centers to at least ``fair'' condition?
Mr. Roth. The Air Force updated its assessment of Child Development
Centers in the ``FY21 Adequate Childcare for Military Families
Report.'' This updated report used a far more accurate, commercially
accepted tool called BUILDER
TM
, which accounts for the
actual condition of facility components (e.g., plumbing; heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning; electrical; roofing; fire protection
systems) versus an imprecise aggregate dollar value of deferred
maintenance as contained in the FY20 report. The FY21 report
categorized 74 CDCs as ``Green'' [Good condition with routine
maintenance or minor repair], 144 CDCs as ``Amber'' [Acceptable
condition, requiring small system repair or replacement] and one CDC as
``Red'' [Poor condition, requiring major rehabilitation]. The single
``Red'' facility at Joint Base McGuire Dix Lakehurst will be repaired
in FY22 at $3.9M. As mentioned, the FY22 Budget Request does include
our most pressing CDC MILCON project at Sheppard AFB, TX. While several
installations nominated CDCs for the Air Force's MILCON program,
projects were prioritized against numerous other critical mission and
quality of life requirements and did not rise above the cut line for
funding in this year. First and foremost, all facilities being used by
our children are safe for their use--installations are empowered to
handle any immediate life-threatening, safety, or health-related
repairs. The DAF utilizes the Childcare Capacity Working Group to
identify priority projects for advocacy and inclusion in future MILCON
or Facility, Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization (FSRM)
programs to address issues with conditions and capacity of our child
care facilities. Currently the Department has 15 Child Development
Center (CDC) MILCON projects in planning with five (totaling $126M)
that will be ready to award in Fiscal Year 2022. Of the five FY22
projects, one (1) was included with the FY22 Presidents Budget and four
(4) are included in the FY22 Unfunded Priority List (UPL).
Additionally, the Department has 22 CDC FSRM projects at $93M ready to
execute in Fiscal Year 2022. The Air Force updated its assessment of
Child Development Centers in the ``FY21 Adequate Childcare for Military
Families Report.'' This updated report used a far more accurate,
commercially accepted tool called BUILDER
TM
, which accounts
for the actual condition of facility components (e.g., plumbing;
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; electrical; roofing; fire
protection systems) versus an imprecise aggregate dollar value of
deferred maintenance as contained in the FY20 report. The FY21 report
categorized 74 CDCs as ``Green'' [Good condition with routine
maintenance or minor repair], 144 CDCs as ``Amber'' [Acceptable
condition, requiring small system repair or replacement] and one CDC as
``Red'' [Poor condition, requiring major rehabilitation]. The single
``Red'' facility at Joint Base McGuire Dix Lakehurst will be repaired
in FY22 at $3.7M. This action will bring all CDCs to at least an
``Amber'' condition. We are committed to never expose children or CDC
workers to unsafe facilities.
Ms. Speier. How much of the Air Force's requested $7.7 million
increase to fight ``corrosives'' including sexual assault will be
directed to new initiatives, and what are the new initiatives?
Mr. Roth. The DAF requested approximately $7.7M to address areas of
greatest concern with sexual assault. We plan to use this funding to
modernize prevention education and skill building for Airmen,
Guardians, and DAF leaders at all levels. We intend to focus on
community-level prevention strategies unique to servicemembers'
environments using virtual platforms. This funding will allow us to
expand our Sexual Communication and Consent program, an innovative,
evidence-informed sexual assault prevention training that includes both
universal and tailored content to servicemembers outside of accessions
training. The DAF will also direct funds to strengthen the evaluation
methods of the effectiveness of our various sexual assault prevention
and victim assistance programs. We intend to identify and enhance
effective programs while eliminating programs with limited utility.
Finally, the DAF will use funds to improve access to advocacy services
and reduce lingering stigma around seeking help. We intend to boost
resiliency by building a ``No Wrong Door'' environment where all
helping agencies will work cohesively together to assist and direct
care for all Airmen and Guardians. The Air Force is actively pursuing
implementation of many of the recommendations of the Independent Review
Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military, including those related
to improved victim care and assistance.
Ms. Speier. How much of the Air Force's requested $7.7 million
increase to fight ``corrosives'' including sexual assault will be
directed to new initiatives, and what are the new initiatives?
General Brown. The Department of the Air Force (DAF) requested
approximately $7.7M to address areas of greatest concern with sexual
assault. We plan to use this funding to modernize prevention education
and skill building for Airmen, Guardians, and DAF leaders at all
levels. We intend to focus on community-level prevention strategies
unique to servicemembers' environments using virtual platforms. This
funding will allow us to expand our Sexual Communication and Consent
program, an innovative, evidence-informed sexual assault prevention
training that includes both universal and tailored content to
servicemembers outside of accessions training. The DAF will also direct
funds to strengthen the evaluation methods of the effectiveness of our
various sexual assault prevention and victim assistance programs. We
intend to identify and enhance effective programs while eliminating
programs with limited utility. Finally, the DAF will use funds to
improve access to advocacy services and reduce lingering stigma around
seeking help. We intend to boost resiliency by building a ``No Wrong
Door'' environment where all helping agencies will work cohesively
together to assist and direct care for all Airmen and Guardians. The
Air Force is actively pursuing implementation of many of the
recommendations of the Independent Review Commission on Sexual Assault
in the Military, including those related to improved victim care and
assistance.
Ms. Speier. When will the Air Force release the results of the
second racial disparity report that was announced in February?
Will the report be released in sufficient time to inform the use of
the $68 million increase for diversity programs requested in the FY22
budget?
General Brown. The second disparity review focused on race, ethnic,
and gender disparities was released on September 9th and the results
are in the process of being shared. The report is available to inform
the FY22 budget.
Ms. Speier. The Air Force is requesting to cut 77,000 flight hours
in the FY22 budget. How will this impact the experience and readiness
of pilots, and what is the Air Force doing to mitigate this risk?
General Brown. The Air Force has been forced to make difficult
tradeoffs in its FY22 budget request. These tradeoffs include the
necessity of taking measured risk in readiness to fight tonight as we
modernize the force to ensure preparedness for any future conflict with
our pacing threats. The reduction in flying hours in the FY22 budget
will impact our ability to train our pilots and there will be a
consequential impact to near-term readiness. One mitigation mechanism
we will pursue is the enhancement of both the live and synthetic flight
training environments through heavy investment in training
infrastructure. These improvements won't happen overnight but do
require FY22 investment and beyond to realize relevant capabilities and
offset recognized risk. The Air Force requires your assistance to
retire legacy aircraft that will no longer be relevant in a highly
contested future conflict. The increasing cost to maintain these
aircraft drains resources which not only impacts the sustainment of the
remaining fleet, but also significantly curtails our investment in the
development of a more capable future force.
Ms. Speier. Have there been any formal reviews by the Space Force
studying the use of the personnel flexibilities, such as direct officer
accession authorities, provided by Congress? What is the status of
these efforts?
General Raymond. The Space Force appreciates the personnel
flexibilities afforded by Congress, such as direct accession authority
and it is the Space Force's intent to maximize the use of those
existing authorities. We have reviewed the existing authorities and are
working with personnel experts across DOD to draft policy that
capitalizes on niche talent integral to building the Space Force and
maintaining superiority in Space. We conducted a review of our existing
civilian personnel hiring authorities and established a plan to
maximize their use. These flexible authorities help develop, retain and
reward our civilian workforce while enabling a more streamlined and
simplified civilian personnel system. This system will be agile enough
to build and sustain a Space Force that can successfully maintain
America's advantage in space.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY
Mr. Kelly. The Air Force can choose to replace the MFDs with a
modern, in production alternative which brings additional capabilities
to bear such as the large area display currently in the Air Force
inventory on the KC-46. Or, the Air Force can choose to pursue a custom
form fit function replacement that would only address reliability
concerns without providing additional capabilities or offer
developmental synergies with other in-inventory displays. Given that
the MFDs have been out of production for decades and there is no off
the shelf direct replacement available, it seems that both of these
paths would require fairly similar development efforts while only the
large area display would bring new capabilities for the warfighter. Has
the Air Force modelled the impact to readiness (mission capable rates)
that MFD obsolescence and MFD stockpile shortages will have over the
next 10 years? If so please share that data with the committee.
General Brown. The Air Force has not conducted studies, analyses or
assessments (to include modeling) on MFDs.
Mr. Kelly. When does the Air Force intend to begin a replacement
program for the Multifunction Displays and when would the USAF fleet be
fully retrofitted?
When does the Air Force intend to request funding from Congress to
begin this program? Is this included in the future years defense
program (FYDP)?
General Brown. The FY22 PB did not request funding for the
replacement Multifunction Displays (MFD). Any MFD funding requests will
have to be addressed in future budget submissions.
Mr. Kelly. Given that the Air Force intends to keep the C-17 in
service into the 2070s, I believe that it is absolutely critical to
take a long term, full lifecycle cost view of modernization efforts for
this aircraft. o Does the Air Force intend to consider the lifecycle
cost when deciding which MFD replacement path to pursue?
General Brown. The C-17 program office will consider lifecycle
costs when evaluating courses of action to address MFD obsolescence.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Ms. Houlahan. The Air Force has sought an increase in recruitment
funding which will support the Air Force in improving the tools they
use to effectively recruit, train and equip Airmen and attain accession
goals and diversity targets. Looking at your January 2021 numbers
though I am still dismayed at the current recruitment levels which
remain remarkably low for underrepresented minorities and women. Can
you please provide an update on your recent efforts to recruit and
retain a diverse force?
General Brown. The Department of the Air Force continues to align
our recruiting efforts to synergize and maximize diversity recruiting
effectiveness. The increased resources will be used as we continue to
develop and publish a data-informed outreach and recruiting campaign
plan and integrate our total force resources. Our efforts will lead to
an increase in under-represented students in the ``Qualified Candidate
Pool'' vice just increasing the diversity of the ``Applicant Pool.''
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MORELLE
Mr. Morelle. Secretary Roth, how does this budget request seek to
provide greater economic stability and predictability for the defense
industrial base and its suppliers? Are there further steps the Air
Force can take to tailor its strategy to maintain this network of
critical infrastructure?
Mr. Roth. The Department of the Air Force relies on a dynamic,
multi-layered, and complex global industrial base to reliably acquire
and support weapon systems. Our budget provides ability to keep
production lines running, and enables us to enter into long-term
contracts, ensuring stability and predictability for our industrial
base. We are mindful of the importance to sustain and grow competition
in our industrial base in partnership with the Cybersecurity &
Infrastructure Security Agency under the Defense Industrial Base
Sector. Through digital design and engineering approaches, there is a
chance to broaden the vendor base, and provide new industry entrants an
opportunity to deliver innovation and war winning capability. As you
may know, the AFWERX challenge aims to accelerate inventive solutions
from individuals, startups, small business, large enterprises,
academia, and research labs in the most collaborative way. We look
forward to staying in sync with the Committee as we adapt to access
this larger, innovation base.
Mr. Morelle. General Raymond, how does this budget request seek to
provide greater economic stability and predictability for the defense
industrial base and its suppliers? Are there further steps the Space
Force can take to tailor its strategy to maintain this network of
critical infrastructure?
General Raymond. Outpacing our adversaries requires a new level of
partnership between Congress, the industrial base, and the DOD to
preserve the strategic advantages our space capabilities afford while
still maintaining accountability and transparency to the American
public, and this budget request is a step in that direction. The
Department has taken steps to build the launch industrial base,
providing stability in National Security Space Launch procurement over
the next five years, and is increasingly working with smaller and non-
traditional companies through the use of Other Transaction Authorities,
such as the Space Enterprise Consortium (SpEC). SpEC is designed to
address the challenges associated with the increasing collaboration
with non-traditional suppliers--growing the defense industrial base and
achieving award timelines 40 percent faster than traditional
contracting methods.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. Since the efficacy of attritable aircraft depends on the
ability to produce them in affordably in high volumes, minimizing cost
for these systems is critical to creating a viable program of record.
How critical is it that we develop low-cost propulsion solutions
optimized for attritable vehicles? And can you describe the impact to
risk of operations 5th gen fighters in a future theater, such as the
Pacific, if we failed to field attritable sytsems due to affordability
issues?
Mr. Roth. Propulsion is a key cost driver for attritable aircraft.
The Department of the Air Force is working on limited-life engine
technologies, prioritizing cost optimization over performance. Overall,
the Department of the Air Force is pursuing digital designs, low-cost
manufacturing techniques, and modular open system architectures to
ensure these aircraft are produced at a price point that enables
sufficient mass to deter, and if necessary, defeat peer adversaries.
The Air Force is pursuing programs such as the manned-unmanned teaming
of attritable systems with fighter aircraft to provide an operational
benefit to the warfighter at a lower cost. While we do not have
specific analysis that compares risk to 5th Gen Fighter Operations
operating with or without attritable systems, our wargaming and
analysis indicates that attritable aircraft can be a force multiplier
in some of the most difficult scenarios we anticipate the Joint Force
may confront in a future operating environment that is highly
contested.
Mr. Moore. How does the Air Force plan to mitigate F-35 cost and
aircraft availability challenges if it continues down the path of
procuring less F-35As per year than originally planned for Full Rate
Production?
Mr. Roth. F-35 operating costs (as currently projected) and long-
term sustainment costs still require continued focus to maximize
affordability. Any approved Air Force reductions in annual F-35A
procurement rates are designed specifically to utilize offsets from
within the program to address cost, aircraft availability, and other
challenges to realize the fighter force design that the Air Force
requires.
Mr. Moore. Composites, especially carbon-fiber, have demonstrated
the capability of creating lighter, stronger and more cost-effective
solutions to USAF materials and manufacturing programs. Are there
research opportunities within AFRL Aerospace Vehicle Technologies to
create new warfare and sustainability solutions using advanced
materials? Are there constraints in funding opportunities?
Mr. Roth. AFRL is actively engaged in advanced materials discovery,
development, manufacturing, and sustainability technologies, including
composites, for air and space systems. AFRL efforts include
demonstration of advanced manufacturing techniques, such as braided
structures for aircraft fuselages, to reduce cost and improve
performance. The Department of the Air Force resources a robust
materials and manufacturing program, which is augmented by additional
congressional funding.
Mr. Moore. Are there composites entities that could execute a
composites research program which works with USAF and brings together
the industrial base, advanced manufacturers, universities and
government entities?
Mr. Roth. The Department of the Air Force actively engages
universities, commercial and defense industry, manufacturers, and other
government entities to further composite research and technology.
Mr. Moore. Since the efficacy of attritable aircraft depends on the
ability to produce them in affordably in high volumes, minimizing cost
for these systems is critical to creating a viable program of record.
How critical is it that we develop low-cost propulsion solutions
optimized for attritable vehicles? And can you describe the impact to
risk of operations 5th gen fighters in a future theater, such as the
Pacific, if we failed to field attritable sytsems due to affordability
issues?
General Brown. Propulsion is a key cost driver for attritable
aircraft. The Department of the Air Force is working on limited-life
engine technologies, prioritizing cost optimization over performance.
Overall, the Department of the Air Force is pursuing digital designs,
low-cost manufacturing techniques, and modular open system
architectures to ensure these aircraft are produced at a price point
that enables sufficient mass to deter, and if necessary, defeat peer
adversaries.
Mr. Moore. How does the Air Force plan to mitigate F-35 cost and
aircraft availability challenges if it continues down the path of
procuring less F-35As per year than originally planned for Full Rate
Production?
General Brown. F-35 operating costs (as currently projected) and
long-term sustainment costs still require continued focus to maximize
affordability. Any approved Air Force reductions in annual F-35A
procurement rates are designed specifically to utilize offsets from
within the program to address cost, aircraft availability, and other
challenges to realize the fighter force design that the Air Force
requires.
Mr. Moore. The Air Force has been procuring F-35s at a rate nearing
Full Rate Production for the past several years. Recently publicized
data showed F-35 as having the best ``Mission Capable'' rate out of all
Air Force fighter fleets in 2020. Despite these significant
achievements, the Air Force's FY22 budget proposes reducing F-35 annual
procurement below last year's appropriated level, while purchasing
additional 4th generation fighters that have not been produced at rates
for the Air Force in roughly 20-plus years. As the Air Force tries to
mitigate a fighter shortfall, how does this revised acquisition plan
not add additional risk? How does the Air Force plan to mitigate this
risk?
General Brown. The AF is committed to the F-35, particularly the
Block 4 version and beyond. This version of the F-35 will be the
cornerstone of our fighter fleet for decades, and we are anxious to get
the Block 4 into the fight. At the same time, the AF must also pursue a
mix of fighter capabilities (F-35, NGAD, F-15EX, and F-16) with
affordability, sustainability and availability in mind, in order to
support the joint force to fight and win across the range of military
operations.
Mr. Moore. Composites, especially carbon-fiber, have demonstrated
the capability of creating lighter, stronger and more cost-effective
solutions to USAF materials and manufacturing programs. Are there
research opportunities within AFRL Aerospace Vehicle Technologies to
create new warfare and sustainability solutions using advanced
materials? Are there constraints in funding opportunities?
General Brown. AFRL is actively engaged in advanced materials
discovery, development, manufacturing, and sustainability technologies,
including composites, for air and space systems. AFRL efforts include
demonstration of advanced manufacturing techniques, such as braided
structures for aircraft fuselages, to reduce cost and improve
performance. The Department of the Air Force resources a robust
materials and manufacturing program, which is augmented by additional
congressional funding.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
Mr. Fallon. 1. General Brown, do you believe there is systemic
racism in the United States Air Force? (a) General Brown in your
opinion, is the United States Air Force a meritocracy?
2. Please provide the number of Article 15s, court martials and
disciplinary separations for the last fiscal year that data is
available?
a. What was the reason for each Article 15, court martial or
disciplinary separation? b. What was the race of each individual in
question? c. What was the disciplinary history, if any, of the
individual(s) in question? d. How many Airmen/Guardians were separated,
in the last fiscal year data is available, due to extremist activity?
3. What is the racial makeup of the United States Air Force
(enlisted/officer/total) for the most recent fiscal year?
General Brown. No. However, there are individual acts of racism and
disparities in military discipline processes, personnel development,
and career opportunity that were highlighted in our Racial Disparity
Review conducted by the Air Force Inspector General and released in
December 2020. 123,000 Airmen and Guardians responded to the survey and
provided an additional 27,000 pages of free text responses. Later this
summer, the Inspector General will release a second review looking at
the experiences of women and other minorities in the Air Force. I
understand over 100,000 Airmen responded to this survey as well. The
number of responses by Airmen and Guardians on both surveys is
remarkable, but also instructive and indicates we still have work to
do. The Air Force is committed to creating and maintaining an
environment where all of our Airmen and Guardians can reach their full
potential. Key steps in doing so are the two Reviews that took the hard
look at ourselves and hearing the voices of our Airmen and Guardians
followed by taking action. With this in mind, we've put in place
several initiatives to ensure our Airmen and fellow Guardians have a
continued voice to highlight behaviors and barriers that run counter to
the diverse and inclusive organization we are charged to uphold. These
include, but are not limited to, the establishment of a Diversity &
Inclusion Office, Barrier Analysis at multiple levels, reviewing of our
talent management processes, and ongoing senior leader discussions
focused solely on progress in this realm.
I believe the Air Force promotes members based on talent, effort,
achievement, and potential. All of our Airmen, no matter their
background, want to have an opportunity to demonstrate their talent,
effort, achievement, and potential so they can be considered for
advancement in their respective careers. As we found in our Air Force
Inspector General led review, we have some disparities in personnel
development and career opportunity that require improvement. We are
continually evaluating processes that affect the development and career
opportunities for our Airmen, including our Recruiting/Outreach,
Accessions, Retention, Force Development/Promotions, and Organizational
Climate.
In fiscal year 2020, Air Force commanders imposed nonjudicial
punishment in 4,278 cases. In fiscal year 2020, the Air Force separated
1,929 Airmen for a ``misconduct'' basis (e.g., drug abuse, sexual
assault, minor disciplinary infractions, commission of a serious
offense, civilian conviction, etc.). Each court-martial and Article 15
stems from an alleged violation of one or more punitive articles of the
Uniform Code of Military Justice. Each involuntary separation can stem
from a number of different bases detailed in DAF instructions, to
include minor disciplinary infractions, a pattern of misconduct,
discreditable involvement with military or civilian authorities, or
commission of a serious civilian or military criminal offense.
Commanders have a duty to ensure good order and discipline and justice
within their units. As the Air Force implements the recommendations of
the Independent Review Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military and
the potential changes to the military justice system as required by
this year's NDAA, the Commander's duty for accountability in their
units is unchanged. The ultimate disposition of an allegation of
misconduct will continue to be based on a number of factors, to include
the seriousness of the alleged offense or offenses, the accused's
criminal history or lack thereof, the wishes of the victim, and the
probable consequences to the accused of a court-martial conviction,
among others considerations.
For Fiscal Year 2020, of the 351 airmen court-martialed, 204
identify as White, 88 identify as Black or African-American, 10
identify as Asian, 8 identify as Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander,
and 6 identify as American Indian or Alaskan Native. The 35 remaining
Airmen either declined to identify their race or listed as unknown. Of
the total, 165 Airmen identified their race as ``Other'' in addition to
one of the races already mentioned. For Fiscal Year 2020, of the 4,278
Airmen who received nonjudicial punishment, 2,564 identify as White,
1,245 identify as Black, 117 identify as Asian, 56 identify as Native
Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and 51 identify as American Indian or
Alaskan Native. The 193 remaining Airmen either declined to identify
their race or listed their race as unknown. Of the total, 227 Airmen
identified as two or more races. Commanders, with the counsel and
advice of servicing Staff Judge Advocates, make decisions regarding
appropriate discipline based on a number of considerations, to include
prior disciplinary history of the member in question, and the need for
progressive discipline of past offenders. Some forms of discipline,
such as nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, UCMJ, and court-
martial convictions, are maintained permanently in a member's personnel
record. Other lesser forms of discipline, such as administrative
reprimands or counseling, may be filed only temporarily in a member's
personnel record, or, depending on the nature of the discipline, not
included in the member's personnel record. Thus, the Air Force does not
maintain comprehensive disciplinary histories for each member apart
from records of court-martial, nonjudicial punishment and
administrative separation.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Mr. Horsford. I would like to better understand the Air Force's
sustainment and modernization plans for the A-10. Some of the A-10's
stationed at Nellis Air Force Base, in my district, are in need to new
wings. In FY21, the Air Force requested and Congress fully authorized
and appropriated $100M for the purchase of an additional 24 wing sets.
I understand the Air Force has so far only purchased 2 wing sets with
this funding and may be seeking a reprogramming for the balance. When
does the Air Force need to place additional wing set replacement orders
so that they can be bundled with the 2 wing sets purchased in December
2020 and thus achieve a lower cost to the taxpayer? Please also provide
a proposed basing structure for fleets of 239 and 218 aircraft.
General Brown. As of today, two wing sets have been purchased with
the $100M appropriated in FY21. An additional four wing sets will be
purchased in August 2021. These four wing sets will be used as spares.
With these purchases, the Air Force will have enough wings sets to re-
wing to the FY23 force structure Total Aircraft Inventory (TAI) of 218.
The remaining FY21 funds will cover wing install costs which begin in
3QFY22. At this time, the Air Force does not intend to reprogram money
out of this program. There are no other wing set purchases planned
beyond the four spares being procured in August 2021. If bundling of
additional wing purchases were to become a necessity, it would have to
be done in August of this year in order to potentially see a lower
cost. As proposed in the FY22 PB, the A-10 fleet will be reduced to 239
in FY22 and to 218 by FY23. The following outlines the planned basing
structure, assuming the Air Force's request is approved.
FY22--239 Total A-10s: Moody, GA (52); Davis-Monthan, AZ (49);
Osan, ROK (26); Tucson, AZ (2); Whiteman, MO (26); Fort Wayne, IN (21);
Gowen Field, ID (21); Selfridge, MI (21); Warfield, MD (21).
FY23--218 Total A-10s: Moody, GA (52); Davis-Monthan, AZ (49);
Osan, ROK (26); Tucson, AZ (2); Whiteman, MO (26); Gowen Field, ID
(21); Selfridge, MI (21); Warfield, MD (21).
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL
Ms. Sherrill. Currently about 86% of pilots are white males and
6.5% are women. Has the Air Force done any studies on whether there is
a culture or bias problem undermining pilot retention, and if so, what
are the results of these studies?
Mr. Roth. The Air Force has not commissioned any studies
specifically addressing bias and culture factors in pilot retention
decisions. However, pilot retention, to include potential culture or
bias problems impacting under-represented groups, is a focus area for
the Air Force. The Air Force has leveraged a body of work that includes
studies, advanced data analytics, and surveys to better understand all
the factors impacting the Quality of Life and Quality of Service for
our pilots. The most recent studies (e.g., RAND 2018) have focused on
Understanding Demographic Differences in Pilot Training Attrition. This
study coupled with additional advanced analysis has resulted in re-
assessing the Pilot Candidate Selection Model (PCSM). While it is
difficult to isolate specific factors impacting retention, the Air
Force is committed to improving retention and has implemented a number
of initiatives. Many of these initiatives stem from the Women's
Initiative Team, including addressing pilot height restrictions,
uniform limitations, and restrictions on flying during pregnancy that
had the potential to impact career progression.
Ms. Sherrill. Currently about 86% of pilots are white males and
6.5% are women, compared to 20% of the larger Air Force. This prompts
the question--if demographics of the pilot cadre matched that of the
broader USAF, do you believe there would still be a pilot shortage?
Given the history of aircraft design that favored male pilots, what is
the USAF doing to ensure that current and future investments in new
aircraft are designed from the ground and airframe up to include women
pilots from the outset?
General Brown. We assess the current shortfalls would exist
regardless of demographics. Current pilot manning levels are driven by
historic rates of underproduction of new pilots and low retention of
our current pilots. Underproduction is driven by unrealized divestiture
of weapon systems and low retention rates. These two factors taken
together determine our overall personnel health. We continue to have
strong interest from the nation's youth across demographics in becoming
an Air Force pilot. While it is a priority to increase awareness and
interest in aviation across all communities, doing so would not
necessarily address the current shortfalls. The USAF implemented design
guidance for pilot and air crew stations in 2020 that now requires
acquisition programs to use the body measurements and proportions of
the central 95% of male and female U.S. recruiting population as a
design basis. The USAF will conduct new studies on the U.S. recruiting
population beginning in late 2021 to refine this initial guidance and
incorporate the findings in new USAF instructions.
Ms. Sherrill. During an 8 June hearing of the Subcommittee on
Seapower and Projection Forces, Lt. Gen. Hinote emphasized the need for
novel logistical aircraft with vertical take-off and landing (VTOL)
capabilities. Do you similarly foresee a need to include VTOL
capabilities in fighter or bomber aircraft, particularly in light of
needing to disperse forces in a possible future conflict with China? If
so, how does this change your F-35 acquisition calculus?
General Brown. The Air Force will continue to evaluate the need for
VTOL capabilities as we develop the future force for peer competition
and conflict. The Agile Combat Employment concept of generating combat
power from multiple and dispersed locations may lead to requirements
for short-field and VTOL capabilities, but this analysis is on-going.
We will assess any impacts to other procurement priorities, including
the F-35, once that analysis is complete.

[all]
