[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 117-58]

DEPOT MODERNIZATION AND
OPTIMIZATION

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

OCTOBER 28, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-443                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JACKIE SPEIER, California            JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JASON CROW, Colorado                 AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan, Vice       JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
Chair                            MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington

Melanie Harris, Professional Staff Member
Whitney Verett, Professional Staff Member
Naajidah Khan, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     4

WITNESSES

Costello, Darlene, Acting Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Department of the
Air Force......................................................     6
Morani, Steven J., Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Sustainment, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense......     5
Saunders, Karen, Senior Official Performing the Duties of Acting
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics, and
Technology, Department of the Army.............................    10
Stefany, Frederick J., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Navy for
Research, Development, and Acquisition, Department of the Navy.     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Costello, Darlene............................................    47
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    35
Morani, Steven J.............................................    38
Saunders, Karen..............................................    65
Stefany, Frederick J.........................................    57

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Moore....................................................    73
Mr. Scott....................................................    73

DEPOT MODERNIZATION AND OPTIMIZATION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Thursday, October 28, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:03 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Garamendi
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. Cameras are on. Okay. The lawyers say we
have to do this, so here we go. First, some administrative and
technical notes. Members are reminded they must be visible on
screen within the software platform for the purposes of
identification. Members must continue to use the software
platform's video function while attending the hearing, unless
they experience connectivity issues or other technical problems
that render the member unable to fully participate on camera.
If you experience technical difficulties, good luck. Please
call. We will try to do the best we can for you.
When you are recognized, the video will be broadcast via
television and internet feeds. You will be recognized as normal
for questions. But if you want to speak at any other time, you
must seek permission, which I will decide whether you will get
it or not. Please mute your microphone when you are not
speaking and remember to unmute prior to speaking. That can be
said a thousand times and still we forget to unmute.
Please be aware that there is a slight lag between when you
start speaking and when the camera shot switches to you. Please
remember to keep the software platform's video function on for
the entirety of the time you are attending this hearing. If you
leave for a short period of time for reasons other than joining
a different proceeding, please leave your video function on. If
you are leaving to join a different proceeding, you are going
to miss all of this and be very, very sorry. Or if you will be
absent for a significant period of time, you should exit the
software platform entirely, then rejoin if you return.
Please be advised that I have designated committee member
staff, next to me, to mute unrecognized members' microphones if
necessary. And if I decide I don't like what you hear, you will
continue to be allowed to speak or maybe we will unmute you or
mute you.
Please use the platform's chat feature to communicate with
staff regarding--that was for you Doug. Please use the
platform's chat feature to communicate with staff regarding
technical or logistical support issues. Finally, you will see a
5-minute countdown clock on the software platform's display,
but if necessary, I will remind you.
Okay. Now, can we go on? Everybody hear that? Do we need a
test?
Now, for those of you that missed the President at the
Democratic Caucus this morning, you need to know that we are in
the midst of a very, very important national debate about
infrastructure. Well, so is this committee.
This committee is all about infrastructure--1,100 DOD
[Department of Defense] facilities all around the world are our
responsibility. Among those facilities are the repair shops,
the depots, the shipyards, the arsenals that keep the tanks
rolling, the ships at sea, and aircraft in the air, and the
munitions to wage war. The effectiveness and the efficiency of
these facilities are a critical piece to the United States
military's ability to successfully meet our national security
requirements.
We have heard this over and over repeatedly from the
Defense Department, from the generals--one-star, two-, three-,
four-stars--and chiefs and Secretaries. Really important.
However, we have also heard that these are national treasures.
They are the insurance policies for readiness. And, yet, a
supposed commitment to the depots is not translated into
action.
The organic industrial base [OIB] infrastructure is
chronically underfunded to the point that these facilities are
relics of the past. The crumbling World War II era depots are
outdated for today's missions, let alone the needs of the
future force or the surge requirements for a major conflict.
Indeed, some of the facilities [that] are currently being used
are on the National Historic Registry.
The problem is pervasive. The Government Accountability
Office found that more than half of all DOD industrial-based
facilities are in poor condition, including all four public
shipyards. This has resulted in the decline in the depot
performance since 2007, and significant delays returning weapon
systems to the field for operations and training. Moreover,
suboptimal facility configurations create an inefficient repair
process forcing maintainers to perform workarounds that further
increase the maintenance time and cost. The equipment at these
facilities is often in use more than a decade beyond its
intended service life, creating safety hazards and further
maintenance delays.
Finally, many of the depots are at a high risk of damage
from extreme weather and other environmental effects and have
not been upgraded to use clean and efficient energy sources.
For example, at the Marine Corps production plant in Albany,
Georgia, a shortage of paint booths resulted in vehicles,
actually, victims too, remaining unpainted and stored outside.
Oh, guess what? Now, they get rusty. And so we get to go all
one more time through the process. So the cost goes up.
At Corpus Christi, Texas, Army depot, engines need to be
moved across 5 miles of facilities during the repair process
because of the depot's highly inefficient work flow. Antiquated
manufacturing processes have caused deadly explosions at [the]
Army's ammunition plants. Attack submarines have recently sat
idle for years because of inadequate shipyard capacity, and
public shipyards are in such abysmal condition that the Navy
has estimated it will not be able to service the Ford-class
aircraft carriers or complete one-third of its required
maintenance availabilities between now and 2040. Shall I repeat
that?
We have got a problem. The military has a problem. This
committee perceives the problem, and we damn well intend to
solve it. So get ready.
In response to these conditions the Congress has required
the services to create detailed infrastructure optimization
plans in 2019 and layered on requirement in 2020 that the
Office of the Secretary of Defense develop an overarching depot
investment strategy. The service plans are mostly in their
initial stages, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense
report is, oh, my goodness, a year late. What a shock, but not
a surprise. The execution of these plans will take up to 25
years and cost billions of dollars.
I have told all the witnesses today there is no such thing
as a 25-year plan. That is a cheap way of saying you don't have
a plan. So we are going to be talking, specifically, about what
you are going to do in the next 5 years, and how does that fit
into the future.
So, let's remember that over such long-time horizons the
needed funding represents a fraction of the services' budgets,
even the most expensive. The Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Plan, or SIOP, would cost approximately one-half
of 1 percent of the Navy's current annual operating budget each
year.
The SIOP is also the most developed of the infrastructure
optimizational plans, which does not speak well for the other
departments. It is estimated that the Navy will need to spend
about $25 billion over 20 years to recapitalize the public
shipyards, $8 billion for dry-dock investment, $14 billion for
facility reconfiguration and optimization, and $3 billion for
tooling and equipment.
Yet, baffling, the Navy has recently stated that it cannot
fund most of the proposed facility optimization and capital
equipment upgrades in 2022 or over the next 5 years with
anticipated resources. This situation is emblematic of the very
problem that has gotten us into this point. The services claim
that the depots are critical, and the rehabilitation is of
paramount importance, and yet show me the money. The
sustainment and modernizations are consistently deprioritized,
and the situation is made worse.
I imagine this challenge is related to the discussion in
Congress about providing the Department with additional top-
line infrastructure money. Yet, such a resource play and others
like putting depot funding on the unfunded priority list sends
the message that the facility and the equipment optimization is
optional. In other words, not a first priority. When we keep
hearing that it is essential, it cannot be both absolutely
necessary and essential and then not prioritized on the funding
programs.
So, witnesses, you are going to be able to answer that
question. So we need rigorous, detailed, well-resourced
infrastructure optimization plans, and substantial leadership
attention to their execution to guarantee success. But we also
need more than a concerted rallying around a once-in-a-
generation upgrade to the depots. I cannot imagine any private
sector industry accepting a 20-year timeline to catch up to its
competitors. But, that is what the military is saying.
Now, let's get on with it. So how do we avoid this? Well,
this committee is going to pay attention. And we would expect
each of the departments and the Office of the Secretary to pay
attention. I am not one to be quiet. There are times when I am
not one to be nice. And I am kind of feeling to be in an ugly
mood today. But I am sure Doug is going to somehow calm me down
and tell me that this is all going to pass and not to worry, 20
years from now we will all be here. Doug, it is your turn.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 35.]

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I share very many
of your concerns. I want to thank our witnesses for being here
today for their testimony and their service. Our organic
industrial base is a vital and important part of our force
readiness and, ultimately, our national security.
Over the past several years, this committee has emphasized
the importance of modernizing our depots. Today marks the third
hearing we have held this year that will touch on the lack of
sufficient investments being made to the infrastructure,
equipment, and processes of the organic industrial base.
In 2019, the GAO [Government Accountability Office]
assessed that most facilities at the military depots are in
poor condition, and that the average age of equipment exceeded
its useful life at more than 70 percent of the depots. There is
a clear need, and yet the Department and the services have
failed in the past to prioritize developments. So here we are
again asking how you intend to modernize and what resources it
will require.
In 2019, Congress directed the service secretaries to
develop optimization and investment plans for the depots. Then
in section 359 of the fiscal year 2020 NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act], Congress directed the Secretary of Defense
to issue a comprehensive strategy for improving depot
infrastructure. This strategy was due in October 2020, but has
been delayed until October 2021. And as of today, it is the 26
of October, we don't have it.
Mr. Morani, in response to GAO's 2019 recommendation that
your office develop an approach for managing service depot
investments, you stated, it had could not--your office could
not develop such an approach until the plans were finalized. I
am interested to hear what you think your office's role is in
this process if it is not to help shape these plans.
The status of our organic infrastructure also impacts our
ability to attract and retain the quality workforce that we
need. If folks know they will be working in facilities that
haven't been updated in 50 years, that will make it hard to
compete against private industry.
Admittedly, Congress isn't blameless here either. Every
time we pass a continuing resolution, as we are in right now,
it makes it easier for you all to ask us to reprogram money
away from these accounts. Unfortunately, there aren't many easy
answers here, but I know the chairman and I and the entire
subcommittee are committed to working with you to ensure that
our organic industrial base has what it needs to continue to
support the mission and our men and women in uniform. With
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Lamborn, thank you.
I would like now to welcome and thank our witnesses. Steve
Morani, Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Sustainment
at the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense.
Ms. Karen Saunders, Senior Official Performing the Duties
of Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition,
Logistics, and Technology--and I understand you have another
job also.
Frederick Stefany, Acting Assistant Secretary of the Navy
for Research, Development, and Acquisition.
And Ms. Darlene Costello, Acting Assistant Secretary of the
Air Force for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics.
So your formal testimony will be in the record. Well, why
don't we hear from each of you, if you would like to make an
opening statement, please do. We will let the Secretary's
office begin the process. Mr. Morani.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN J. MORANI, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SUSTAINMENT, OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE

Mr. Morani. Thank you, sir. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking
Member Lamborn, distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the steps the
Department of Defense is taking to rejuvenate, modernize, and
optimize the organic industrial base. Your continued support
for this national resource safeguards the Department's ability
to deliver ready and mission-capable weapon systems at the
speed of war. The OIB is our network of maintenance depots----
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Morani, that little black thing near
your side, it is a microphone. Yeah. Pull it up close and
personal. Thank you.
Mr. Morani. Yes, sir. Our OIB network of maintenance
depots, shipyards, fleet readiness centers, air logistics
complexes, manufacturing arsenals, and software engineering
activities that perform depot-level maintenance. These
government-owned and government-operated industrial activities
provide core logistics capability to ensure military readiness
and serve as a shock absorber when the warfighter's operational
surge requirements demand an immediate and flexible response.
It is one of our most important strategic assets and has been
described as our Nation's readiness and war-sustaining
insurance policy. Simply put, the OIB must be ready always.
At present, the OIB continues to fully support warfighter
requirements, but also faces a number of challenges, including
the ongoing efforts of COVID-19, aging infrastructure and
equipment, workforce development and retention, supply chain
instability, and the need to balance sustainment requirements
of new and legacy systems.
The Department is taking action to address these
challenges, including ensuring measures are in place to protect
our workforce while also meeting production schedules that meet
warfighter material readiness requirements, investing $241
million in maintenance technologies through the Commercial
Technology for Maintenance Activities program, conducting
supply chain risk assessments, and issuing DOD-wide policies
for integrating novel capabilities, like Condition-Based
Maintenance Plus, additive manufacturing, robotics, and
intermittent fault detection.
We are also working to ensure a resilient and responsive
organic industrial base and posture it for long-term viability
and efficiency. To that end, we have developed a strategy
aligned to the requirements cited in the section 359 of NDAA
fiscal year 2020. This strategy, which is complemented by the
military's services' individual investment in infrastructure
optimization plans, has four main strategic areas: Revitalizing
the OIB infrastructure, improving equipment modernization of
the OIB, developing and supporting the OIB workforce, and
continuous assessment and reporting.
Focusing on these areas and continuously improving will
provide a future OIB that is safe and properly sized with
modernized facilities and equipment and supported by a highly
competent and innovative workforce. Each area also has metrics-
based goals that are specific, realistic, and measurable to
determine the success of and compliance with the strategy.
The Department will continue to ensure that industrial
facilities and infrastructure remain viable capabilities and
that workforce recruitment, development, and retention is a
robust and enduring process. These efforts will require
predictable and stable funding to succeed as well as support of
the military services' force structure plans. And I look
forward to working with the subcommittee on these key
priorities.
Thank you for your support and the opportunity to provide
you an update on the steps the Department is taking to
revitalize the OIB as well as your continued support of this
vital national strategic asset. I appreciate the critical role
and the role this committee plays to ensure the Department is
ready to face every challenge. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morani can be found in the
Appendix on page 38.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Ms. Costello.

STATEMENT OF DARLENE COSTELLO, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE FOR ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY, AND LOGISTICS,
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE

Ms. Costello. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
having us here today so that I and my peers can provide
testimony. I on the U.S. Air Force depot infrastructure
optimization. Additionally, thank you for your support of the
United States military and our organic industrial base.
As the Department of the Air Force continues work to
accelerate delivery of capabilities to the warfighter, we must
apply the same level of urgency to investment in the organic
industrial base and sustainment enterprise to ensure we are
ready to deter and defeat potential adversaries.
Our current aircraft inventory is becoming significantly
more expensive to sustain as it ages. Weapon systems
sustainment costs have increased 130 percent over the last 20
years, even with a 15 percent decrease in total aircraft
inventory. At an average age of 29 years, the Air Force fleet
is also the oldest in the Department of Defense. Despite this,
our exceptional workforce continues to develop innovative ways
to sustain legacy weapon systems using emerging technologies
and 21st century processes.
In fiscal year 2021, the Air Force Sustainment Center air
logistics complexes delivered 602 aircraft; 316 engines;
141,353 parts; and 611 software bundles to the warfighter. But
even with creative problem-solving, our sustainment challenges
are exacerbated by the aging infrastructure, a dwindling supply
and manufacturing base, and challenges recruiting highly
skilled technicians and science, technology, engineering, math
workforce to support the mission demands.
The U.S. Air Force relies upon a strong organic industrial
base to deliver air power in support of the National Defense
Strategy. As we shift towards fleets that include fifth-
generation and beyond capabilities, it is imperative that our
air logistics complexes, also known as depots, optimize
opportunities to stay ahead of future missions.
In 2019, the Air Force developed a 20-year strategic plan
to revitalize the depots' infrastructure to accommodate new
weapon systems and improve readiness at an affordable cost in
the 21st century and beyond. We continue to refine that plan,
better articulating projects, defining lines of effort, and
implementation strategies. Through our capital investment
program and new mission military construction, the Air Force
has invested more than $2 billion during the previous 4 fiscal
years to maintain and improve infrastructure and equipment
across our three depots. Our plan details essential dimensions,
including depot equipment and technology; digital depot, which
includes infrastructure and industrial software; facilities for
overhaul and final assembly; and repair/manufacturing nodes and
hidden infrastructure, including utilities and the
transportation grid. Investments in these dimensions are
critical to the Air Force's ability to support weapon systems
and retain industrial capabilities, and we are continuing to
make investments in modernizing and optimizing these
capabilities within current budget constraints, priorities, and
realities.
The Air Force strives for excellence through technology
insertion to improve networking capabilities and to demonstrate
our commitment to modernize our organic industrial base
infrastructure. To support a successful modernization, emerging
digital technology such as smart factories, data analytics,
robotics, and artifical intelligence are needed to achieve
results on par with industry standards and to eliminate waste.
Information technology improvements outlined in the organic
industrial base plan are based on the Air Force digital
campaign objectives, the digital strategy, and the industry
best practices, with the objective of building a connected and
resilient environment to facilitate maximum effectiveness of
people and processes. The Air Force will take maximum advantage
of initiatives such as 5G wireless technology, cloud storage,
movement from desktop computers to lightweight, faster devices
in order to virtualize the work and workforce.
People are the Air Force's most valuable resources. And we
are making every effort to strengthen and enhance our total
workforce. Our ability to meet warfighter needs hinges on
attracting, developing, and retaining world-class airmen. Our
depots rely on a large labor force of highly skilled
technicians and mechanics, and the Air Force Sustainment Center
works closely with local vocational training centers and
academia which surround our depots.
The use of direct hiring authority and expedited hiring
authority for the depots and associated support has allowed us
to better compete with industry to secure top talent and to
reduce hiring timelines. We appreciate your active role in
obtaining those critical authorities.
The Air Force must accelerate change to prepare for the
future and ensure we continue delivering global air power
superiority. Stable and predictable budgets are essential to
maintain and modernize critical logistics and sustainment
capabilities. The dialogue we have today will help us design,
build, operate, and sustain a force capable of fighting and
winning now and in the future.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before this
committee, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Costello can be found in the
Appendix on page 47.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Ms. Costello. Mr. Stefany.

STATEMENT OF FREDERICK J. STEFANY, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF THE NAVY FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND ACQUISITION,
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

Mr. Stefany. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am honored to
appear today before you to discuss the Department of Navy's
ongoing depot modernization and optimization efforts.
A modernized and ready organic industrial base generates
our fleet readiness and strengthens our national security. The
Department appreciates the strong support of this committee, as
shown in our infrastructure optimization efforts to date, and
is committed to maintaining transparency throughout the
planning and execution of the Department's infrastructure
optimization investments.
The Department has taken an enterprise-wide approach to
infrastructure at our depots, our arsenals, our logistics
complexes, and our shipyards. The Department's efforts are
focused on three areas: modernizing our aging facilities and
equipment, upgrading our facilities to support our future
platforms that are coming online in the coming years, and then
optimizing workflow and processes to support our current
platforms. All this while we continue to do the critical work
of maintaining the naval force.
Planning for optimization and modernization of our Nation's
four public shipyards is the furthest along. In 2018, the Navy
laid out a three-phase Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Program, SIOP, to modernize and optimize capital equipment,
facilities, and dry docks. Since then, we have learned a lot
about the complexity, the scale, the interdependencies, and the
costs associated with these mega projects.
In the near term, we are focused on building, expanding--
and expanding the dry docks which we need to support our new
classes of ships, like the Ford-class aircraft carriers, the
Columbia-class ballistic missile submarines, and the Virginia-
class attack submarines.
The Navy has not built a new dry dock in 70 years, so we
are working closely with industry to address construction,
laydown, and environmental impacts at each location. Facilities
optimization will be informed by ongoing digital twin modeling,
followed by developing formal area development plans or master
plans for each of the four shipyards.
Above all, we are now treating SIOP like it is a major
acquisition program, giving it the visibility and the impact
that any other major program would have, and we have dedicated
a program executive officer to exercise oversight over this
entire effort.
Similar planning and investment strategies are under way in
support of the Navy--the Navy's and the Marine Corps' aviation
fleet readiness centers, and the Marine Corps' organic
industrial base logistics installations. These facilities were
purpose built for maintenance, so modernization and
optimization planning are taking a different scale than the
SIOP efforts.
In these areas, we are focused on modeling the workflow and
improving processes within existing facilities and in investing
in new capabilities, including advanced industrial equipment
technology. Both the fleet readiness center and the Marine
Corps logistics facilities are implementing their plan
improvements over multiple phases to provide flexibility for
managing facility investment priorities and to ensure these
investment facilities and equipment are properly positioned to
maintain our legacy platforms as well as our next-generation
platforms.
The Department is committed to integrating environmental
considerations, including climate resiliency and energy
resiliency, throughout our modernization process. From sea-
level rise mitigation in our naval shipyards to seismic
hardening at our west coast depots, the Navy and Marine Corps
infrastructure projects will use sustainable and resilient
design principles while optimizing the value of our
investments.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to appear before
your subcommittee today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stefany can be found in the
Appendix on page 57.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Stefany. Ms. Saunders.

STATEMENT OF KAREN SAUNDERS, SENIOR OFFICIAL PERFORMING THE
DUTIES OF ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY FOR
ACQUISITION, LOGISTICS, AND TECHNOLOGY, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

Ms. Saunders. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the House Armed Services Committee
Subcommittee on Readiness, good morning. Thank you for the
invitation to appear before you to discuss depot modernization
and optimization.
I am pleased to be here with my counterparts from the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, the United States Navy, and
the United States Air Force. I also appreciate my written
statement being included as part of the record for this
hearing.
Chairman Garamendi, the Army's vast organic industrial base
along with its patriotic workforce provide critical material
and sustainment support to the joint force in meeting the
National Defense Strategy. This strategic national asset must
be protected and modernized to meet future force needs in the
multi-domain environment.
The Army is currently developing an organic industrial base
modernization strategy with investments focused on emerging
requirements for facilities and land, energy and water
resiliency, equipment modernization, information technology and
security, and human capital requirements. This long-term
investment plan will be complete in March of 2022 and be a
holistic 15-year modernization effort to begin in fiscal year
2024.
The Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff of the
Army's priorities are people, readiness, and modernization. We
are laser-focused on these priorities as the Army continues to
develop its organic industrial base modernization investment
plan.
The Army's number one priority is people. Our depot and
arsenal operations are comprised of more than 32,000 dedicated
and highly skilled people who produce, overhaul, and repair
newly fielded systems, sustain enduring ones as well as
prototype new ones. This resilient workforce with its sharp
focus on health and safety, continued operations throughout the
COVID-19 global pandemic to ensure our joint warfighters had
the equipment when they needed it--the equipment that they need
when they needed it.
As part of the modernization plan, we plan to empower our
workforce by employing process automation and other state-of-
the-art technology solutions to allow more efficient operations
and free workers to focus on technical oversight. This effort
will also include a human capital plan to foster partnerships
with private corporations, universities, and technical
colleges. The plan will not only provide advanced training for
our current workforce, but also help us recruit and retain our
future workforce.
The Army's second priority is readiness. And the health and
vitality of the organic industrial base is critical to
supporting combatant command requirements and ensuring the
success of our joint warfighters. To this end, the Army is
simultaneously improving our depots and arsenals to address
aging conditions to meet future capabilities.
Over the last 5 years, we exceeded our annual minimum
investment of 6 percent to 9 percent in fiscal year 2020, 2020,
and 7.4 percent in fiscal year 2021. These investments include
energy projects, infrastructure improvements, and equipment
upgrades to support our key modernization efforts.
Third, the Army is committed to seeing our signature
material modernization efforts through to completion. To meet
the requirements of the Army's modernization priorities, we
have restoration, modernization, and capital improvement
projects programmed as a bridge to the 15-year Organic
Industrial Base Modernization Investment Plan.
It is difficult to modernize for the future without--while
maintaining current production continuity, but there is greater
risk in not doing so. While we continue to prioritize projects
that enable readiness, build surge capacity, and modernize for
the future, we must also address the fiscal resources needed to
reduce single points of failure, protect our industrial control
system from cyber threats, and ensure energy resilience.
Mr. Chairman, in closing, let me state that we must
modernize our organic industrial base with the latest
technological advances, manufacturing processes, and safety
protocols to ensure our workforce and facilities to operate
within the standards of the 21st century. We thank you for your
support and the continued support of the distinguished members
of this subcommittee in order to achieve the optimized depots
and arsenals that our Army and our joint warfighters will rely
upon now and into the future. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Saunders can be found in the
Appendix on page 65.]
Mr. Garamendi. I want to thank the witnesses for their
statements, all of which are appropriate, all of which speaks
to--all of your statements speak to the necessity, and you seem
to have some sense of where this committee is going to go, and
that is to require that the Department of Defense and the
various organizations within it provide not only a plan but the
money.
So here is my question to you. And it is really not a
question, it is a request that I would ask our committee to
enforce, and that is that in the next 3 months you present to
this committee the first 5 years of your multiyear plan,
whether it is a 15- or 20-year plan. What are you going to do
in the next 5 years? And we would like to have that in detail,
beginning with what is the first step in all that you must do
and any significant improvement in your facilities, and that is
the preliminary engineering and environment. How those reviews.
What is going to be necessary for each of your depots and
arsenals and shipyards? And also what the approximate cost of
that will be and the timelines associated with it?
We intend to be drilling down. Some would say we are going
to get into the weeds or the seaweed, as the case might be, and
that is exactly what we are going to do. We are not going to
any longer just deal with your good, appropriate statements,
well-written, well-delivered. We want to see the result of
those statements, in detail. So that is an ask of you. I
recognize that each of you are acting, and that eventually the
President and the Senate willing, you will be replaced by a
confirmed political appointee. I would expect all of you to
pass the message on.
And since all of you are the senior advisors or will
probably continue to be the senior advisors, advise them that
they should be aware of what this committee is going to require
of them with regard to the infrastructure, specifically here
the depot infrastructure. I don't expect you to respond today,
but I do expect you to be responsive to this.
There is one other thing, and that is show us the money. I
know that that will be in the President's budget. But I know
that budget will be scrubbed and washed and hung out to dry and
significantly shrunk by what is needed. And I would expect--no.
We will find a way given the ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] capabilities of our
extraordinary professional staff, on both sides, to know what
it is you have proposed, each of the departments. We will find
out what is it that you proposed, and then we will find out
what the Secretary has actually approved. And if those two do
not match up to the expectations of the 5-year program that you
will develop for us, your replacements as the permanent
appointees, they will hear from us. This committee is not
messing around. We are going to drive this issue.
I also want to alert all the committee members that in the
$23.9 billion additional money that was added to this
committee--to the full committee's NDAA, there was several
billion dollars of projects, base by base, across the entire,
well, spectrum of places that we represent. We are going drill
down on that, and we may very well be prioritizing for the
purposes of dealing with what I think this committee believes
to be the most important infrastructure projects or MILCON
[military construction] projects across the array of 1,100
facilities that we are responsible for.
So heads up to my committee members, we are going to look
at this. I would expect your engagement and involvement in
that. That will be part of the ongoing negotiations with the
Senate.
I could ask a lot of questions. I have asked those
questions of you in the previous, with the exception of Ms.
Costello, in the conversations we have had. I don't want to
take more time. I really want to turn to my colleagues and let
them ask their questions. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I, too, would
like to see that 5-year plan that you have just asked for.
In talks with the Navy representative earlier this week,
you said that the SIOPs are going to be treated like a major
program with enhanced visibility. That is a step in the right
direction because I am concerned about these programs not being
raided in the future like they have been in the past. And I
would like to ask the Army and the Air Force, how will you
protect these modernization programs from being raided in
future years?
Ms. Saunders. Ranking Member Lamborn, as the person acting
for the ASA(ALT) [Assistant Secretary of the Army for
Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology], I can give this
subcommittee my commitment to be able to represent the organic
industrial base and the importance of it to our modernization
efforts. As the Army is transforming, bringing in new
capabilities, I understand the importance of the entire
sustainment infrastructure needs to be transformed as we are
developing our new systems. And I will represent that to the
Secretary of the Army to that effect.
Mr. Lamborn. Ms. Costello.
Ms. Costello. Yes, for within the Air Force, we are
committed to following these very closely through every step of
our budget process. We have formed teams, actually, over this
last year, who at every level of our budget process who are
making sure that they emphasize and keep track of our
infrastructure investments, our modernization, and the
sustainment arena.
And we are hopeful that that is going to be helpful. I know
hope is not a strategy, but I believe having people in the
fight every day is important. Often, we would prepare
something, and then it would be--you would see what pops out of
the machine at the end.
So we are trying to stop that and have groups available all
the time. At the same time, we will be championing for those
funds along the way. And my office will be in the forefront of
that championing because we do see it as very important working
with our sustainment center and with AMFC [Air Force Materiel
Command] and LCMC [Life Cycle Management Center].
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. I would like to now ask you
all about the vaccine mandate, and we will start with you, Ms.
Saunders, and just go down the table. You have all noted
correctly that the workforce at our organic locations are vital
to our national security and would be difficult to recreate.
So how will the workforce be impacted by the vaccine
mandate? Will those who resist the mandate be fired? And will
we have early retirements by those resisting a vaccine with
their consequent loss of institutional knowledge.
So, Ms. Saunders, we will start with you and just go down
the line here.
Ms. Saunders. Thank you. First of all, let me say that that
the Army's number one priority is people. And the health and
safety of our people is paramount. We do believe the
vaccination works, and we believe that an employee that has
been vaccinated lowers the risk to him, his co-workers, his
family, and to the general public. That is why the Secretary of
Defense has issued out policies.
To this date, we have not seen any, any negative reaction
within our organic industrial base. We are closely monitoring
it. And I can report back to you as we learn reactions to our
workforce. We are still working through the policies.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Stefany.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. We have basically seen, depending on
which of our depots, you know, different levels of the
workforce that is not currently vaccinated, especially
shipyards and some of the other depots.
You know, the workforce works very tightly together in
combined spaces, and so having a vaccinated workforce will
reduce the risk to each of them as well as their families when
they go home and whatnot.
So we are certainly encouraging at each location the
implementation of the mandate. As far as your question as far
as retirements and things like that, we have not seen--we have
surveyed the workforce and we have gotten indications, but we
have not seen any large retirements or movements yet, at least,
in the workforce at our depots, sir.
Ms. Costello. And the Air Force also sees the value in the
vaccines and has issued the policy through. It is early to know
what the ultimate outcome will be, how many will be vaccinated.
We are encouraged, we have seen a lot more people taking their
administrative leave while they go get their vaccine, or we
assume that is why they are taking it. We expect that we will
be able to work through the perturbations that happen as we did
when COVID first hit.
Within our organic industrial base, the people who are
there are resilient, and they are able to find workarounds. And
what will happen if we do end up losing some workforce is we
will have to prioritize the work that remains in order to take
care of those high priorities. And we are hoping that that will
be minimal, but we are ready to take that on as quickly as we
can once we know the actual numbers that we are dealing with.
Mr. Lamborn. And Mr. Morani.
Mr. Morani. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. So,
again, I don't want to walk the same ground that my colleagues
did; we do support the mandate. But with the enterprise that is
within my responsibility, DLA [Defense Logistics Agency], what
we are seeing is interesting that it is not necessarily the
older workforce, you know, that may have a question about
taking the vaccine, it seems to be the younger workforce.
They are working through accounting for and attestation of
who is vaccinated right now. They actually have built an app
that is automated. It is allowing their employees to go in and
self-attest to the fact that they have been vaccinated. They do
expect around, roughly, a thousand people to probably ask for
an exception, either medical or religious accommodation.
Interestingly enough, again, it is probably more weighted on a
religious accommodation versus a medical.
But we are early in the process. We want to let the process
work. No one is going to be fired on the 22nd. There will be
opportunity--again, I think education is critical in this
space, to educate people about the safety of it and the risk of
not having it. There will be escalation in, you know,
disciplinary actions that will go through a process.
So, again, I am confident that, you know, we will work
through it. Some may find that when it comes to whether they
put their job at risk or take the vaccine, they may decide to
take the vaccine. Friends of mine that I know who are in that
position who are working for defense contract companies who
have the same kind of mandatory requirement, they all say, if I
am told to take it, I will take it. So right now----
Mr. Lamborn. Could you repeat that please.
Mr. Morani. They said they will get the vaccine. And,
again, it depends what State as well. Some States there is more
question than others.
So right now, I will just close with saying that it is a
little too early to tell, but I think we put in places the
processes to educate and to understand the concerns, offer
those accommodations where appropriate, and then work through
any additional attrition that we have to deal with.
Mr. Lamborn. I will just say to all four of you that I am
concerned that if we start having firings with an organic
industrial base that is already limping in some ways, that that
is not going to make the situation any better. Now I understand
the balancing act. You want to encourage and educate and urge
those to get vaccinated who haven't yet been, but there are the
religious and medical exceptions, Mr. Morani, that you referred
to. And I believe there should also be a previous infection
exception also because those people have natural immunity.
So I am concerned, though, that our economy in general and
our organic industrial base, in particular, is going to be hurt
by this mandate. And I am very concerned about that, and I
don't really agree that it is being handled in the correct way.
With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Doug, thank you. I am--I am going to put
into the record a very short statement on this issue. We had a
debate that was unending in Transportation [and] Infrastructure
[Committee] yesterday about this. And I would rather not have
to repeat it, but I want to put this into the record so that it
is there.
The vaccine mandate has resulted--this is from Secretary
Austin--vaccine mandate has resulted in a vaccination rate of
96 percent among Active Duty service members. As Secretary
Austin has stated, vaccination is one of the surest ways to
bolster our readiness, absenteeism, labor disruptions,
quarantine, and paid leave costs from acute illness. Mitigation
members and long COVID far outweigh the disruption from the
small number of people who might walk off the job.
With that, we recognize this as a significant issue in the
general public of America. And to the extent that we will deal
with it on the military side, we will.
Doug, thank you for raising that. Let me now move on to Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
the witnesses for being here today to talk about this very
critical issue. And, Mr. Stefany, you know, you have been here
a number of times, and this issue of getting the SIOP up and
running is something that, again, Navy and Congress work
together starting in 2018 when the planning process came
through.
There is 5-year plan, but you know, I was thinking of the
Yiddish saying, you know, Man plans and God laughs, when the
USS Connecticut, unfortunately, had a serious accident out in
the Pacific.
And today's hearing is not about that incident. And I am
sure, you know, we have already gotten some preliminary
information at Seapower [Subcommittee]. And we will at a later
date, obviously explore the circumstances of the accident.
But right now, it is in Guam. That is public record. There
is no dry dock in Guam. Hopefully, a sub tender can do the
work, but, you know, that remains to be seen. But again, in
terms of the Yiddish saying, it just shows how, you know, the
Navy and all the forces are dynamic forces that, you know, the
world gets a vote and things change, and unexpected incidents
create more demand for repairs.
And I didn't know whether you had any comment in terms of
just, you know, the attack subs have always been the poor
cousin in the public shipyards in terms of, you know, getting
priority. But we know, particularly a Seawolf-class submarine
is extremely valuable in terms of the mission out in that part
of the world. You know, whether or not there is any sort of
comment or statement that you can share with us this morning
about, you know, the impact that is going to have on the queue.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir, Representative Courtney. We will
certainly come brief you on everything surrounding the USS
Connecticut incident, and the plan, and if we end up doing work
in one of the public shipyards that would certainly cause, you
know, perturbations in all the other work in the shipyards,
right?
Just like maybe express, one of the reasons why the SIOP
plan is [inaudible] and to the chairman's point, you know, we
have been talking infrastructure for a while as a Navy and a
Marine Corps. But why it is urgent--why the urgency is picked
up now and the commitment, I think, is there now is because we
realize these shipyards, particularly, but the other depots are
not needed, not optional, but they are necessary to support our
forces in our maritime strategy going forward.
And we need to optimize them to create that surge space,
surge ability whether it was an accident or wartime damage, or
whatever, that we have to have that ability to surge. We have
some ability to surge by going to the private sector, as you
know, sir. But, again, those yards are also building new ships.
So we need to create this surge ability for the unexpected as
part of this. And that is why optimization is just as important
to me as the upgrades of the yards.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. You know, again, that
conversation will continue. Again, Mr. Geurts, before he left,
you know, had talked a lot about having a 30-year ship repair
plan to sort of track the 30-year shipbuilding plan. Where do
we stand with that? Is that still something that, you know, the
Navy is going to follow through with?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. We actually drafted one last year,
but as you know, the shipbuilding plan didn't go forward. So
the ship repair plan didn't go forward with it. But this year
with this year's President budget, we will get a new
shipbuilding plan. And then while not required, we will provide
a ship repair plan as well for ships and submarines.
Mr. Courtney. Great. I mean, I think that is a really
important, you know, signal for us to be able to have for this
subcommittee as well as Seapower [Subcommittee].
And one last point on the vaccination. Mr. Garamendi
mentioned the Secretary's statement that framed the vaccination
program around readiness. When Admiral Merz laid it out for the
Navy, same thing, that this was really a readiness issue for
the force. I checked the USNI News latest reporting is that the
Navy is at 99 percent for at least one shot, and I think 96
percent for two shots.
Having been to the public shipyards, I mean, anyone who
walks in there sees that the workforce there is working elbow
to elbow with Active Duty Navy personnel. So, I mean, if we are
really going to be consistent, you know, everybody should sort
of be one team, right, and just sort of working together to
reduce the risk of infection. Because, you know, having that
risk there detracts from the Navy's ability to be ready.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. I believe our workforce is one
military, civilian, and contractor, all one team, one effort.
And we should treat them all the same.
Mr. Courtney. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank each of
you for your service to our country. It is really refreshing to
see people as positive as you are attempting to be.
And Ms. Costello and also Mr. Stefany, this past spring, I
visited with Congressman Ralph Norman the McEntire Joint
National Guard Air Base, a leading candidate for upcoming F-35
basing selection. The F-35 is crucial for maintaining air
superiority for peace through strength.
For both of you, could you discuss your integration with
the F-35 program office and how your depots are modernizing to
support this critical weapon system? Do you have any concerns
about being able to service it while maintaining your other
priorities?
Mr. Stefany. I'll take that first, sir. So at the moment, I
actually have the secondary role to be the service acquisition
executive for the Joint Strike Fighter program, in addition to
representing the Navy and Marine Corps as users of the Joint
Strike Fighter.
I would say that from a depot point of view--and Ms.
Costello I will leave for the Air Force bases and Air Force
facilities that are upgraded--but the efforts that we are doing
for sustainment and creating Joint Force Strike Fighter depots,
we are looking at work in Cherry Point, and we are looking at
down in Jacksonville for the engines. So we are incorporating
that as a new capability into our Navy and Marine Corps depots.
And those MILCON efforts are top of the list and are
getting funded. And I am pretty enthusiastic about our ability
to participate as part of the national effort to take care of
these aircraft. And Ms. Costello.
Ms. Costello. And the Air Force cares an awful lot about
our F-35 sustainment capabilities. And at Hill, they are
definitely taking on a lot of it. ACC [Air Combat Command], our
owning command, has prioritized high many of their projects
that they need for expanding and scaling the capability. And we
are also looking at the ALIS [Autonomic Logistics Information
System] to ODIN [Operational Data Integrated Network], the
software enhancements, and the sustainment for that, all of
which is going to help with the support and sustainment of that
platform going forward.
Mr. Wilson. I thank each of you. And, Mr. Stefany, you
mentioned about sea-level rise. And you may not have it with
you, but if you could get back with me, I would be interested
on the east coast, west coast, the last 30 years, and
increments 1991 to 2001, 2011, 2021, what has been the recorded
sea-level rise?
Also, what, for the next 30 years, the anticipated rise
through 2031, 2041, 2051? I would be very interested in seeing
what has been recorded and what is to be anticipated? And did
you bring that with you?
Mr. Stefany. No, sir, I didn't.
Mr. Wilson. And so if you could get that to me, I would
appreciate it.
Mr. Stefany. I would be happy to take that.
Mr. Wilson. Well a question--and good luck who might want
to answer this one, but this is for everybody. In the
industrial bases face recent budget challenges that impede
capital investment is because of sequestration and threaten the
viability of suppliers.
A recent study indicated by the Center for Strategic and
International Studies estimates that between 2001 and 2015,
more than 17,000 companies have stopped being prime vendors for
DOD.
Which of you would like to discuss the compounding impact
of budget sequestration continuing resolutions on depot
modernization?
Mr. Morani. I will take that first. So, again, I think this
is a continuous problem when we have a continuing resolution. I
think, again, the sequestration that we experienced did drive
some backlog, but it is some of the similar problems that we
face every year. We don't get the full benefit of the fiscal
year to execute to. Right? And when we are in the continuing
resolution, we get no new starts, so new contracts can't be
let. So that compounds.
And then in the remaining fiscal year, the workforce that
is available to put on contract, to sequence that work, again,
their compressed schedules, it compresses the work. So, again,
it throws our planning out of synchronization. It doesn't allow
us to fully execute in a fiscal year.
Mr. Wilson. And I look forward to working with Chairman
Garamendi in a bipartisan manner on how we address this. I
yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Wilson, thank you. I'm on--current gavel
order so that the members can be prepared. Golden, Scott,
Luria, Moore. Okay. Mr. Golden.
Mr. Golden. Thank you. I am going to follow up a little bit
on the issue of vaccinations of the workforce. I am fairly
confident that all of the services and just across, you know,
the Pentagon--you have workers who are upset about this. It is
undoubtedly true. I find it almost impossible to believe that
that is not the case at every single depot that you have.
So, look, I come out of the military. I had all kinds of
vaccines that I had to get. I get it. I was more than
comfortable with that. I am, you know, also encouraged by the
high vaccination rates that we are seeing in the uniform part
of our military.
I am less comfortable with tying this requirement to being
able to show up to work, but that is the current situation. So
what I want to convey is these workers were asked from the very
beginning of the pandemic, they weren't asked, they were told
that they were going to show up to work when there was no
vaccine, when we weren't even sure if they should wear
protective gear like masks or not.
And even if we had known that they should, they weren't
really available. People got sick. Some of them died. And they
are your workforce, working to provide important, you know,
things to contribute to our national security and to meet the
needs of our service members.
For me, this is about respect and how you go about
implementing this vaccine requirement, rather than just
throwing out a deadline and telling people to meet it or take a
hike, which is how I think many of them are perceiving the way
this is being implemented. They deserve better than that. They
deserve respect, and I think a collaborative approach.
So I think my ask would be that each of the services, and
the Pentagon in particular, lead the way, whether it be public
depot or private Federal contractors--and I am talking
shipbuilding in particular--that you lead the way in coming up
with a plan that is negotiated with the workers and their
representatives to figure out how to do this the right way that
shows the proper amount of respect to this workforce that we
all value so much. They are incredibly skilled. We need them.
We can't really afford to lose any of them.
Look at the shipyards around the country; we can't really
afford to lose even a little bit of them. We are struggling to
recruit like crazy. The idea that someone would take
administrative leave to get a vaccine is totally unacceptable.
No way. Why isn't there a plan to bring the shots to them
at the workplace and administer them, after having gone through
this consultative process of explaining to them why it is in
their best interest, figuring out who actually is worthy of an
exception, making sure that, when they get the shot, they
understand what is going on, what the benefits are, sitting
under observation like we all do after getting a shot to make
sure they don't have a negative reaction, making sure they are
cared for and that they feel cared for.
I want to know: Will the Pentagon commit to working with
the services to soften up these deadlines and come up with a
way to figure out how to get this done without unnecessarily
losing incredibly valuable, skilled workers who contribute a
lot to this country and to our national security? And I don't
know why that process isn't already fully in place, but the
feedback I am hearing from public and private is that it is
not. And where it is, it is haphazard. There is no consistency
whatsoever, and people are very frustrated.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Golden, apparently that was an
appropriate ask of the witnesses and, beyond that, to the
Department. Would you like them to respond?
Mr. Golden. If they have a response. I will certainly be
submitting, you know, such a request in writing.
Mr. Garamendi. Let's have from the--Mr. Morani, if you
could, from the Secretary's office respond to Mr. Golden.
Mr. Morani. Yes sir, I can offer you a brief response. So
that kind of a policy question is personnel-related, really not
in my area to comment on as far as the policy for that. I can
tell you that last week I did get my flu shot and my booster
shot, both provided for me at--onsite. As far as trying to
understand and share, we are all concerned. And we don't want
to lose anyone. We value, we tremendously value their
patriotism and their work.
As I mentioned earlier through my collaboration with our
Defense Logistics Agency and understanding how they are
implementing, they are taking every step they can to ensure
that everyone is fully informed, everyone is treated with
dignity and respect in this matter. But I will take your
concern and forward that to my policy comrades.
Mr. Stefany. I will just jump in for a minute since you
mentioned the shipyards. First of all, both the public shipyard
and the private shipyard workforce, they are national heroes.
Right? Before and then last year during COVID, what they did,
produced for us, for our warfighters is just incredible. So
every one of them, I share with you the respect that we should
be providing to each and every one of them as they come through
this sometimes difficult, you know, personal decision they have
to make.
I will tell you I talked to the shipyard presidents, the
seven major shipyards, just Tuesday this week. And that
haphazard implementation that you mentioned, sir, that was
their main point. Right? We want to do this right by our
workforce. We want to do it together with you and the Navy. And
so I took action with our Naval Sea Systems Command to get at
least a single approach out and let all of our shipyards know
this is what we expect them to do on the private side.
So that is in process. We want, again, to do the right
thing by our workforce but also recognize the need to protect
everybody as well. So hopefully that is helpful, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Very well. The issue of vaccines and
vaccination mandates are certainly on the table. And Mr. Golden
properly raised the question of the--that that mandate be
carried out in a very coordinated, informational, educational,
and efficient-effective manner.
We would expect that we will follow up, Mr. Golden. Thank
you for raising that.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I, too, share the concerns about the mandate. I am
vaccinated. I have had COVID. I was actually hospitalized with
COVID and on oxygen for 14 days. There are legitimate reasons
not to take the vaccine. And I am very concerned about the lack
of respect that has been shown for the workforce with regard to
this being a personal decision where people do have legitimate
objections to it, some of them religious, some of them health-
based. And I would just, again, like to express my same
concerns other members have.
I do have specific questions for Secretary Morani and
Costello. General Hammerstedt, who is doing a great job at
Robins Air Force Base in the use of robotics, you mentioned
this in your testimony. Robins has spearheaded the
implementation of the DOD's robotics, and my question is: What
is the Department's plan to expand that technology into the
rest of the organic industrial base? And what do you need from
this committee as we push forward with both the NDAA and the
appropriation measures for the DOD to do that?
Mr. Morani. Mr. Scott, thank you for the question.
So that is something I can talk about. So you are
absolutely right. There is some tremendous work going on at
Warner Robins. I was just there. That is the most recent depot
that I was able to visit, and I can tell you I was part of Air
Force Sustainment Center before. Two years ago I had visited
there, and I can see a marked improvement in what is going on
there in the implementation of robotics.
So Warner Robins is actually leading the Department when it
comes to implementation of robotics. They have right now over
40 robotic machines that are, again, taking the place of the
human. They are increasing productivity. They are increasing
quality. They are increasing health and safety. And then the
other benefit is the reduction in environmental impact.
So we have worked with Warner Robins. We have worked with
the other services. We have a very very robust working group.
We call it JROBOT, Joint Robotics Organization for Building
Organic Technologies. We have policy that is in draft right
now, first time in the Department's history, policy for how we
are going to implement and use robotic systems for
manufacturing and sustainment. And we have been partnering with
the ARM Institute, the Advanced Robotics [for] Manufacturing
Institute in Pittsburgh.
So we are working with industry and academia on the same
plane to ensure we are taking advantage of what industry has
and incorporating it in our depots. So very proud of what is
going on at Robins.
Mr. Scott. Secretary Morani, thank you for that answer. If
you do have specific recommendations for the National Defense
Authorization Act or for the appropriations with regard to
robotics and how we implement that as soon as possible, that
would be appreciated in short order as we are pushing pretty
quick.
Secretary Costello, I am going to move to a second question
because I am down to 1\1/2\ minutes. And, the ``Catch Up and
Leap Ahead'' initiative, you describe this in your testimony.
Can you speak a little more to the Catch Up and Leap Ahead and
the prioritization that we can expect from the Air Force on
that?
Ms. Costello. Yes. Thank you for that question. In addition
to the 6 percent, our catch-up is to invest in using our
production or procurement--I am sorry--our MILCON, our funds
that are budgeted either with programs or for the sustainment
centers themselves. And then the Leap Ahead is that future
technology, the networks, the technical infrastructure in order
to get to that digital depot that we want in the future. So
that is really kind of what the two are.
As far as funding it, that Leap Ahead is the harder one.
That is because we are reliant on our future budgets in order
to have a steady stream of funding in there to make that
happen. But that is what we are lobbying for; that is part of
our plan. And we do start putting things in place now and each
year going forward. And as we can find additional resources, we
do have a fully populated, prioritized list of which things
would go first, second, third, fourth. And that is exactly
where we will go as funds are made available either in the same
year or as we go into future years. So that is how we plan to
address both of those.
Mr. Scott. Thank you all for being here.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Scott, thank you for that last question.
I am going to comment very briefly and then Mrs. Luria.
Early on I said we need a 5-year plan, so that we can plan,
so that we can carry out, as you just said, Ms. Costello, the
MILCON piece of it and also make sure that the other funding
available, for example, the robotics, that that is also there.
So we need these--the plan and the money associated with it so
that we can lay out a 5-year plan.
The problem has been created by the military not
prioritizing this and, frankly, Congress not prioritizing. And
so I would like us to be able to prioritize, but that requires
this integration of these two things. And we will persist.
Mrs. Luria.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you to our witnesses.
I just want to take us back, you know, kind of to maybe a
little higher level and also a little bit back in time.
When we received the budget this year, the proposal from
the Navy had us only building one destroyer. It had us
decommissioning seven cruisers, four LCS [littoral combat
ships], essentially shrinking the size of the Navy in a time
with the rising threats from China we know we need to be
growing the size of the Navy.
This committee worked deliberately and in a bipartisan
manner to reverse and add things back that were clearly missing
from the budget that came over from the Navy.
In that vein, the House bill, which has already passed on
the floor, it sped us up to three Virginia-class submarines a
year. It also preserved three cruisers and put three DDGs
[guided-missile destroyers] in the bill. And lo and behold it
comes to my attention this week that the Navy is letting
contracts for decommissioning CMAVs [continuous maintenance
availabilities] for the cruisers and is already--the three
cruisers that we preserved, specifically the Vella Gulf--I am
sorry--the Monterey, a CMAV to start on 1 November and also
working with an additional contractor to strip the ship of, you
know, equipment before the CMAV starts.
So I was just wondering if you could comment. You know,
this is pending law. We need to go to conference, pass it with
the Senate. But it is clearly the intent of this House and of
Congress to preserve those three cruisers, the San Jacinto, the
Lake Champlain, and the Monterey. And can you give some insight
into why the Navy is moving forward with the CMAVs in order to
start the decommissioning process?
Mr. Stefany. So, yes, ma'am. I recognize the cruisers you
mentioned and the process of decommissioning in the initial
plan. That, again, the committee, we thank the committee for
your support in the 2021 budget. I don't know why that process
was not stopped when we saw the, know, the committee action
here. I will have to go back to you and find out why our team
did not stop the process when they saw that, ma'am.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. And I have already put this
question out to the Navy. I am still waiting for answers, too.
So I would greatly appreciate a prompt followup because,
obviously, November 1 is next week.
Mr. Stefany. It is coming up real quick, yeah.
Mrs. Luria. We need to understand that.
Mr. Stefany. Yeah.
Mrs. Luria. Another thing, you know, I have concerns about
the capacity in our public shipyards. You know, just looking
over the last few yours, you know, even before I came into
Congress, the Bush [USS George H.W. Bush] had started this DPIA
[docking planned incremental availability], CVN 77, which
lasted 27 months at Norfolk Naval Shipyard. In the Nimitz-class
design, the first DPIA is supposed to be 10\1/2\ months. And
somehow we got--creep from 10\1/2\ to 27.
You know, we talk about needing ships on station to support
our efforts in the Pacific and to counter the threat from
China. They shouldn't be sitting in Norfolk Naval Shipyard for
27 months. But, you know, a lot of that comes down to a
capacity issue. We had to do the MTS [moored training ship]
conversion. We had another refueling, and manpower and those
types of things.
But now the Ike [USS Dwight D. Eisenhower] is going in for
a PIA [planned incremental availability] that is 13 months.
That PIA essentially should have been a 6-month PIA. The OFRP
[Optimized Fleet Response Plan], I think, pushed it out to 8
months. But now we are adding essentially more than 50 percent
onto the length of that availability.
So, like, what do you need? What do we need to provide as
far as resources to the Navy, you know, to stop seeing the
length of these availabilities grow? And then, you know, more
submarines, there is going to be more maintenance obviously in
our public shipyards.
And above and beyond that, once we get into the SIOP
process and we actually have to take dry docks offline to
modernize them, have you taken into account the impact that is
going to have, the domino effect on the maintenance schedule,
because for a period of time you will have less dry docks
available?
And there was legislation that we cosponsored, myself,
several of my colleagues, that would have given essentially $4
billion to the private sector industrial base, $2 billion of
that for new construction, $2 billion for repair. And I was
wondering if you could comment. Like, you know, what are you
looking at as far as additional capacity that we need either in
public or private nuclear-capable shipyard capacity?
Mr. Stefany. Yes, ma'am. So maybe starting at the back and
working forward. Yeah, we recognize that $4 billion, you know,
item that was part of the, I guess, SHIPS [Securing the
Homeland by Increasing our Power on the Seas] Act and that one.
Certainly the Navy would support that.
The larger question of why in the particular case of
those--that aircraft carrier, Norfolk Naval Shipyard did have a
conflict of both work and workforce, were not able to get the
workforce in they needed. And so we are--while the SIOP
projects are coming down to make us more effective and
efficient in the future, we are not waiting for that. We are--
we have analyzed Stennis [USS John C. Stennis]. And we are
looking at other--other--particularly at Norfolk Naval and
saying what can we do better. What--we call it the P2P, or Plan
to Perform, process. What kind of triggers can we put in and
levers can we put in place now to better plan and better have
workarounds if we get into trouble on future availabilities.
So I would like to say that the Stennis was maybe an
oddball, but we do try to work around and have actually across
all four shipyards have levers in place to be more efficient
and to not get into those cases particularly for aircraft
carriers and ballistic submarines where the fleet is, you know,
heel to tail on needing those aircraft carriers and those
submarines.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you for that response. I would love
to follow up, you know, really in more detail and clarity----
Mr. Stefany. Yes.
Mrs. Luria [continuing]. And look at the maintenance
schedules over the next 5 years to understand, like, where
those spots are because I have looked at the operational
schedules. And I think that maintenance is clearly driving
operations, and that is not acceptable. That is not acceptable
in the environment that we have. And we want to--we are here
today to have a hearing to understand what resources you need,
in addition to what have you today, in order to get the ships
out and deployed, in order to be forward.
And, you know, I have greatest confidence in your commander
at Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Dianna Wolfson. We served together,
and I think she is the perfect person to be leading that
effort. But I just want to understand with more clarity the
plan. So would love to follow up with you.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, ma'am. And that 5-year plan that we did
submit, will show you the availabilities that are going on at
the same time and how that all comes together. That will be a
key discussion with you and your staff.
Mr. Garamendi. Mrs. Luria, thank you for a very important
set of issues.
I am going to read the gavel order: McClain, Moore, Fallon.
Mr. Fallon is not on the committee. And, therefore, I ask
unanimous consent that non-committee members be allowed to
participate in today's hearing after all committee members have
had an opportunity to ask questions.
Is there an objection?
There being no objections, that will be the order.
So I want to put one more thing on the table here and this
came from a discussion but has not come up thus far but I want
to get it in the testimony.
And this, Mr. Stefany, we were talking. Clearly the most--
all of these updates on the depots are complex. The SIOP is
undoubtedly the most complex, and Ms. Luria just and others
have raised the issue of the integration of the ongoing
maintenance with the upgrade.
In our discussion earlier you talked about a different
management mechanism to address this complexity. Could you
please speak to that, maybe take 47 seconds to do that? But I
do want to get this in the record.
Mr. Stefany. Yes, sir. So in the acquisition world for
major acquisition programs, to elevate them, we have a
streamlined structure where the assistant secretary to an
executive, a flag officer, a program executive officer to
provide that executive oversight, one person that is
accountable to us and accountable to you, frankly, for making
sure the whole program works. And then we have a, typically an
O-6 program manager who does the day-to-day business. Right?
So that structure of an executive at the Pentagon, a single
person for execution in the Pentagon, and then an executive to
run, make sure it is all running together and bring--all
brought together in a strategic mode, and then a program
manager to do the day-to-day, and that is the decision process
for execution. There are lots of other stakeholders, but they
don't get a vote. That is the voting process: program manager,
PEO [program executive officer], and then a service secretary.
On the requirements side, again, at the same time on the
requirements and resourcing side, a single three-star in this
case has been identified in the Navy to be responsible for the
resourcing and the requirements. And that is what we would
typically do with a major acquisition program as well.
So that structure now we are putting in here. We have a
captain identified. He is already in position. We have a two-
star admiral that is coming in. He will be on board on December
1 to be that executive, that program executive officer to be
the accountable executive for us and for you. And then, of
course, myself as the Pentagon, you know, lead for the effort.
And then, again, we have, like I said, a three-star admiral on
the requirements side to take care of the resourcing
requirements for us.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Stefany. I wanted the
committee to be aware of this management change that is
underway, and we will be watching it closely.
McClain.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today. While I agree with
my colleagues that the rejuvenation and the modernization of
our installations globally is one of our--one of the many
signals that we can send to our allies and, quite frankly, our
adversaries that the United States is committed to having a
modern, powerful fighting force, I fear, though, that we are a
little too focused on the long-term peacetime modernization
plan and ignoring any potential for the need of a rapid buildup
military, a rapid buildup of military assets. I am concerned
with China, who is no friend of the United States, and their
ability to leverage their domestic business in a whole-of-
nation approach to national defense.
So my question is this. In the event of a large-scale
combat operation against China, God forbid, is the Department
capable of surging capabilities including leveraging private
sectors such as the auto industry--I come from Detroit or the
Detroit area and the auto industry--to compete against China
and provide service men and women the assets that they are
going to require to conduct effective operations against a
massive modern military force? You know, meaning are we going
to be able to adapt on a large-scale basis?
Ms. Saunders. Thank you for that question, ma'am.
The Army OIB has both the capacity and the capability to
surge, and we have different methodologies to be able to do
that.
First of all, we have a strategic resourcing contract that
we can leverage to surge personnel to where we can go to 24-
hour operations. We can also implement authorities such as
direct order, direct exchange which prioritize parts. And then
we can also work with the executive branch to implement Defense
Production Act [DPA] which goes out to industry and ensures
that they--that they prioritize our requirements.
Mrs. McClain. I am glad to hear that. So, in essence, what
I heard was, yes.
Ms. Saunders. Yes. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. McClain. We are prepared that, God forbid, there was a
large-scale attack, we could, in essence, turn relatively
quickly and be able to--we have the resources. We have the
ability to turn our manufacturing facilities and adapt those to
what you all need to prepare.
Ms. Saunders. Yes, both in human capital, as well as
material.
Mrs. McClain. What kind of timeframe would it take, does
the Department need in order to get that done?
Mr. Morani. Ma'am, if I may, so I think COVID-19 and our
national response was a great example, case study in how we can
leverage the capacity of our industry and move fast and use
mechanisms, like Ms. Saunders mentions, DPA Title I and Title
III to energize private sector that has similar capabilities.
So I do think that that model and what we are studying and
looking at that shows how quickly we could react.
I was on the Joint Acquisition Task Force for 6 months,
supporting Health and Human Services. So I learned a lot
through that process. So I would agree that we can move pretty
quick if we have targeted investment in those areas where we
need that capacity. Ventilator manufacture was one, and we did
leverage the auto industry.
So we have--we have demonstrated that we can do that and I
am confident that, when called upon, industry and government
will work together to react in the timeframe necessary and
leverage the capacity of both.
Mrs. McClain. And I agree with you on a very--if the
pandemic, if there was a silver lining in terms of that, it
exposed what we were good at and exposed some of our flaws in
that. And there were manufacturing companies in my district
that were able to convert rather quickly to accommodate our
needs. So, again, I hear from you--and I don't want to put
words in your mouth, sir--is in a relatively short period of
time we can make that conversion very rapidly.
Mr. Morani. Relatively speaking, depending on what it is we
are trying to surge to, we can make those target investments. I
will use ventilators as an example.
Mrs. McClain. And let me--I don't mean to cut you off, but
I am almost out of time. Is there anything that we can do to
help expedite that process?
Mr. Morani. So I think the authorities are there. We are
looking at DPA Title III in how we can actually leverage that
for the organic base. So if we need additional help, we will
come to you.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Morani. Thank you.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Mrs. McClain, you are onto a set of issues
that the full committee and several members of the committee
are dealing with and that is to get ahead of the critical
elements in the supply chain and the use of the Department's
authorities. If you would like to stay with that, there are
several other members of the full committee and on this
committee that are working on that. Okay.
Mr. Moore, you have gone and you are back and you have gone
and you are back. And it is your turn.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. I just like to keep you
guessing.
Mr. Garamendi. And that may have to do with that emergency
evacuation sign behind your head.
Mr. Moore. All is well. Thank you all.
Mr. Garamendi. Speak into the microphone so we can hear
you. Thank you.
Mr. Moore. As cochair of the House Depot Caucus with the
Ogden Air Logistics Complex, these are utmost important
priorities to one of the key things, one of the key reasons
that I want to serve on this committee. So it is of utmost
priority.
These proposed depot investments described as once-in-a-
generation projects are long overdue, and these need to be
brought into the 21st century. So I share many of my
colleagues' on both sides of the aisles some concerns and
frustrations about where we are at with a lot of these plans.
This would be a question for all the witnesses. Since 2007,
Congress has required the DOD to invest 6 percent of depot
workload revenue back into the depots. In a 2019 report, the
GAO indicated that the services almost always met their 6
percent minimum and yet facility conditions have worsened and
modernization backlogs have increased. So, going in the wrong
direction. We are now looking at tens of billions of dollars to
fix the depots across the DOD.
Is 6 percent too low an investment floor to keep the depots
sustained?
Ms. Costello. I will go ahead and start on that one. From
the Air Force perspective, we believe that 6 percent minimum is
appropriate as a minimum. We have been investing at least that,
if not more, every year for the recent years, and we plan to
continue to do that. So the concern with making a minimum hire
is on--that could have some unintended consequences, depending
on the color of funding and what you are doing. If it comes out
of our working capital fund, it effects rates which then
translates to readiness, other challenges. So we balance. But
as a minimum, 6 percent is fine as the minimum. We plan to be
investing more than that.
Thank you.
Mr. Stefany. I would say from the Navy and Marine Corps,
same view. We have to catch up. We are way behind, and so we
will be putting more than 6 percent in for our fleet readiness
centers and the SIOP program. Once we get caught back up, I
think, to Ms. Costello's point, a minimum of 6 percent and then
the balance of that between equipment and actual facilities
needs to be something we look at a little harder.
Ms. Saunders. From an Army perspective, I agree with both
my Air Force and Navy colleagues, 6 percent minimum. As you
know, the 6 percent is calculated as a function of both revenue
and workload and the way the calculation is made with deep
depreciation. We really feel that 6 percent as a minimum is
appropriate at this time.
Mr. Morani. Yes, sir, I will just add----
Mr. Moore. Oh, please.
Mr. Morani. Finally, I agree as a threshold it is a
satisfactory floor. The services are all investing above that.
We do have to be careful about what that does to the rates.
But I will add that alone we--it is not enough. We need to
ensure that, as we bring on new weapon systems as part of the
acquisition strategy, any new system ought to have new mission
MILCON associated with it. That is where we can make--we can
catch up. And we can build facilities that are agile, that will
allow us to combined functions, that will allow us to use those
facilities into the future for other things than maybe
originally designed, and to ensure that they are built with
construction methods that allow for energy efficiency and help
us optimize in those areas environmentally as well.
Over.
Mr. Moore. I just reiterate the chairman's request to have
some detail on this and would look forward to it--and my team
is always at the ready to dig into any of these as well, given
my--given our role and the importance of the depots to not only
my district but many others.
I will ask one more question briefly, Ms. Costello. We have
a retirement problem. In the AFSC [Air Force Sustainment
Center], Federal wage-grade employees will be eligible to
retire; by 2080, over half will be. To replace [them] is going
to be very difficult. Is there anything that we can be focused
on as a committee to make sure that we are able to optimize and
be--and sustain that workforce, that there is a--there is going
to be a dearth of it soon?
Ms. Costello. So I recognize that challenge as our entire
workforce ages in this area. We are investing quite a bit in
efforts to retain and recruit people for our organic industrial
base and our depots specifically. We have the hiring
authorities which help us get them on. We are looking to
modernize our depots which we believe will attract. We are
partnering with academia which is a great tool for recruiting
because people see what we are doing.
Our biggest draw, as we said earlier, is our mission. Our
mission is really what brings people in, and that is what is
keeping some of those people from actually retiring is that
they believe in the mission and how important it is. And we are
doing everything we can to make the conditions under which they
work something that is sustainable while we are recruiting
additional people.
Mr. Moore. Yield back the time I don't have.
Mr. Garamendi. That is okay. We are being a little [audio
malfunction].
Mr. Fallon, it is your turn.
Mr. Fallon. Oh, great. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. I couldn't hear
you. Appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit my remarks for the
record. And, first off, I want to thank you for inviting me and
allowing me to speak and ask a few questions.
Depot readiness and modernization is a topic that is of
great importance to me, not only to me but to Texas and the
country. Our district is home to Red River Army Depot which is
the Army's center for industrial and technical excellence for
tactical-wheeled vehicles.
Depots improve readiness and save the Federal Government
billions of dollars every year. Specifically, Red River has
created a unique capability of flyaway teams to address the
urgent matter of Humvee rollovers.
The Army has invested considerable resources in the depot
to have a core capability to install the ABS [antilock brake
system] and ESC [electronic stability control] rollover kits,
and they have special tools and equipment to do so.
The Army projects it will maintain about 50,000 Humvees in
service until 2050 that did not have the rollover mitigation or
ABS capability addressed in the new production. With so many of
these legacy vehicles being new or like new, they are used by
our soldiers every day and located across the United States. We
have lost too many soldiers to these rollover accidents.
However, the rollover mitigation technology that is on
them, once it is in place, it works just as well as like a new
vehicle that are coming offline on 2019 and 2020. And readiness
is clearly an issue for the base commanders in terms of how to
address the safety issue, whether they are new or they are like
new and used vehicles.
So I think the solution for good policy is the flyaway
teams. A brand new Humvee costs $400,000. A retrofitted Humvee
costs $15,000. And if we could--I know we can't retrofit them
all because some of them are just so old that it is just time
to buy new ones. But we can retrofit most of them, and we can
save literally billions of dollars. The high estimate is about
$12.9 billion. I think we must do it. We are at a time where we
are in some budget crunches particularly vis-a-vis defense.
So this is--my concern is the--there wasn't a lot of money
allocated for this in the budget. And we have teams that are in
place that are highly skilled but if they are not doing the
work, we are going the lose those teams.
So what I wanted to do is, if I could have a question for
Secretary Saunders, and it is a compound question. But how much
of a priority is it for the Army and across the military to do
what I just described? And if it is a major priority, as I
believe it should be, then why wasn't it fully funded? And
then, lastly, in your view, did the Army emphasize the
importance of this program to the appropriators? Did they
emphasize it appropriately?
I really appreciate to hear your response. Thank you.
Ms. Saunders. Thank you, Congressman Fallon. I appreciate
your question.
First of all, I want you to know that the Army views as our
number one priority is people, that the life and safety of our
soldiers is paramount. And so ensuring that they are equipped,
that they have equipment that is safe is a priority.
The Army does intend to equip all of our Humvees that are
in the fleet with the increased safety capability as soon as
fiscally possible. But as you know, the Army is also
modernizing. And so this is a balance. And so in our light
tactical vehicle fleet, we are looking at bringing in the JLTV
[Joint Light Tactical Vehicle]. We are looking at bringing on
Humvees off the production line that already have safety
equipment, as well as retrofitting. So it is a balance across
the entire wheeled-vehicle fleet.
In 2022, we do have $10 million set aside for retrofit
kits. But we are also sharing the resources with JLTV, as well
as Humvees coming off the line already with the advanced safety
capability. And then I do want to remind you in fiscal year
2021 we were given an additional $4\1/2\ million to send out
two teams to Fort Bragg and Fort Lewis to retrofit teams--to
retrofit vehicles.
So this is important to us. But we are looking, while
keeping safety paramount, we are also looking at how we are
modernizing while maintaining our enduring force.
Mr. Fallon. Right. And, Secretary, sorry to cut you off.
But with all due respect, we only funded about 1 percent of
the vehicles for retrofit. And as you just mentioned, JLTV is
going to come on line in 2050. So buying new Humvees that we
know aren't--are going to be replaced, I think that it was not
quite the balance that it should have been. And I would really
like to see and will advocate for the retrofitting whenever
possible. And the $10 million was a pittance, considering it
should be probably closer to $200 million. But thank you so
much for your question.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Fallon.
Mr. Lamborn.
We are about to wrap up here. I don't see any other
members.
Mr. Bergman, did you want to ask a question?
Mr. Bergman. No, sir. I would make one comment to echo what
you have said multiple times. If you have a 25-year plan, you
don't have a plan. Speed it up. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Jack.
A couple of things. Mr. Fallon raised, and as did Ms.
Luria, one of the conundrums that all of us face. We have a
legacy fleet across all of the departments, and we need to move
on to tomorrow's platforms. And the conundrum is: How do we
maintain the legacy fleet as it phases out and the new
platforms phase in?
That conundrum requires additional resources at the depots
so that the transition can take place without loss of the
legacy fleet's readiness. We have seen multiple examples of
where this problem has led to tragedies. I am thinking of the
AAV amphibious vessels that were not maintained but used off
the coast, various rollovers, airplanes that--whose blades fall
off like the C-130s, and also radars that don't work well, and
ships run into each other in the Western Pacific.
It is the business of this committee to work with the
Department and--Departments and the Secretary to address this
ongoing issue which will be with us forevermore. And so there
are two things that seem to me to be fundamental.
First of all that the military that is--well just yesterday
a couple of generals said, ``If there is anything we do, we
plan.'' Okay. I want to see the plans for this, and that is the
5-year question versus the 20 years. We understand that this is
going to go beyond 5 years. And so but be very, very specific
about the first 5 years. And we will be watching that very
carefully.
We will also be looking at how to address the conundrum of
phasing in and phasing out, which I suspect is a question of
the facility itself, that if we are going build a new facility,
it would be built in such a way that it can be flexible.
And while I don't think there is anybody on this committee
that is an industrial architect, I know that every person on
this committee will think that they are when you look at your
plans. And then we will hire somebody to look at your plans
that is an industrial architect and planner. So be aware that
we are going to drive this issue.
I know that all of you are acting. We understand that. I
also know that you're all senior executives. And as near as I
can tell, none of you intend to retire. But the heat is going
to be on you so that you can put the heat on the new appointees
whenever they may arrive. And until they do, you are the direct
recipient of both the sources of concern.
I think we have covered most of the ground here. With that,
Doug, I am going to adjourn the committee. Look forward to the
future. Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

October 28, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

October 28, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

October 28, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. My understanding is that all three variants of F-35 are
exceeding requirements for reliability and maintenance hours per flight
hour. Can you provide some examples of how F-35 sustainability compares
with that of other fighters, correcting for any differences in how
fighters are supported?
Ms. Costello. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. We've heard the proposed depot investments described as
a ``once-in-a-lifetime'' project to bring the depots into the 21st
century. I am very concerned that these modernization efforts are
dependent on increasingly finite and competitive military construction
funding. Is your service committed to prioritizing these projects
during the military construction budgeting process? And should we be
relying on ``once-in-a-lifetime'' investments rather than making the
continuous investments necessary to sustain these facilities at modern
standards?
Mr. Morani. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. We've heard the proposed depot investments described as
a ``once-in-a-lifetime'' project to bring the depots into the 21st
century. I am very concerned that these modernization efforts are
dependent on increasingly finite and competitive military construction
funding. Is your service committed to prioritizing these projects
during the military construction budgeting process? And should we be
relying on ``once-in-a-lifetime'' investments rather than making the
continuous investments necessary to sustain these facilities at modern
standards?
Ms. Costello. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. We've heard the proposed depot investments described as
a ``once-in-a-lifetime'' project to bring the depots into the 21st
century. I am very concerned that these modernization efforts are
dependent on increasingly finite and competitive military construction
funding. Is your service committed to prioritizing these projects
during the military construction budgeting process? And should we be
relying on ``once-in-a-lifetime'' investments rather than making the
continuous investments necessary to sustain these facilities at modern
standards?
Mr. Stefany. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. We've heard the proposed depot investments described as
a ``once-in-a-lifetime'' project to bring the depots into the 21st
century. I am very concerned that these modernization efforts are
dependent on increasingly finite and competitive military construction
funding. Is your service committed to prioritizing these projects
during the military construction budgeting process? And should we be
relying on ``once-in-a-lifetime'' investments rather than making the
continuous investments necessary to sustain these facilities at modern
standards?
Ms. Saunders. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. At Hill AFB, we have a grouping of 66 buildings that
were constructed over 80 years ago, initially built as ammunition
warehouse space during WWII. Over the years, these buildings have been
modified to accommodate the mission but and are in disrepair and simply
not fit to house the 4,000 DOD personnel found working in them. Much of
our infrastructure not only leads to poor working conditions but have
contributed to recruiting challenges. The Navy has SIOP and the Army
has their 15-year optimization strategy; when will we see the Air
Force's plan to modernize the ALCs and can you elaborate on what you
believe should be the top 3 priorities of such plan?
Ms. Costello. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. DOD issued a report earlier this month entitled
Assessment of Electronics Maintenance As A Leading Driver of Weapons
Systems Non-Availability. The Report addresses a serious readiness and
sustainability issue relating to detecting and addressing electronic
faults in our aircraft that prevents these platforms from performing
their mission. The report specifically references technology and
equipment that is available to address this issue and notes the
improvement in readiness and the reduction in costs being delivered as
a result. This technology and equipment are currently and successfully
deployed at Hill AFB in my district, but not widely deployed across the
services. Is there any interest within the department to increase
funding for the expansion of the deployment of this technology?
Ms. Costello. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. Currently, energy usage at fixed DOD installations
exceeds $4B per year, representing over 22% of the total Federal energy
usage and nearly 40% of DOD greenhouse gas emissions, second only to
transportation fuels. Continuously- active wireless sensors are
available today, which if deployed on all energy-critical assets would
dramatically reduce DOD's energy consumption and CO2 emissions. One
example where this technology is used is within the Air Force, who is
currently involved in a pilot deployment of these batteryless monitors
on steam traps and using machine health monitors at the Ogden Air
Logistics Center at Hill Air Force Base. The project is estimating a
net savings of $13M over 10 years, with more than a 350% return on
investment and a 108,000 metric ton reduction in CO2 emissions
(equivalent to reducing oil consumption by 250,000 barrels). Is there
interest from within the Depart to deploy these batterlyess steam trap
monitors and machine health monitors more broadly across DOD
installations?
Ms. Costello. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]

[all]
