- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-50] Department of Defense Information Technology, Cybersecurity, and Information Assurance for Fiscal Year 2022

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-50]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

ON

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,

CYBERSECURITY, AND INFORMATION
ASSURANCE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 29, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-433                    WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              JIM BANKS, Indiana
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
RO KHANNA, California                MO BROOKS, Alabama
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania,      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Vice Chair                       C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado                 BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             PAT FALLON, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York

Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Moxley, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Franklin, Hon. C. Scott, a Representative from Florida,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and Information
Systems........................................................     2
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems............................................     1

WITNESSES

Sherman, John, Acting Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Defense.....................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................    29
Sherman, John................................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Ms. Houlahan.................................................    45
Mr. Langevin.................................................    45
Mr. Larsen...................................................    46

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Banks....................................................    49
Ms. Houlahan.................................................    50
Mr. Moore....................................................    52

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INFORMATION

TECHNOLOGY, CYBERSECURITY, AND INFORMATION ASSURANCE FOR FISCAL YEAR
2022

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, June 29, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:02 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER,
INNOVATIVECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Langevin. The subcommittee will come to order. So I
want to welcome everyone to today's hearing on the Department
of Defense information technology, cybersecurity, and
information assurance. This is the subcommittee's first hearing
on the Department's current IT [information technology] efforts
and the requested investments for fiscal year 2022.
Since this subcommittee was formed at the start of the
117th Congress, our members have been eager and encouraged to
see the Department of Defense approach its information
technologies with a prioritization that has been lacking in the
past. Of the many lessons from the pandemic, we have seen
clearly that technology can revolutionize how we conduct our
business, whether that is in Congress, or in the Department of
Defense. However, it also requires that the infrastructure
which enables our technology is prioritized and secured in a
commensurate way.
In my many years in Congress, I have witnessed firsthand
the progress that the Department has made in improving the ways
in which it can utilize technology. Nevertheless, there is
still tremendous work to do. Year after year, we have leaders
from across the Department tell us that they consider IT to be
a priority before immediately pivoting to discuss how much
funding they need for more flight hours, or more aircraft, or
more tanks.
Quite frankly, I would like to think that technology will
truly be a priority when, for example, the Chief of Naval
Operations says that the Navy can live with one less fighter
aircraft in favor of greater IT investment.
Through multiple National Defense Authorization Acts, the
Congress has judged it prudent to empower the chief information
officer [CIO] in managing the Department's technology
portfolio. Today, the CIO is a Senate-confirmed position, has
oversight over each of the service's IT budgets, and manages
not only the Department's networks, but also its
electromagnetic spectrum enterprise and command and control and
communications efforts. This places the CIO in a unique
operationalized role, contributing to success in the
Department's ``no-fail'' missions.
At the same time, there are still questions about how the
Department of Defense defines the roles and responsibilities
for cyber matters. If the Secretary of Defense is asked who is
in charge of buying weapons for the Department, the answer is
unequivocal: it is the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Sustainment.
Conversely, if the Secretary is asked who is in charge of
keeping DOD networks safe, the fact that there isn't a single
correct answer is troubling. The Secretary could respond with
the chief information officer, or the commander of Cyber
Command, or even the chiefs of the military services, and he
wouldn't technically be wrong in any of these responses.
So if we can teach every one of our new officers about the
criticality of clear command and control, why can't it apply--
apply this to the highest levels of the Department?
So with that as the context, I want to welcome Mr. John
Sherman, who appears in front of the subcommittee today. Mr.
Sherman serves as the acting chief information officer. And
while we have had the pleasure to work together since assuming
the role in January, this is his first appearance before a HASC
[House Armed Services Committee] hearing. He is a career member
of the senior intelligence service and previously served as
chief information officer of the U.S. intelligence community.
So, I thank you, Mr. Sherman, for your service and your
commitment to the United States and the work that you are doing
in DOD [Department of Defense].
But before we get to you, I would like to now yield to Mr.
Franklin, who is stepping in for Ranking Member Banks. Scott,
the floor is yours.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
FLORIDA, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, AND
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Sherman, for your time here with us today.
The Department's information technology and cybersecurity
budget may not be the most riveting subject, but it is
certainly one of the most critical. IT undergirds every
Department, or every part of the Department, whether it is
protecting our Defense networks from adversaries; managing the
DOD's spectrum to ensure swift, clear communication with our
troops around the world; or deploying IT or software--secure
software, IT is foundational from weapon systems to financial
management.
In an enterprise as large as the Department of Defense,
with its many missions, different systems, and multiple
stakeholders, we are fortunate there has not been a
catastrophic IT failure rendering our equipment no better than
paperweights, or allowing adversaries to sit in our networks
and capture sensitive information.
I am encouraged by the direction of the Department, but
this is not an area where we can afford to slow down. Without
strategic vision, resourcing, and investment in the workforce,
and buy-in from leadership in the Department, failure is
possible.
The IT and cyberspace budget represents roughly 7 percent
of the DOD budget. So every dollar must be used wisely. I look
forward to hearing your views and justifications for the budget
and how you are using the dollars to pursue modernization,
efficiencies, and security.
The Department of Defense has a technology deficit. And
unless we make both the necessary investments and
prioritizations, we risk weakening our national security, and
none of us here wants that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Good. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
With that, I want to turn it Mr. Sherman for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SHERMAN, ACTING CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Sherman. Thank you very much, sir. Good afternoon Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee today on the current efforts underway pertaining
to the Department's information technology and cybersecurity. I
am John Sherman, the acting Department of Defense Chief
Information Officer.
The President's interim national security strategic
guidance, as well as Secretary Austin's priorities drive the
key areas I will highlight regarding the Department's cloud,
software and network modernization, cybersecurity workforce,
command control communications, and data.
In what I see as a critical step for the whole enterprise,
we have made cloud computing a fundamental component of our
global IT infrastructure and modernization strategy. With
battlefield success increasingly reliant on digital
capabilities, cloud computing satisfies the warfighters'
requirements for rapid access to data, innovative capabilities,
and assured support.
Furthermore, we remain committed in our drive toward a
multivendor, multicloud ecosystem, with our fiscal year 2022
cloud investments representing over 50 different commercial
vendors, including commercial cloud service providers and
system integrators.
The Department's cloud conversancy and ability to leverage
this technology has definitely matured over the last several
years, and we are driving hard to accelerate the momentum even
more in this space.
Software capabilities and networks are also critical to our
success. I am pleased to announce that we will release a
software modernization strategy later this summer that builds
on already-developed guidance, such as DevSecOps 2.0 guidance
released last month. We are dedicated to delivering resilient
software capability at the speed of relevance. The fiscal year
2022 budget includes investments to enable software
modernization, with cloud services as the foundation to fully
integrate the technology, process, and people needed to deliver
next-generation capabilities.
Meanwhile, the COVID-19 pandemic crisis changed the way we
all work. The Department deployed a commercial-based
collaboration capability to enable the rapid transition to
remote work. While cloud access and remote work introduces a
significant burden to the DOD networks, we continue to deploy
secure and agile solutions.
All of these efforts must address cybersecurity from the
start. The Secretary previously discussed the Department's
investment in cybersecurity and cyberspace operations that will
maintain the momentum of our digital modernization strategy.
The fiscal year 2022 DOD cybersecurity budget maintains
enhanced funding levels established in fiscal year 2020 and
fiscal year 2021 for key enterprise cybersecurity capabilities
that will enable us to advance our focus on Zero Trust and risk
management and drive our new investments to enhance resiliency
and cyber defenses. We take our responsibilities in this area
very seriously given the threat landscape we face.
While all divisions on our CIO team support warfighting, it
is command, control, and communications, or C3, that might be
most closely linked to the warfighter on the ground, sea, air,
and space domains. The critical capabilities in this portfolio,
positioning, navigation, and timing, or PNT; electromagnetic
spectrum enterprise, or EMSE; and 5G, are a key priority for
the enterprise, especially as we face threats from our near-
peer competitors.
Finally, we often note that data is the ammunition of the
future. The Department has prioritized ensuring the timely,
secure, and resilient access to data needed for military
advantage and all-domain operations. While data management is
not directly tied to specific program elements in the fiscal
year 2022 budget request, we are identifying, assessing, and
tracking our data-related investments as part of the budget
certification process that I lead.
In closing, I want to emphasize the importance of our
partnership with Congress in all areas, but with a particular
focus on digital modernization and IT reform.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this afternoon.
And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sherman can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
So, we are going to go member questions now as we recognize
in order of seniority for 5 minutes. And I will start with
myself.
Mr. Sherman, first question I have, and I am going to be
direct, the Department released a comprehensive summary
document of its IT and cyberspace activities budget, totaling
30 pages. This year, that same document is six pages, only two
of which contain any substance. Separately, this committee has
made your office aware that the IT and cyberspace activities
portion of this year's defense budget overview was nearly a
carbon copy of the 2020 defense budget overview.
I have to be honest with you. If the Department of Defense
were a high school student, I would have called this
plagiarism. So with all due respect, if your office cannot be
troubled to put together the necessary materials for this
committee's oversight, how can we trust the stewardship of this
critical portfolio?
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question. And
I appreciate everything you are saying. And your staff had
raised this with us a couple of weeks ago.
So, a couple of things happened on this as I have dug into
this in my 6 months into the job, and particularly as it was
raised recently. Part of the reduction in the length of the
documents had to do with the CUI, or controlled unclassified
information, designator that was put on it that, in a way,
perhaps restricted the number of pages on there.
But your point, sir, about the carbon copy is something I
take very seriously. Your staff has raised this with me. And I
will own this and ensure we get it better next time. And,
indeed, I have been laser-focused on the technology and
cybersecurity, but we need to do a better job in CIO working
with comptroller and other Department colleagues in the level
of product we share with you. So sir, I will take this guidance
on and make it a priority going forward. And I appreciate you
flagging it, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Without that level of detail, just to
understand, we can't fulfill our oversight responsibilities. We
are in the dark otherwise. And that is unacceptable going
forward. So I take you at your word and we will go from there.
Also, in reviewing the Department's budget materials, it
would appear that there are significant challenges between all
of the various DOD entities in harmonizing how the Department
categorizes its cybersecurity and IT investments. For example,
the Navy does not categorize endpoint device management tools
as cybersecurity funding, yet the Air Force does. As a result,
it is nearly impossible to get a comprehensive picture of how
resources are being spent. How can our members help you
accelerate the efforts to create greater compliance and
consistency in understanding the Department's investments?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, thank you for that. I think some of this
is what we need to be doing on our own within the CIO
enterprise, working with our service and other colleagues as we
work the budget year to year.
To your point, and I took this once I got in the seat here,
that our $5.5 billion for cybersecurity thereabouts doesn't,
indeed, represent the totality of cybersecurity throughout the
Department. It is a large portion of it, but to your point
about endpoint security--and I will give another example, what
we have done with DOD or Office 365, and some of the
cybersecurity features we bought from the vendor on there are
reflected in our enterprise and not cyber budget.
Cybersecurity is my top priority as CIO, along with the
other modernization activities. But to be able to reflect the
totality of that is something we need to do a better job of.
And I think we have the tools and wherewithal internally to
work with our colleagues to make sure we can reflect this more
accurately. But this is something, sir, I have noticed
recently, because the $5.5 billion, while an accurate
assessment of cybersecurity, there are some more in the budget
that we need to be able to reflect in there. So sir, we will
take that on board as well.
Mr. Langevin. It is important. Having that common
understanding is going to help us better understand, you know,
where we are lacking capabilities, where are we investing in
the right place, and how our dollars are being spent.
In the statement you submitted to the committee, you noted
that you serve as the Department's lead for industrial control
systems [ICS] cybersecurity. You also noted that the Department
is working to build cybersecurity expertise in the cyber
workforce and developing capabilities to monitor ICS systems.
So I have a few questions about this.
First, does the Department use the term ICS and operational
technology, or OT, interchangeably?
Mr. Sherman. To my understanding right now, we do, sir.
This is an area of late that I have wanted to really dig on,
both back when I was the principal deputy CIO at the time and
now as the acting CIO. To answer your question, I believe we
use those interchangeably. I am working with our chief
information security officer, just as recently as this week, to
start to gather the documentation we have on this to ensure
that we, at the departmental CIO level, have the right sort of
guidance and the articulation of terms, right what you are
getting at, sir, as we are using IO--and I will throw IOT,
internet of things, in there as well, along with industrial
control systems, operational technology, et cetera, to get at
the main issue that we are not creating seams in our
cybersecurity activities between the cyber defenders and our
facility managers, where an adversary could go after things
like HVAC [heating, ventilation, air conditioning], elevators,
and other places that would allow cyber vulnerabilities. So
that is where we are at right now, sir.
Mr. Langevin. And what is the difference between defense
cyber workforce, and cyberspace operations forces?
Mr. Sherman. The--I want to make sure I get this one right.
The defense cyber workforce would include the way we
characterize the work roles, include the cyber workforce, I
believe in there, sir. So the defense cyber workforce is based
only the framework of the occupational series we have, I
believe there are 54, of any type of individual military or
civilian operating in cyber work roles in terms of whether you
are a coder, a cyber defender, et cetera.
So this gets to the blocking and tackling we have been
doing over the past couple of years to get our arms around the
totality of our cyber workforce. So, I will take that for the
record to ensure I am being correct on this, sir. But the cyber
operators that are working for CYBERCOM [U.S. Cyber Command]
and elsewhere included in our broader Cyber Workforce framework
that we have put together to allow us to get the fidelity we
need on these occupational series, and the work roles so we can
look all the way across the dozens of work roles with the
fidelity we need to be able to characterize the tens of
thousands of individuals we have in this area, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 45.]
Mr. Langevin. And last question I have--and then I am going
to yield to the ranking member, and hopefully, we will get a
second round in, too--but do the efforts that your statement
describe extend to the cyber mission force, and/or the cyber
operation forces? And will the cyberspace operations forces
have dedicated elements for OT cybersecurity?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, I want to take that one for the record
and make sure I give you the right answer on that. I would see
the IOT, the industrial control system, absolutely involving
our CYBERCOM colleagues on this, but in terms of how we are
going to structure this, it is frankly early in the movie on
this, and I want to make sure I get the right answer for you on
that, sir. But this a priority for me, especially post-Colonial
Pipeline. This was a wake-up call. And again, the Department
has been on this, but what can be done to ICS? I want to ensure
we are putting all the piece parts to this together. So I will
need to take that one for the record as well, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 45.]
Mr. Langevin. We look forward to getting the follow-up from
you for the record.
With that, I am going to hold there and yield to the
ranking member.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sherman, it is my understanding that the Department of
Defense allows unpatched software to remain on the network for
120 days before being removed. When our adversaries are
increasingly looking to attack us from the cyber domain, can
you highlight what the Department's doing to reduce this
timeframe, and make sure our systems are not vulnerable? And
then part two of that, do you have the authorities necessary to
require the services and components to act?
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, sir. I believe we do absolutely
have the authorities we need on this. And this gets into the
broader cybersecurity push we have. Looking at things like our
risk management framework, the standards we have about how long
software can remain on our network, and, indeed, one of my
absolute main priorities is we move to a Zero Trust
architecture getting after things like unpatched software, but
also, an overall holistic approach to how we structure our
networks and making it assume that the bad guys are going to
get on there, and how do we segment things, ensure it is
patched as quickly as possible, and have the very best tools
and approach on this. So sir, this is something 120 days is
probably too long. We would need to take a look at that, but
this gets to the broader push.
I've also got the CISA [Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency] working on to how can we do this better to
ensure as we look at peer competitors and non-state actors that
know they are coming at this, that that is not what we want to
be able maintain there, sir. So we will be looking at that.
Mr. Franklin. Very good.
In your testimony you state that not all priorities can be
satisfied in each budget. That is pretty much a standard for
all the different departments that come before us. But can you
highlight what is not being satisfied in the President's
budget? And what risks are there associated with those unfunded
priorities?
Mr. Sherman. Well, sir, I would say the main priorities are
all being answered in the President's budget. We do have some
risk areas that bother me, though, as CIO. And these have been
enduring and I think my predecessors would have said the same
thing. You mentioned about the software patching, that is
something immediately on our networks. Working with our
colleagues in Acquisition and Sustainment, I really want to put
our shoulder in to weapon systems, and critical infrastructure,
recognizing that our adversaries are going to be coming after
those, too, and moving just beyond the Department of Defense
Information Network under my charge, but looking again at
weapon systems and elsewhere where we can work with General
Nakasone's team at CYBERCOM, work with A&S [Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment]. And those are some
risk areas that because some of these programs were started in
the 1990s when cybersecurity was in a different place, we have
a better way to come at this. That is the type of area, sir,
where I think we are carrying some risk that I want to do a
better job of working with our colleagues in the Department.
Mr. Franklin. Okay.
And one final question for this round. Recent cyber
attacks, such as those on the Colonial Pipeline and water
treatment facility back in my home State of Florida, have
highlighted that critical infrastructure and utilities are
becoming more integrated with traditional IT networks, and
therefore, can be more exposed to cyber risks. How could the
DOD's mission be impacted by such attacks on critical
infrastructure and utility operations technology? And what are
the Department's plans to ensure an adequate level of
protection to those assets that is commensurate with the risk?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. That gets exactly to what I was
mentioning with the chairman's question on this as well. ICS,
industrial control systems, operational technology, and we will
get the terminology all right on this, but exactly what you are
talking about, a cyber attack not necessarily launched on our
networks, but against our water supply, our heating and
cooling, on a data center somewhere that could be the same as a
kinetic kill on something, and shutting the water off for
cooling. Any number of things that affect our operations on our
installations.
What I didn't appreciate until I got into this job was
there could be seams we need to address. And so again this is
one of our priorities is I am having our team do a close look
at what policies we have in place. Is it directive enough? Is
it suggestive? And we need to roll in harder on this? What I
don't want to have happen is any seams between the outfield so
to speak, between facilities, cybersecurity, and elsewhere,
where our adversaries could find a gap and get after us and
hurt our facilities in the NCR [National Capital Region], or
one of our installations, or overseas, or our warfighting
ability. So this is a priority, sir, and it is in progress as
we are looking at this. And again, as recently as this week, we
have been working on this.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Larsen is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Sherman, it is good to see you. In your testimony, on
page 10, you--on page 9 and 10, you discuss 5G; in particular,
that, I think you say that the Department's ready to make
available 3.45 to 3.65, but you have concerns about the 3.1 to
3.45. Is this a setting in which you can explain some of your
concerns about the mission operational impact on the 3.1 to
3.45?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. At a high level, so the 3.45 to 3.65
are areas we have actually been able to vacate, or are in the
process of vacating. The other one, the 3.1 and up to 3.45,
this other band has quite a bit of DOD activity in it in the
continental United States and our territories for radars and
other capabilities that are used for training, as well as real-
world operations, homeland security, and so on. Whereas we have
been able to vacate, or in the process of outright vacating
those other bands, this one is going to be trickier, where
we're gonna need to learn and be able share that, where we can
have some sort of relationship if this becomes available
working with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and
Commerce, NTIA [National Telecommunications and Information
Administration] to where--I will give you an example of the
kind of vision we have on this, would be, say, an Aegis-class
cruiser down in Norfolk needs to be able to bring up their very
powerful radar, but not every day, maybe certain days of the
months. But when that illuminates, it can go well into the
Tidewater region, as I understand it.
Well, hopefully, we are able to walk and chew gum where we
can work out arrangements where on those days that cruiser has
to bring the radar up, there could be some sort of sharing of
that spectrum. That is what I am getting at with that band,
that 3.1 to 3.45, recognizing there is a lot. And I just used a
naval example. There are plenty of others that operate in that
space, where our soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, and
guardians have to be able to operate in that space. And again,
some of this is for real-world operational activity, AWACS
[Airborne Warning and Control System] is an example.
So that is what we are looking at. We want the U.S. to be a
5G dominant Nation, but we also have to maintain these DOD
operational needs. But we think we can work this out and that
is what we are looking at in that band, sir.
Mr. Larsen. You might know, we have been trying to help you
all work that out as well. It has been fits and starts a little
bit.
So can you discuss, does CIO have a role and what would you
assess the progress of the 5G pilot projects? You don't have to
go through all 12, but do you have general thoughts right now?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. We absolutely have a role. So we
work with our Research and Engineering colleagues, USD R&E
[Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering], they
have the lead. We work it from the CIO side with the standards
piece, working it closely with them. And working it--I don't
want to say at a more strategic level, but there is a very
close partnership where they are working directly with the
services. And, sir, you are aware of all 12.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah.
Mr. Sherman. Logistics, and healthcare, and aircraft
maintenance, and everything else. Well, we are working the
standards piece and working with the higher level interlocutors
at FCC, and Commerce, and elsewhere. So it is a very good
coupling between their leadership, working with the
stakeholders on the pilots, and us working it from a CIO
standards, policies--I don't want to say oversight yet, but
that piece of it, so we do have a very close part.
Mr. Larsen. When those are done or when there is some
assessment, I would note in your testimony, it said, CIO gets
those in 2024. So will you--will the CIO office be taking the
operational role at some point?
Mr. Sherman. I think we need to define exactly what that
means, sir. But yes, I think we are going to have that, as
mentioned in my written submission. And by 2024 and what does
that look like? And as our colleagues in R&E move on to 6G, and
Next G, and keep leading us in that direction to stay ahead of
our adversaries. So, yes, sir. I see us as having the overall
baton, but to be honest, we have to define exactly what that is
going to look like.
Mr. Larsen. But that makes a broader assumption as well
that CIO will be, for lack of a better term, you will be the
repository for 5G, not military operations, but you will be the
keeper of 5G for the Department once we are using it.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. That is based on that assumption,
subject to administration and departmental guidance and
legislation from you all, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. That is great.
I only have 20 seconds, so I will ask the question, but we
may be able to come back. So I will give you a heads-up. It is
a question about the JAIC [Joint Artificial Intelligence
Center], and specifically the AI [artificial intelligence]
education strategy that was part of the 2020 NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act]. So if you have an update on that.
And specifically on that as well, any information on the
DOD's--your perspective on the National Security Commission on
AI and identification to be AI-ready by 2025 and will we be
ready?
With that, I will yield back. And you can chew on that
while we work through the first round.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Moore is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you all for being
here.
The intelligence community through its commercial cloud
enterprise initiative recently moved away from its previous
approach of utilizing one cloud provider, and has, instead,
adopted a new approach to cloud computing. Generally, I am in
favor of increasing competition and innovation. I believe this
ensures access to the latest emerging technologies and the
benefit of price competition, as well as the ability to procure
services based on specific workload. And the needs with that.
I am interested in learning how the Pentagon has approached
cloud computing in order to maximize the benefits of
competition, while balancing the needs of managing highly
sensitive, often classified, DOD materials. So my question to
Mr. Sherman, the Pentagon's $10 billion JEDI [Joint Enterprise
Defense Infrastructure] program has been in ongoing yearslong
litigation. One of the key objectives for the JEDI contract is
to move at the speed of relevance to support the delivery in
sharing information real-time for our Nation's warfighters, but
with years of delays that has still not happened. I know that
JEDI is in litigation, and your comments may be short on
specifics, but can you speak generally about how the Office of
CIO is approaching cloud currently? And what plans are in place
or being made for the Department for future cloud services?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. So, starting with cloud writ large,
we went from a situation where we had maybe almost a 1,000
flowers blooming, to really starting to consolidate down where
we have roughly a dozen as we would call them fit-for-purpose
clouds. You have heard of some of them: milCloud 2.0, the Air
Force's Cloud One, the new cloud Army, cARMY as they call it,
and I can go into some others, where we are using those as
platforms for software development for some of the AI activity
at the unclassified and secret level, in some cases. Some are
on premises, some are off premises. But this gets into that in
my opening statement about the cloud conversancy in the
Department moving from a capital expenditure or CapEx model, to
where we maintain all the infrastructure and all the hardware
to an OpEx or an operations expenditure model which we would
use a cloud setting. So it is not only having the software
development, the DevSecOps, workloads, but learning how to live
and operate in a cloud environment. And that we have done. So
we have been able to work on that across the services, across
the enterprise, and with the Defense agencies and field
activities.
To your point, we still also have an urgent unmet need for
an enterprise cloud capability at all three security levels--
unclassified, secret, and top secret--that extends all the way
from headquarters all the way to the tactical edge. And that
has not gone away at this time.
And as Deputy Secretary Hicks made some recent public
statements, we are continuing to assess our next steps vis-a-
vis, the what comes next or what should we be doing with that
enterprise cloud urgent and unmet need. And that is where we
are now on the cloud and we will be pending your further
questions.
Mr. Moore. Would leveraging public-private partnerships
help in that regard? Given the fact that a healthy majority of
cyber infrastructure in this country is owned by the private
industry, do you see an opportunity to leverage that with those
particular challenges and moving forward?
Mr. Sherman. I think some of the main challenges--and we do
obviously want to work very closely with our industry partners
on their best capabilities, gets into the cybersecurity realm
as we move from different impact levels as we call from IL, or
Impact Level 2, which is what we just did on that commercial
virtual remote, that COVID-era remote work capability up now to
what we call DOD 365 to get onto an Impact Level 5 enclave that
in this case Microsoft helped set up for us in different
tenants of which we have 13 of them. So, sir, a lot of that--we
appreciate the public-private partnership, but for the
Department of Defense and for our mission, cybersecurity is
going to be paramount in that discussion.
Mr. Moore. Yeah. And I would agree with that. I mean, it
started--the questioning--we are talking about the intelligence
community, and absolutely respect that.
I look at our Space Force, right? And how our Space Force
is able to leverage so much from the private sector, just
thinking about how we can create more efficiencies and leverage
it. Obviously, paramount is the classification and ability to
do that.
So with 20 seconds left, I will yield back. And thank you
very much.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
Ms. Houlahan is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I just would like
to say I find this testimony riveting. And, so, I appreciate
the conversation. And I am glad to be here to ask you
questions.
I guess my first question has do with a letter that I
recently sent to Secretary Austin with several of my
colleagues, and asked the DOD to implement a mandatory training
on digital literacy and cyber citizenship within the DOD. The
proposed defense budget would set aside $30.8 million to help
the Pentagon improve tools to identify and address extremism
amongst troops and to enhance training at all levels. It also
included $9.1 million to take initial steps to fight extremism
and insider threats.
I was wondering if you might be able to share a little bit
of detail on what sort of tools there would be possibly, and
trainings there would be possibly, and what they might look
like?
Mr. Sherman. For digital literacy, ma'am ----
Ms. Houlahan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Or countering extremists
specifically?
Ms. Houlahan. Digital literacy. The idea here, sir, is that
we need to make sure that everybody has understanding of how to
assess truth. And literacy is a set of skills that is not just
reading, but it is also numeracy, it is financial literacy. It
is also just kind of civics engagement and understanding how to
understand when you are being not told the truth. And so, the
digital literacy would be for our troops in that area.
Mr. Sherman. Ma'am, at a high level, I will say I know
there are training opportunities all across the enterprise in
terms specifically for those operating. And, ma'am, I know you
have got a lot of experience of this from Hanscom [Air Force
Base] and elsewhere for those operating in the digital space.
But in terms, I would like to take this for the record to give
you a holistic answer. Because I am going to be honest with
you, I haven't had a chance to drill down on exactly how much
we have for the--everybody's digital, of course, but if I am
not working in the information technology or cybersecurity, and
if I'm in operations let's say, which I think is what your
letter is getting at, I would like to get back to you and take
a look at that and see exactly what we have on the shelf and
what we can do to expand what you are getting at to beyond the
standard, computer-based training on things like avoiding
cybersecurity threats.
Ms. Houlahan. Sure.
Mr. Sherman. But avoiding or doing the right thing. So,
ma'am, I would like to take that for the record and come back
to you with that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 45.]
Ms. Houlahan. No. I appreciate that. And I would love to
follow up with you on that.
My next question is about investment in STEM [science,
technology, engineering and mathematics] to make sure that we
have competitive cyber professionals that are able to meet our
Nation's workforce demands. And so, I am really interested in
your Cyber Excepted Service. At the hearing in April before the
Senate Armed Services personnel committee, the Acting Secretary
for Defense for civilian personnel testified that cyber
exceptional service was important and that authorities have
been able to enhance recruitment of cyber professionals. He
pointed to the flexibility in compensation and classification
of work requirements as examples of how this program has been
able to better meet targeted cyber needs.
We also received testimony in the subcommittee from the
U.S. CYBERCOM commander that the mission and the opportunity to
work with colleagues of such caliber provides the most unique
and important competitive advantage than compensation when
competing with the commercial industry.
So, I would like to hear your take on what it is--what is
and what isn't working with Cyber Excepted Service from an IT
perspective, rather than from a personnel perspective. Do you
agree with the assessments that we have heard previously? What
would you like Congress to know about what is and what isn't
working as we continue to examine these and other authorities
to meet the DOD's cyber needs?
Mr. Sherman. I think at a higher level I think CES [Cyber
Excepted Service] is working well. I think, and as I put in my
written testimony, we got about 9,000 civilian positions that
it could apply to, and we have got about 6,500 that have been
converted. This has been, as us at an enterprise level,
learning how to use this capability to the best advantage,
getting it out there to the different services and components
on how to use it. And also, as we use the targeted local market
supplement, TLMS, to the best advantage, and the other
capabilities that CES provides us for expedited hiring, and
benefits, and so on to get that talent in the door.
I would say this really does have to be nested in a broader
cyber workforce strategy, which I have actually launched, and
we aim to publish early next year on what is it we are trying
to do with CES and all these other tools in our toolkit here,
and to increase the diversity, the capability, the conversancy
of our workforce for the 21st century threats. And also
leveraging back to the STEM training, things like the NSA
[National Security Agency] scholarship program they have, and
being able to fit that in, and also the accreditation they have
for institutions around the country from junior colleges up to
4-year institutions. So what I saw lacking was we didn't have
one place, we had a little bit in our cyber strategy. We need a
cyber workforce strategy. And as a matter of fact, I chaired
the first--I need to make sure I get this right--the CWMB, the
Cyber Workforce Management Board. We hadn't held one in a year.
I said we need to hold one, which I co-chair with personnel
resources and PCA [principal cyber advisor] to be able to start
to look as these hard problems that you are getting at, ma'am,
with CES and some of these other talent issues we have got to
get right.
Ms. Houlahan. I know my time has expired, and I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Houlahan.
Before we go to the second round, is there any member who
has not asked a question in the first round that wants to ask a
question? Any of our members remotely? Okay.
Hearing none, we are going to move to the second round. And
I will recognize myself for the first round of second
questions.
So out of the 17 unfunded priority lists submitted by DOD
components and commands, there are a total of $1.2 billion in
IT-related requests. Obviously, no small number. As the DOD is
officially responsible for compiling and certifying the
Department's IT and cyberspace activities budget, what does it
say that the various components have identified IT and cyber
requirements may judge to be critical, but do not prioritize
them enough in the normal budget process to make sure that they
are in the President's budget?
Mr. Sherman. So as a CIO, this is an ongoing thing we need
to always be looking at. We have certified the budget as
required for sufficiency to ensure that as we look at our
digital modernization priorities, that the components
submitting, the services and so on, have funded sufficiently to
reach that, as well as within the submitted budget, the
increase roughly I think 5 or so percent since last year we
have seen an in--our submitted increase to get after what we
need to get to. But to your point about UFR [unfunded
requirements], sir, being able to be have the governance to
work with them to ensure that this is being submitted properly
and not outside of what we are certifying is something I will
continue to focus on as CIO to ensure we can get this right.
But I feel that we have certified a good budget, that we have
what we need to cover down on digital modernization priorities.
And we will continue to watch this closely with our component
colleagues.
Mr. Langevin. So I have consistently advocated for more
dedicated senior leadership and focus for electromagnetic
spectrum operations at the Department. Mr. Sherman, in your
written testimony, you wrote that the CIO has been assigned and
designated as senior official for long-term implementation of
the 2020 spectrum superiority strategy. When will this
implementation plan be released? And how do you intend to carry
it out? And why would this plan be successful while others have
fallen short?
Mr. Sherman. So on the question, we expect the
implementation plan to be signed very soon by the Secretary. I
don't have an exact date. But we have got this teed up, ready
to go. And in terms of why it will be successful, the
commitment from the Department, from the Joint Chiefs to the
OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] side, in recognizing
that we have got to get this right in a near-peer competitor
environment, not that we haven't been focusing on this during
the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, but as we look at China, and
Russia, and other adversaries in that regard, electromagnetic
spectrum is going to be critical, just as critical as kinetic
long-range fires, space, cyberspace, and so on. We've got to be
successful.
So the commitment from the Chairman, the Vice Chairman,
Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and everybody has been very
strong. So we are confident that we are going to have what we
need.
And back, I think, to your middle question, sir, we are the
main overseeing official for this. The Vice Chairman through
the Joint Staff is leading a CFT [cross-functional team], a
functional team working on this. And come start of fiscal year
2022, we are going to take the baton as the implementing office
for this.
So we are the overall lead responsible official for the
Department, Joint Staff is working the CFT and we are ready to
pick that up. And sir, I feel we have the commitment on this
across the services and the seriousness recognizing the threats
we face right now.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
With that, since Ms. Bice has not asked a question yet, I
will yield to Ms. Bice for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing today. Mr. Sherman, thank you for being
here.
The DOD's cloud strategy calls for three clouds: milCloud
2.0, a secure premise cloud; the Defense Enterprise [Office]
Solution, cloud-based secure collaboration solution; and the
JEDI, general purpose cloud. Fourth Estate agencies were
directed to move to the milCloud 2.0, but adoption has been
incredibly slow. Today, only 3 percent of the targeted
workloads have migrated to the milCloud. This has delayed
realization of enhanced security, which is paramount in light
of the most recent Colonial Pipeline and Solar Winds
cybersecurity attacks.
A little bit back of background. I come from a family
business that has dealt in the technology space. And I
recognize the critical need for us to protect our assets,
especially in the cyberspace. Will the DOD enforce the 2018
mandate directing milCloud 2.0 migration by the Fourth Estate?
Mr. Sherman. We are going to ensure that it is being used
where it can be used and ensuring that the DAFAs, the Defense
agencies and field activities, that need the on-prem capability
that it provides are going to use it.
In terms of what was directed in 2018, I am frankly, from
my seat, going to take a more nuanced approach on this.
MilCloud 2.0 is a powerful capability on-prem. To your point,
it operates at IL 5. It is not yet accredited at IL 6 secret.
And roughly 25 percent of the DAFA migrations that have
occurred from legacy to cloud-based solutions have gone to
milCloud 2.0. It is a powerful arrow in our quiver, but not the
only one. And, so, that is the approach I am taking on this. It
is definitely a good capability to have, but it is not our only
capability. And so, that is how I am approaching this, ma'am.
Mrs. Bice. If I may follow up. So you are suggesting that
only 25 percent has migrated to milCloud. What is the other 75
percent doing?
Mr. Sherman. They are going to other cloud-based
capabilities. Amazon, Microsoft, and DISA [Defense Information
Systems Agency] provided cloud capabilities to get off of
legacy platforms.
Mrs. Bice. Do you feel like the migrating to those
particular platforms provides a security that you feel
comfortable with?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, ma'am, It does.
Mrs. Bice. A follow-up question to that, if I can. Our
adversaries have made it known that they plan to use artificial
intelligence to gain a competitive advantage in cyberspace.
What is the DOD doing to match and exceed any capabilities our
adversaries might develop in this space to defend our assets,
and ensure DOD can effectively carry out its mission? What
keeps you up at night?
Mr. Sherman. What keeps me up at night are cyber threats of
the kind we are seeing across the country, not only against the
government, but against the private sector. This is the main
reason I am so committed to moving out with the Zero Trust
implementation at the Department of Defense. I want DOD to be a
leader in this space.
Zero Trust has been bandied about for years. Some in the
private sector may have achieved this at some level, but no
department has at the level I am suggesting. With an assumption
that the adversary is on the network, we must segment in a way
we never have before. Instrument the network in a way we
haven't, and using things like identity credentials access
management, endpoint security, comply to connect. And it is not
one thing you buy, but a host of capabilities. I know what the
Chinese and Russians want to do to our networks and this is the
most important role I have as CIO, along with our types of
modernization for our warfighters, keeping our networks safe.
I have often noted that right now, the offensive side has
all the capability. And we on the defensive side have got to
run a new defense, to use one of my football terms. We are
going to run a new defense. That is what keeps me up. And it is
going to involve making it about the data in the systems as
well as, ma'am, artificial intelligence, how we can bring that
to bear, so we don't segment ourselves and have to have tens of
thousands of defenders doing the work that a set of AI
algorithms can do. So that is going to be part of Zero Trust as
well.
Mrs. Bice. Mr. Sherman, I appreciate your answer.
One of the concerns I have, however, is looking at, as a
freshman legislator, I am probably bringing a different
perspective, the time that it is taking to actually get these
services migrated to either cloud-based solutions or other that
can protect our assets. We talked about milCloud 2.0 being
implemented in 2018, and here we are 3 years later with a very
small percentage that have been migrated. How can we
effectively speed things up in a way that will make sure that
we are doing it in a thoughtful way but we are also protecting
our assets?
Mr. Sherman. Ma'am, I would just add, of the Defense
agencies and field activities, the first 14 of them, in our
first tranche, we moved 97 percent of their applications off
legacy to cloud of the four areas I talked about, as well as
the services have made great progress, shut down legacy data
centers, and got to manage services like cloud. We are moving
aggressively in this direction, recognizing the vulnerability
of legacy to cybersecurity threats. So we appreciate your
comments on that, ma'am.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mrs. Bice.
Mr. Larsen is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Sherman, thanks
for sticking around for my second round of questions. I
appreciate it.
I had a question regarding, first off, section 256 of the
fiscal year 2020 NDAA, which required the DOD to develop an AI
education strategy. And JAIC is responsible for that effort. Do
you have an update on that?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, I am going to have to take this for the
record. As the JAIC no longer reports to me directly, they are
close colleagues.
We work hand in glove with them. But some of their specific
initiatives, sir, I wouldn't feel comfortable articulating. I
would defer that to General Groen and the JAIC leadership. So I
would like to take that for the record to give you an accurate
answer back on that, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 46.]
Mr. Larsen. That is fine.
And then to follow up on some AI. I mentioned earlier, I
asked if the DOD CIO had perspective on whether or not we are
AI-ready. The National Security Commission on AI has a variety
of goals, including to be AI-ready by 2025. Do you think the
Department will be AI-ready by 2025?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir. I think holistically we are doing
the right things to be AI-ready. We talked about cloud a little
bit here in terms of what we have for cloud to host AI
capabilities and algorithms. The cybersecurity pieces I have
talked about with Zero Trust are going to be critical for
artificial intelligence. I will come back to our urgent and
unmet need for an enterprise-wide cloud capability from
headquarters to the tactical edge. That is going to be
important for AI, and it will go to what Deputy Secretary Hicks
announced last week with the AI and Data Accelerator
initiative, or AIDA, as we are calling it, to be able walk
across combatant commands, and unlock the power of AI for the
COCOMs [combatant commands] as well, using cloud-based
technology. So I think we are leaning in the right direct, but
we have with got some work to do.
Mr. Larsen. So on that point, though, then who is
responsible, for lack of a better term, educating the COCOMs on
the use of algorithms for purposes they define?
Mr. Sherman. I think this is exactly the AIDA initiative
that Deputy Secretary Hicks announced with these AI teams that
will be going to the COCOMs, as well as data teams, ODTs,
operational data teams, working together on both the data side
and the AI side, starting at places like NORTHCOM [U.S.
Northern Command], INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command], and
so on. Getting in there with the users and the various J-code
staffs and so on, and working on everything from the algorithm
development, building on say what Maven has done, and also on
the data side working on thing like Advana [advanced
analytics], and what the data capabilities are and merging that
together, so these teams that are coming out are going to be a
key accelerator for that, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. I might have missed it, but maybe I
didn't, do you have an update, or are you directly involved
with CMMC [Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification], with
the role cybersecurity plays with these smaller suppliers?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, only insofar as I had one of my senior
executives participate in the CMMC review which was conducted
by A&S as a subject matter expert to contribute to that. And
then only as CMMC connects to our broader defense industrial
base security that we are working through the strategic
cybersecurity program. But directly, no, sir. CMMC I am aware
of, but not directly leading.
Mr. Larsen. I understand. We will follow up with other
folks on that.
With that, Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
The ranking member, Mr. Franklin, is going to be
recognized.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Two follow-on questions. All of the services who have come
before us have talked about the need for more folks trained in
the area of cybersecurity. It is a hot job market in the
outside private sector. What difficulties are you facing in
hiring individuals with the skill sets you need? And what are
you doing to address any shortfalls?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, I think about this almost every day as I
look out my window over at Crystal City, and as I walk out to
my truck and look over at Rosslyn and the number of our private
sector partners who are competing for some of the very same
talent here. This gets to the cybersecurity workforce strategy
I spoke about a minute ago. We have got to come at this
differently here.
We are using the Cyber Excepted Service as mentioned to get
talent in here. We are using things like NSA educational
programs to get to the colleges and institutions. We have to
broaden the aperture on this, sir. I feel very strongly about
this. This is going to take a whole-of-Nation approach. We talk
about diversity is critical. And I mean diversity and not only
race, gender, but also geographic placement. We can't keep
going to the same wells and recruiting in the same places. I
want to broaden the aperture of the sort of talent we can bring
into the Department of Defense.
We may need to think differently, too, working with our P&R
[Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness]
colleagues about, I am not sure if we want to hire a data
scientist for 30 years. Maybe she comes in for 3 or 4 years,
gets the skills there, gets the patriotic duty for DOD and
returns to the private sector, and then comes back to us in
some number of years. We are going to have to work with our
colleagues in Intelligence and Security on how we work
clearance issues with that.
I am both excited by this, but also daunted, because of the
competitive environment in which we live with our private
sector colleagues and the whole-of-Nation approach this is
going to take to stand up against our adversaries, sir.
Mr. Franklin. One last question. In the physical domain, a
commander would be held accountable if he or she lost equipment
or mishandled it. To what extent do you believe commanders are
held sufficiently accountable for not caring for DOD
information and system in their care?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, this is an evolving era that we have
talked about quite a bit. Part of the issue, and I felt
passionately about this myself, if you roll out of a motor pool
without proper ammunition, or fuel on your fighting vehicle, or
off pushing the ship off the dock, et cetera, you are held
accountable for that. Part of it has to get on how we can
ensure that there is instrumentation and that the commanders,
and the ship drivers, and the maneuver commanders, and others
know what is going on on their weapons platform.
So, if there is gonna be accountability with this, we have
got to be able to monitor what is actually going on there. And
then what does it mean in terms of readiness? So that is an
evolving discussion we are having again with our P&R colleagues
on this.
But what does cyber accountability mean? But one key thing
on this, sir, that I am working to do, and this is an area that
I want to inject with here with you all on the legislative
side, and industry partners, and elsewhere, we use terms like
cyber hygiene, which can make people glaze over. Sir, I know
you are a former operator. Sometimes cyber hygiene my people
go, Well, that is something for the CIO, or the 6, the J6. I
want to use a term called cyber survivability, this is
something--as a former Bradley guy myself, this will get my
attention, that if I am going to be taken down by this by an
adversary, we have got to change how we think about
cybersecurity. So sir, these are the kinds of things we are
looking at. We need different tools in our tool box working
with P&R. And we have brought this up to our leadership and we
have some work to do on it, sir.
Mr. Franklin. Thanks. And I agree. From a Navy standpoint,
it has just always been known that the captain is ultimately
responsible. It doesn't matter if he or she is on the bridge,
if the ship goes aground, you are relieved of command. And at
some point I think we are going to have to understand that the
potential damage from cyber intrusions are going to be just as
serious as any of those. But I appreciate your comments there.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Very appropriate comments, too, I would say.
Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
And Ms. Houlahan is now--before I go to Ms. Houlahan, I
just want to remind members that as soon as we adjourn here, we
will be going up to 2212 for the classified portion of this
hearing. So I hope everyone can go up there for the classified
portion.
With that, Ms. Houlahan is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
My last and final question has to do with our allies. And I
had the opportunity to meet with several of their defense
attaches. And they were talking about how their nations have
implemented effective cybersecurity protocols, or at least what
they believe to be effective cybersecurity protocols and
managing potential cyber attacks and intrusions. And in their
opinion, sometimes better than the United States. Has the DOD
sought to work closely with our allies to determine what
cybersecurity practices are working for other nations?
Mr. Sherman. Absolutely, ma'am. One of things I am
privileged to do is work, for example, with our Five Eyes
defense CIOs. As a matter of fact, just 2 weeks ago, we would
have been meeting in person, but for COVID. But we held a
multiday virtual conference going over not only cybersecurity,
but how we can work together to modernize. As I work with my
colleagues in the Five Eyes, but other nations as well, such as
Singapore I had a meeting with recently.
As we talk about things like Zero Trust, there may be
different terminologies, but how do we segment networks? How do
we instrument things? How do we train our workforce, back to
the talent piece? So yes, ma'am, we have robust conversations.
And one thing coming from the intelligence side having the
privilege to work with allies for many years, we in the United
States do a lot of things right, but we have a lot to learn
from allies, too. And I value that highly. And many of them are
women and men who have great experience in the private sector
before they went to their governments. And, so, we do have very
active discussions on this area, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. Has there been discussion in the DOD or with
our allies about developing a formal comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity or global cyber infrastructure?
Mr. Sherman. So some of this would get into probably--in
terms of cybersecurity, I don't think that we have talked
formally about that. I would also have to defer to General
Nakasone through CYBERCOM, some of those channels, what he may
be setting up. So I will take that one for the record and make
sure we get you a whole answer. But from the CIO side, we do
have a lot of engagements, but maybe not quite to the level of
a formal structure that you are getting at on that, ma'am.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 46.]
Ms. Houlahan. Thanks.
And my last question is something that you talked about
with kind of the workforce coming in and out, starting with you
all as an example, and then going to the private sector and
then perhaps looping back around later on mid-career, and you
talked about something that is an important part of that, which
is clearances.
Can you reflect for a little bit on what does that mean?
How do--I am a person who held a TS/SCI clearance decades ago,
came back around, and now I am here again, and we have a very
different process, which we can talk about later on, how we
reestablish those clearances here. But how would that happen?
And is there anything congressionally or federally that we can
be doing to make that easier for people?
Mr. Sherman. Ma'am, I would really have to defer to my
colleagues in Intelligence and Security and DCSA [Defense
Counterintelligence and Security Agency], but I would just
flag, as someone who has worked in intelligence and now seen
how this would work, we are going to have to get our head
around this. As a person leaves government service, works in a
private sector, academic setting, they are necessarily going to
have foreign contacts in a globalized--and I know you are well
aware of this, ma'am, and when they come back, let's say they
want to come back at a higher rank, maybe a slightly different
role, we are going to have to figure out how we don't make them
wait 12-, 18-plus months. And so I think this is something we
need to look at.
And, again, on the cyber workforce strategy, this is
something I want to start to put some markers down as really
firm requirements for us to think differently because the more
we reflect on this, 30-year careers may work for some, but as
we look at the digital and cyberspace, this is not going to be
best for us, back to as we were talking, from a whole-of-nation
approach.
So I don't know if we need anything legislatively just yet,
but I think we need to get our head around kind of what the
steps of this would look like, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
And one final comment, I really was interested in the
ranking chair's comments about, kind of how we have
responsibility to understand what the liabilities are and,
frankly, the punishments are for people who are in command and
control of cyberspace, so to speak, and I am really intrigued
and would look forward to learning more about that with
everybody on the committee.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, ma'am. And nothing to add on that, but
just recognizing cyber accountability, maybe a new term, is
something we definitely need to consider the same as poor
maintenance or poor training as before a unit pushes out.
So thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Houlahan.
Mr. Moore is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore is still with us?
Okay. I will hold there. I am going to yield to Ms. Bice
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I actually want to really tack on to Representative
Houlahan's comments about the clearance process. I think one of
the things that we have heard over and over is that it is
taking too long, and sort of to that point, when we are talking
about recruitment, we often think of sort of the high-tech
universities, maybe west coast universities, the Stanfords of
the world to go recruit from.
What are you all doing to really look at other institutions
of higher learning that have a fantastic program that maybe
hadn't been thought of in the past? And I will use a university
in Oklahoma. The University of Tulsa has a fantastic cyber
program that they are really doing some innovative work in. How
are you looking at this from a workforce standpoint?
Mr. Sherman. So I will tell you how we are looking from
CIO, and I think our P&R colleagues could absolutely amplify
this with greater detail. The NSA accreditation--and I don't
have the list here in front of me of several hundred
institutions, again, from junior colleges, and I would have to
look in the State of Oklahoma, ma'am, but I know there is
several there, to be able to--and partner institutions together
to help bootstrap each other, as some have gotten the
accreditation to get the students there, and this is what I
really feel strongly about. I come from a rural area myself, La
Ward, Texas. You know, everywhere from very rural areas to
urban areas, from mainland U.S. to U.S. territories, it is
going to take us looking very broadly.
So to your point, that is one thing I am trying to push as
CIO through this upcoming workforce strategy. I will say I
believe recruitment has expanded over the last several years
into these areas, and the NSA accreditation that General
Nakasone's team lead has helped, again, anywhere from 2-year
junior colleges up to 4-year institutions, major Big 12 or Big
Ten schools and SEC [Southeastern Conference], and so on, all
across the Nation, to be able to do that. So that is what we
are trying to do to broaden the aperture, and also maybe
looking at--we do have a new tool we are looking at, kind of
matching talent to job positions, looking more broadly beyond
just the degree they have, what types of experiences they have,
to be able to get folks in there. And this is, of course,
something that the private sector, I know you noted, ma'am, is
looking very carefully at, too, in terms of what degree
requirements does someone really need to be a coder? How do we
get them in the door?
So those are the kind of things I am, again, excited and
daunted by. But I think if we get this right, this is what is
going to give us the advantage on the PRC [People's Republic of
China] and others. We have got the talent out there. We just
have got to get them in the door.
Mrs. Bice. It is fantastic to hear you talk about that. And
Representative Houlahan and I sit on the Supply Chain Task
Force that has been talking a lot about workforce and how do we
engage various, you know, young people and getting engaged in
this that may not be going to a 4-year college, but still have
the aptitude to be able to engage in these conversations. So I
appreciate your comments on that.
If you could kind of pivot for a just a minute. Can you
talk a little bit about how you are coordinating with other
government agencies, CISA for example, to really look at a
whole-of-government approach in protecting our assets and
addressing cybersecurity issues? We have seen all of these
intrusions lately. And, so, it is not just DOD that could be
impacted, but you have all of these other agencies that are
also kind of coordinating. Can you talk a little bit about
that?
Mr. Sherman. Yes. Well, there is the interagency process.
My friend and colleague, Anne Neuberger up at the NSC [National
Security Council] is a Deputy National Security Advisor up
there and, of course, we have Mr. Inglis is the National Cyber
Director. Through their various forums through the National
Security Council, and so on, we have the new cyber executive
order has been a good thing to help us unify as a government on
these things. And, of course, there is other governance fora we
have. The Federal CIO has meetings as well as with the Federal
CISO [chief information security officer]; and also the kind of
informal networks we have with DHS, CISA, with other agencies,
and, of course, with where I come from, the intelligence
community, governance bodies we have on national security
systems, on things like accreditation and looking at policies
and practices.
So there is quite a bit--you noted CISA, obviously, close
work and they have the .gov and helping secure the Federal
side. And then also, we have what we are doing through the
Joint Force Headquarters, DODIN, JFHQ-DODIN [Joint Force
Headquarters Department of Defense Information Network], that
General Skinner leads, has much contact with them. So I think
there is robust dialogue back and forth, and best practices.
And I do have to say, the cyber EO [executive order] and the
focus that we have there has helped us kind of unify around
some best practices, everything from Zero Trust supply chain to
how we are going to look at these problems, ma'am.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Bice.
That concludes the member questions as I understand it. So
with that, the subcommittee will recess, and then we will
immediately reconvene in 2212 for the classified portion of
this hearing.
The committee stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 5:09 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Sherman. The DOD defines the Cyberspace Workforce in DOD
Directive 8140.01 as ``personnel who build, secure, operate, defend,
and protect DOD and U.S. cyberspace resources; conduct related
intelligence activities; enable future operations; and project power in
or through cyberspace.'' It is comprised of 54 work roles and 5
elements: Information Technology (IT), Cybersecurity, Cyberspace
Effects, Intelligence (Cyberspace), and Cyberspace Enablers. The Cyber
Operations Forces (COF) are included in the broader Cyberspace
Workforce and consist of ``Units organized, trained, and equipped to
conduct offensive cyberspace operations (OCO), defensive cyberspace
operations (DCO), and DOD Information Network (DODIN) operations.'' The
DOD CIO, in coordination and consultation with U.S. Cyber Command
(USCYBERCOM) and the Components, has developed foundational
qualification standards for the Cyber Workforce in accordance with DOD
Directive 8140.01. USCYBERCOM is authorized to augment Enterprise
qualification requirements with focused training requirements to meet
specialized mission objectives, which extends to the COF.   [See page
6.]
Mr. Sherman. Regarding whether Cyberspace Operations Forces will
have dedicated elements for IOT cybersecurity, the DOD Cybersecurity
Program is applicable to all DOD systems and technology types.
Likewise, the Cyber Mission Force is organized, trained, and equipped
to operate, protect and defend in all mission environments. Dedicated
forces solely for ``operational technology (OT) cybersecurity'' are not
feasible as most DOD systems are comprised of many different technology
types. To enhance the cybersecurity risk posture of all systems and
ensure readiness, the DOD CIO and U.S. Cyber Command are integrating
the DOD Cybersecurity Program and the Cyber Operations Program. This
integration will inform and mature the skill sets of the cyber mission
force to ensure they have the requisite skills to protect and restore
critical systems that enable the Department to successfully accomplish
its various missions and operations in a cyber-contested environment.
[See page 7.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Mr. Sherman. At the awareness level, the primary purpose of Cyber
Awareness Challenge, mandated to be taken by all DOD personnel
annually, is to influence behavior, focusing on actions that authorized
users can engage to mitigate threats and vulnerabilities to DOD
Information Systems, and that the users themselves are a critical link
protecting DOD information and information technology (IT). The Cyber
Awareness Challenge content works to encourage cyber citizenship and
digital leadership by providing users with an awareness needed to
maintain a degree of understanding about cybersecurity policies and
doctrine commensurate with their responsibilities. All users must be
capable of 14 appropriately reporting and responding to suspicious
activities and know how to protect the information and IT systems to
which they have access. The course provides an overview of
cybersecurity threats and encourages users to maintain awareness of and
stay up to date on new cybersecurity threats. The training also
reinforces best practices to keep both DOD and personal information
secure and stay abreast of changes in DOD cybersecurity policies.
Course content is based on the requirements addressed in Congressional
Legislation, Federal and DOD policies, and from DOD Component community
input from the DOD CIO chaired Cyber Workforce Advisory Group (CWAG).
An example below of new DOD Component community input that will be
added to 2022 version to be fielded on October 1, 2021 is content on
disinformation. ``Adversaries exploit social and other media to share
and rapidly spread false or misleading news stories and conspiracy
theories about U.S. military and national security issues. Using fake
accounts on popular social networking platforms, these adversaries:

Disseminate fake news, including propaganda, satire,
sloppy journalism, misleading headlines, and biased news

Share fake audio and video, which is increasingly
difficult to detect as the creation technology improves

Gather personal information shared on social media to
devise social engineering attacks

Most media messages intend to influence you, if only to
attract traffic.
Ask yourself:

Who provided the information, and why?

How does the information provider want you to act?

Whose interests would your reaction serve?''
The depth of understanding of the Cyber Awareness Challenge is
mapped to the Cybersecurity Essentials concept as described in the
Information Technology Security Learning Continuum Model found in the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special
Publication (SP) 800.16. The Draft NIST SP 800-16 Revision 1 (3rd
Draft), titled ``A Role-Based Model for Federal Information Technology/
Cyber Security Training,'' dated March 2014, describes Cybersecurity
Essentials. Cybersecurity Essentials, in addition to knowledge gathered
via security awareness, provides a general introduction to
cybersecurity. The concept of Cybersecurity Essentials is not computer
literacy as this concept refers to an individual's familiarity with a
basic set of knowledge that is needed to use and maintain a computer.
Cybersecurity Essentials refers to an individual's familiarity with--
and ability to apply--a core knowledge set required to protect
electronic information and systems.   [See page 12.]
Mr. Sherman. DOD's approach to cybersecurity with respect to allies
is directed by the classified International Cyberspace Security
Cooperation Guidance. Along with the Department of State, DOD seeks
like-minded partners who will stand with us to reinforce responsible
state behavior in cyberspace and push back on the authoritarian regimes
that seek to control access to information and expand the surveillance
state. The Department has been quite active in sharing its views about
the cybersecurity risks of telecommunications infrastructure provided
by companies with ties to authoritarian regimes. Further, the
Department has expressed the importance of countries building 5G
networks that rely on infrastructure and equipment that meets our
cybersecurity standards.   [See page 20.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN
Mr. Sherman. The Department of Defense Artificial Intelligence
Education Strategy, developed in response to Section 256 of the FY20
NDAA, is the foundation for the JAIC-led pilot training programs based
on AI archetypes and concentrations designed to differentiate AI
learning needs across the entire DOD workforce, from the AI developers
to the administrative assistants. Since October 2020, the JAIC has
launched four pilots--they target DOD leadership, product managers,
acquisition professionals, and data scientists. A present, three of the
pilots are currently underway, and one has successfully been completed.
Each of the pilots are designed to improve the skill sets of the
current workforce and to encourage cross collaboration across the
commands through the interaction of its students in a common learning
environment. The JAIC is currently evaluating these early pilots to
assess their effectiveness in meeting the DOD needs of AI education at
scale. As the Department moves toward further implementation and
integration of AI capabilities, it will be paramount for the DOD to
adopt scalable training and education practices. DOD stands at a
critical juncture in history, where adopting AI capabilities at speed
and scale is essential to maintain military advantage. DOD must not
only develop world class AI practitioners to make AI real at the
Department, but must also ensure the entire DOD workforce is ready and
capable to employ AI capabilities in their respective areas of
responsibility. It is important that the DOD AI training strategy is
constantly updated to ensure new developments in the field are
incorporated into the training to ensure DOD's competitive edge against
our adversaries.   [See page 17.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 29, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BANKS

Mr. Banks. Mr. Sherman, Purdue University and Carnegie Mellon
University, in partnership with industry, recently launched a research
effort to study the use of AI for intrusion detection in resource-
limited embedded systems.
Artificial intelligence, as you know, is one of the most effective
methods to detect undesired or anomalous behaviors within systems.
However, traditional AI requires significant computing resources that
may not be available in challenging operating environments, like
aircraft engines, where high-temperatures, high-vibration and high-
noise levels require robust, and often less-sophisticated, embedded
systems.
Given your view of the future threat environment, and the DOD's
intention to procure new combat systems--like hypersonics--how critical
is it that we fund and develop threat detection capability for embedded
systems that can operate in harsh environments?
Will you commit to working with Purdue, and their partners to
ensure we mature this capability?
Mr. Sherman. The Department concurs that employment of threat
detection capability for embedded systems that can operate in harsh
environments is critical. Artificial intelligence (AI) at-the-edge,
where data can be analyzed in near-real time or real time, will provide
key insights into current or future performance for critical systems
such as aircraft engines. However, the data with which these algorithms
are developed, trained, and tested can be as important (if not more so)
than the algorithms themselves. Sensors currently exist that enable
real-time data collection in these highly-dynamic, harsh environments.
This data can be leveraged in compute-rich environments to develop AI/
machine learning (ML) models for deployment to the edge. Once deployed,
these embedded algorithms can analyze this critical data to provide
predictions and analytics in a future threat environment. DOD has
partnered with universities and companies looking to leverage AI and
anomaly detection to enhance the cybersecurity of embedded sensors and
software. At a high-level, this is very similar to how the DOD cyber
protection teams are using AI/ML today; with tools developed by the
JAIC and others. Since data is the foundation for AI, each of these
sensors/embedded systems become a potential target for corrupted or
manipulated data; and from an autonomous cyber perspective, they each
could be a potential inject point for a cyber exploit. 2 DOD CIO has
identified threat detection in this environment as critical to assuring
the safety of our warfighters and success of our mission. DOD CIO and
the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) recently initiated the
deployment of an AI/ML-based cybersecurity capability for industrial
control systems (ICS) defense. This work is based on the capability to
monitor spacecraft behavior that exhibits the same methodical and well-
characterized traffic that ICS exhibit. DOD CIO is committed to working
with OUSD(R&E), the Services, the Defense Industrial Base (DIB),
academia, DISA and the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC) to
employ diverse partnerships, such as with Purdue, Carnegie Mellon, and
others, to enhance our cyber-secure future.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Sherman, mobile devices are the current and future
of compute--with massive investment and innovation from the commercial
sector. How is the Department using mobile devices today? What plans do
you have to leverage technologies like 5G in order to support the use
of mobile devices within the broader national security infrastructure?
How are you securing those devices? Many governments, including the
United States, ban commercial smartphones and tablets in secure spaces
due to security risks, which impacts accessibility, productively, and
the ability of the Department to recruit people who have become reliant
on their mobile devices. What is your plan to securely enable mobile
devices at work, at home and on the move? Finally, how does the
Department control RF emissions and our adversaries' use of them to
target mobile users?
Mr. Sherman. The DOD is employing mobile devices today. With our
Microsoft Office 365 (O365) deployment of e-mail, chat, and
communication tools, the Department is taking a measured approach that
balances accessibility and security. Government-furnished mobile phones
provide access to O365 tools through the native application. There are
also multiple ongoing pilots by the Army, Navy, Air Force, National
Guard, and Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) to enable access
from personal mobility devices utilizing modern commercial
cybersecurity tools, or via virtualization from a remote, secure
infrastructure. DOD is also planning for technologies like 5G to
support mobility. The deployment of 5G will significantly broaden the
use of mobile devices across all aspects of the Department's
infrastructure--including in physical security, logistics,
transportation, maintenance, training, command and control, and combat
operations. We are currently piloting each of these applications in 10
experiments across 11 DOD installations in the Continental United
States and Hawaii. The results of these projects will be foundational
for the plan to transition 5G technology to operational use within DOD,
as stipulated in Section 224 of the Fiscal Year 2021 National Defense
Authorization Act. To secure these devices, DOD is actively
implementing cybersecurity principles and techniques in all aspects of
its 5G technology development and deployment--including in supply chain
risk management, zero-trust network implementation, and the use of
highresiliency operational techniques. 3 DOD actions to secure the 5G
supply chain are consistent with the National Strategy to Secure 5G and
are in accordance with the DOD 5G Strategy Implementation Plan. The DOD
is engaged in Defense Industrial Base (DIB) consortiums established to
protect national security interests. Further, DOD is developing 5G-
specific Supply Chain Risk Management standards through the North
American Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS). DOD
makes extensive use of mobile devices at home and on the move. The
Department also makes extensive use of properly secured laptops and
tablets at work, including in secure spaces. There are numerous
issuances that govern the use of commercially available unclassified
and classified mobile devices and technologies in DOD-accredited
classified spaces. DOD balances the risk of compromise of classified
information with mission capability very carefully. In many cases, the
risk is determined too great to integrate mobile technologies in these
spaces. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Department adapted to remote
work through largest deployment of Microsoft Teams in history. As we
plan for a return to work, DOD is diligently working to find the
correct balance between capability and security. DOD goes to great
lengths to keep foreign adversaries from introducing radio frequency
(RF) listening devices, or ``bugs,'' into our classified environments.
DOD personnel bringing smartphones and tablets into these spaces could
enable hostile monitoring of classified conversations through embedded
and undetected malware, doing our adversaries' work for them. Physical
security issuances provide guidance for RF shielding protecting
classified spaces as well as restrictions on the introduction of mobile
devices to prevent compromise of classified information.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Ms. Houlahan. Back in April, I sent a letter to Secretary Austin
with several of my colleagues asking the DOD to implement mandatory
training on digital literacy and cyber citizenship within the DOD. The
proposed defense budget would set aside $30.8 million to help the
Pentagon improve tools to identify and address extremism among troops,
and enhance training at all levels. It also includes $9.1 million to
take initial steps to fight extremism and insider threats.
Can you share in a bit more detail what these tools and trainings
would look like?
Mr. Sherman. DOD CIO supports OUSD(I&S) efforts to take essential
steps to fight extremism and insider threats through the proposed Non-
Secure Internet Protocol Router (NIPR) User Activity Monitoring (UAM)
program described in the $9.5 million request. UAM provides a technical
capability to observe and record the actions and activities of an
individual at any time on select Non-Secure Internet Protocol Router
(NIPR) devices accessing U.S. Government information in order to detect
insider threats. The NIPR UAM capability provides the Department with
the ability to detect and monitor leading indicators of concern on the
unclassified IT system. The Departments `Countering Extremist Activity
Working Group' is exploring multiple actions to enhance Insider Threat
(InT) awareness training which are still being reviewed. While those
recommendations are being finalized, the Office of Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence & Security (OUSD(I&S)) is: (1) collaborating
with the Common Military Training Working Group to include InT
awareness training and requirements for the services in an efficient
and effective manner; (2) reviewing the Cyber Awareness Challenge and
InT trainings provided by Defense Counterintelligence and Security
Agency (DCSA) Center for Development of Security Excellence (CDSE) for
recommended updates to address extremist activities/behaviors; and (3)
partnering with Department stakeholders to produce additional training
tools, including graphic novels and leadership training videos, to
assist with identifying, addressing, and mitigating extremist
activities and other behaviors of concern. The $30.8M is contained
within the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA)'s FY
2022 President's Budget request, as follows:

User Activity Monitoring: +$9.5M/3 Full-time Equivalents
(FTEs) in O&M, DW (DCSA OP-5 Increase Statement #1) 5

Vetting Risk Operations Center: +$12.5M O&M,DW/7 FTEs
(DCSA OP-5 Increase Statement #5); +$8.8M in RDT&E,DW (DCSA RDT&E, DW
Line 230, PE 0305128V, Security and Investigative Activities)
Additionally, the Vetting Risk Operations Center (VROC)
incorporates Publicly Available Electronic Information (PAEI),
including social media, into background investigations in accordance
with Security Executive Agent Directive 5 (SEAD-5) and aligned to the
Trusted Workforce 2.0 personnel vetting reform initiative. PAEI also
fulfills the Secretary's requirements to improve the vetting of
International Military Students who intend to or are currently
receiving training within the continental U.S. This effort funds
collection, analysis and reporting of PAEI, including social media, in
support of national security eligibility determinations. The PAEI
investment will deliver a capability to support DOD requirements for
enhanced personnel security as directed in the Intelligence
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (division M, P.L. 114-113), and
aide in the execution of continuous vetting in accordance with
direction of the Security and Suitability Executive Agents
Ms. Houlahan. I recently met with several defense attaches who
shared how their nations are implementing effective cybersecurity
protocols and managing potential cyber attacks/intrusions, some times
better than the United States.
Has the DOD sought to work closely with our allies to determine
what cybersecurity practices are working well for other nations?
Has there been any discussion in the DOD or with our allies about
developing a comprehensive approach to cybersecurity or a global cyber
infrastructure?
Mr. Sherman. The DOD continues to share US Government (USG)-
approved cybersecurity standards such as the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST) framework with partners. However, the
Department is always interested in learning how are allies are tackling
problems of interest to DOD too. We regularly engage on a bilateral and
multilateral basis to share best practices with mission partners and to
proliferate cybersecurity best practices and standards. Of note, DOD
generally cites the NIST standards both in our international
engagements and when developing security cooperation cyber security
programs with partners. Also, DOD CIO publishes a cybersecurity
reference and resource guide for the department that is just as
applicable for international partners. DOD's approach to cybersecurity
with respect to allies is directed by the classified International
Cyberspace Security Cooperation Guidance. Along with the Department of
State, DOD seeks like-minded partners who will reinforce responsible
state behavior in cyberspace and push back on the authoritarian regimes
that seek to control access to information and expand the surveillance
state. The Department has been quite active in sharing its views about
the cybersecurity risks of telecommunications infrastructure provided
by companies with ties to authoritarian regimes. The Department has
expressed the importance of countries building 5G networks that rely on
infrastructure and equipment that meets DOD's cybersecurity standards.
Ms. Houlahan. During my time in Congress, I have advocated
vigorously for investment in DOD STEM to ensure cyber professionals
remain competitive and meet the needs of the future's workforce. To
that end, I am interested in your perspective on Cyber Excepted
Service.
At hearing in April before the Senate Armed Services Personnel
Subcommittee, the Acting Secretary for Defense for Civilian Personnel
Policy testified on how important Cyber Excepted Service authorities
have been to enhancing recruitment of cyber professionals, pointing to
the flexibility in compensation and classification of work requirements
as examples of how the program has been able to better meet targeted
cyber needs. We've also received testimony in this Subcommittee from
the U.S. CYBERCOM Commander that mission and the opportunity to work
with colleagues of such high caliber--provides the most unique and
important competitive advantage than compensation when competing with
the commercial industry. I'd like to hear your take on what is and
isn't working with Cyber Excepted Service from an IT perspective rather
than a personnel perspective. Do you agree with these assessments? What
do you want Congress to know about what is and isn't working as we
continue to examine these and other authorities to meet DOD's cyber
needs?
Is the program equally effective from both a recruitment and
retention perspective? How are we making these cyber positions
competitive to retain highly qualified individuals and prevent them
from moving on to the private sector?
Mr. Sherman. The Department of Defense is appreciative of the
authorities and flexibilities afforded by Congress to implement the
Cyber Excepted Service (CES). Since October 2018, US Cyber Command
(USCC) continues to see positive improvements to the recruiting and
hiring timeline with the use of CES authorities. Some metrics provided
below:

Since CES implementation, USCC conducted 19 recruiting/
hiring events resulting in 150+ job offers (including same-day offers
during the hiring events on 18 May, 2018, and 28 August, 2019), met
over 3,300 candidates and built a repository of 5,000+ resumes.

CES authorities decreased their hiring timeline by 45
percent. The average timeline to receive a Tentative Job Offer started
at 111 days prior to CES and reduced to less than 60 days pre-COVID.
This is separate from the security clearance process and associated
timelines. 8

Despite the nation-wide impacts of COVID-19, USCC found
alternative ways to onboard new talent. In 2020, USCC added over 70 new
cyber warriors to their formation.

In 2019, the Command offered $270K in recruitment
incentives and over $80K in relocation incentives.

In 2020, USCC offered over $375K in recruitment
incentives and over $40K in relocation incentives to attract high-
quality civilians with competitive compensation packages.

In 2021, USCC offered $219K in recruitment and retention
packages. A key program enhancement has been the development of CES
Target Local Market Supplement (TLMS), a monetary compensation tool
used to incentivize seven critical work roles. The TLMS addresses
recruiting and retention challenges of these critical work roles due to
excessive vacancy and attrition rates.

To date, USCC paid $40K in support of TLMS and
anticipates paying $60K by the end of this FY.

The Department continues to explore this new authority
and use it as a tool to attract our best and brightest cyber warriors.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. Now that a Federal judge recently rejected the
government's motion to dismiss the JEDI protest, what is the DOD doing
to meet this pressing need?
Mr. Sherman. The Department continues to have unmet cloud
capability gaps for enterprise-wide, commercial cloud services at all
three classification levels that work from the home front out to the
tactical edge, at scale. In the three-and-a-half years since the
Department developed its enterprise cloud needs, the cloud computing
industry has undergone significant technical advancements and
marketplace changes. The Department has itself matured in its cloud
technology utilization. Additionally, a number of new programs,
including Joint All Domain Command and Control (JADC2) and the
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Data Acceleration (ADA) initiative,
have impacted the Department's enterprise cloud needs. As it exists,
the JEDI Cloud solution no longer supports the technical requirements
of the Department. In a commitment to filling our unmet capability
gaps, on 6 July, 2021, the DOD canceled the JEDI Cloud Request for
Proposals (RFP), began the process to terminate the JEDI contract, and
issued a Pre-Solicitation Notice for a new contract action, the Joint
Warfighting Cloud Capability (JWCC). The JWCC is a multi-award/multi-
vendor cloud solution with a performance period of no more than five
years, if all the options are exercised. The JWCC will allow for vendor
competition at the task order level and will help drive innovation and
pricing to the benefit of the Department. Additionally, in a multi-
vendor environment, DOD Components will be able to consider varying
approaches to their specific cloud computing needs and will be able to
choose the vendor whose capabilities best suit their missions. DOD is
actively pursuing the JWCC contract and is in the process of completing
its market research by conducting technical engagements with each of
the U.S.-based hyper-scale Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) to evaluate
if they meet DOD's requirements. The intent is to provide the
Warfighter with an enterprise multi-vendor cloud solution as quickly as
possible. The Department intends to make awards within the next 8-12
months.
Mr. Moore. The DOD OCIO's December 2020 report on the status of
implementation of 21st Century IDEA states that the Department ``is
working to ensure each department or command has selected a 21st
Century IDEA designee responsible for coordinating the implementation
of IDEA requirements.''
What is the status of this requirement? Has every required
department or command identified a 21st Century IDEA lead? Can you
provide that list to the committee? Will the Department be requesting
funding in future year budgets to meet these requirements?
Mr. Sherman. The Department identified a 21st Century IDEA designee
from each required Service CIO, Washington Headquarters Service, and
relevant Defense Agencies and Field Activity. To further support the
implementation of the IDEA requirements, DOD CIO established the 21st
Century IDEA Working Group that meets quarterly to coordinate on OMB
and Congressional reporting. The Department is committed to meeting the
legal requirements of the IDEA act and has established an environment
that fosters open communication and sharing of ideas, lessons learned,
and dialog for future opportunities for standardization. The DOD CIO
plans to utilize the 21st Century IDEA Working Group to continue open
dialog on the improvement and standardization of customer experience
and digital services, and ensure that resource gaps are identified and
addressed.

[all]
