- [H.A.S.C. No. 117-32]  Operations In Cyberspace And Building Cyber Capabilities Across The Department Of Defense

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-32]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

ON

OPERATIONS IN CYBERSPACE

AND BUILDING CYBER CAPABILITIES
ACROSS THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 14, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-604                      WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts          MO BROOKS, Alabama
RO KHANNA, California                MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    MATT GAETZ, Florida
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania,      STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
Vice Chair                       C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
JASON CROW, Colorado                 BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan             PAT FALLON, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York

Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Moxley, Professional Staff Member
Caroline Kehrli, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Gallagher, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Wisconsin,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and Information
Systems........................................................     3
Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems............................................     1

WITNESSES

Eoyang, Mieke, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Cyber
Policy, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy....     4
Nakasone, GEN Paul M., USA, Commander, U.S. Cyber Command, and
Director, National Security Agency.............................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Eoyang, Mieke................................................    36
Langevin, Hon. James R.......................................    33
Nakasone, GEN Paul M.........................................    54

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mrs. Bice....................................................    65
Ms. Escobar..................................................    65
Mr. Larsen...................................................    65

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Kim......................................................    69
Mr. Moore....................................................    69

OPERATIONS IN CYBERSPACE AND BUILDING CYBER CAPABILITIES ACROSS THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Innovative Technologies, and
Information Systems,
Washington, DC, Friday, May 14, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:03 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James R.
Langevin (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM RHODE ISLAND, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Langevin. The subcommittee will come to order.
Before I begin my opening statement, I want to welcome our
witnesses. I am just going to read some technical information
since this is a hybrid hearing and some members will be joining
us remotely.
Welcome to today's hearing, ``Operations in Cyberspace and
Building Cyber Capabilities across the Department of Defense.''
We have convened.
This is a hybrid hearing, and we are joined by members who
are participating remotely. Members who are joining remotely
must be visible on screen for the purposes of identity
verification, establishing and maintaining a quorum,
participating in the proceeding, and voting. Those members must
continue to use the software platform's video function while in
attendance unless they experience connectivity issues or other
technical problems that render them unable to participate on
camera. If a member experiences difficulties, they should
contact the committee staff for assistance.
Video of members' participation will be broadcast in the
room and via the television internet feeds. Members
participating remotely must seek recognition verbally, and they
are asked to mute their microphones when they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep the
software platform's video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding. If members depart for a short while for reasons
other than joining a different proceeding, they should leave
their video function on. If members will be absent for a
significant period or depart to join a different proceeding,
they should exit the software platform entirely and then rejoin
it if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
communicate with staff regarding technical or logistical
support issues only. I have designated a committee staff member
to, if necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to
cancel any inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the
proceeding.
So I would like to welcome our witnesses, General Paul
Nakasone, the Commander of U.S. Cyber Command and the Director
of National Security Agency, and Mieke Eoyang, the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Cyber Policy. Welcome to you
both.
In past hearings, General Nakasone has been joined by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global
Security. However, with the challenges faced in that role, we
are thankful that Ms. Eoyang is able to step in, and the
committee appreciates your cooperation and collaboration.
So it is truly incredible how much has changed since our
last cyber posture hearing on March 4, 2020. The world has been
upended by a pandemic, changing the lives of literally every
person on the planet. In the realm of cyber matters, the men
and women of the Department of Defense, including our soldiers,
sailors, airmen, Marines, and guardians, have had no respite,
continuing to operate and defend Americans' interests in
cyberspace.
Despite the pandemic, our adversaries and competitors have
not let up their cyber campaigns. In the last 6 months alone,
the media has reported almost nonstop on arguably some of the
most significant cyber incidents ever to affect our Nation,
from SolarWinds to Hafnium to, just in the last week, the
attack against Colonial Pipeline by the DarkSide criminal
collective. So if there were any doubters that cyberspace is an
active and contested warfighting domain, I would hope that the
last year has changed those perspectives.
Yet, incredibly, it still appears to this committee that
cyber does not always have the focus for much of the
Department's senior uniformed and civilian leadership that it
requires, despite our forces engaging adversaries in this
domain every single day. I point this out. Recently, the Air
Force removed cyber from its mission statement, even though a
report from the Office of Secretary of Defense concluded that
the inclusion of cyber in the Air Force mission statement is
the single reason why Air Force personnel have vastly outpaced
other services in pursuing cyber-related certifications.
Candidly, it is frustrating that the people in this room,
both members and witnesses, seem to be fighting an uphill
battle to put cyber front and center in the Department. Out of
five officially recognized warfighting domains, the senior
civilian official for air, sea, land, and space domains are
military service secretaries. Yet, with all due respect to Ms.
Eoyang and her spectacularly overworked team, the senior
civilian for cyber is four rungs lower than her counterparts
overseeing other domains.
So we also have to account for the ways in which cyberspace
operations occur within and affect the information environment.
One of the most illustrative examples of how the Department's
structure can hinder rather than enable operations is its own
organization chart. The DOD's Joint Publication 313 notes that
cyberspace is one of many information-related capabilities,
designed to affect the information domain alongside
psychological operations and electromagnetic spectrum
operations. Yet each of the information-related capabilities is
handled by a separate entity and siloed within the Department,
ensuring that we cannot leverage our capabilities to the
maximum extent possible. This needs to change.
In our current age of great power competition, conflict in
the ``gray zone'' below the level of armed conflict has never
been more relevant to our strategic thought. For numerous
reasons, challenges with attribution, easily altered payloads,
and ease of proliferation, cyber is the ideal tool for the gray
zone conflict. The information domain, including cyberspace, is
where our forces are engaged against our adversaries daily.
As the Nation comes to realize that this domain is as
important as any other, we need the Defense Department to adapt
to ensure that any conflict with adversaries remains in the
information space as much as possible and never moves into the
kinetic realm.
As we push the Department to adapt toward the information
environment, congressional oversight has never been more
necessary. It is the mechanism by which we monitor the
activities of the executive branch and ensure compliance with
relevant statute. While I understand that transitions can
result in disconnects or misunderstandings, I anticipate
hearing from the committee staff that any issues that may have
arisen will be quickly resolved to our satisfaction. So I am
happy to add detail in private, but we will leave it at that
for now.
So, with that, I now want to thank our witnesses again for
appearing before us today. As a reminder, after this open
session, we will move to the CVC auditorium for a closed,
member-only session.
With that, I want to turn now to Ranking Member Gallagher
for his remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Langevin can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE GALLAGHER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, AND
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
General Nakasone and Ms. Eoyang for being here today.
Cyberspace is the ultimate gray zone in which operations
often do not fit neatly into either traditional kinetic
warfighting or nontraditional activities. Adversaries like
China and Russia, as well as nonstate actors, are continuously
exploiting the gray zone and probing our networks and
exploiting our vulnerabilities in cyberspace. I mean, just in
recent months, we have had SolarWinds. We have had Microsoft
Exchange. We had Russian cyber actors last week shut down a
major U.S. pipeline, highlighting the cyber threat posed to our
critical infrastructure from actors anywhere in the world and
how actors all over the world can reach out and touch all of
our constituents, no matter where our districts are.
I just would say, though our cyber adversaries are diffuse
and evolving and they prove time and again that our cyber
networks are only as strong as the weakest link, our operations
and capabilities have also evolved, in large part due to the
work of this subcommittee and the leadership of General
Nakasone at U.S. Cyber Command and, in particular, General, the
input that you provided to the Cyberspace Solarium Commission
over the last 2 years, which took up a lot of Representative
Langevin and my work over the last couple of years.
But as we continue to harden our networks and improve our
capabilities, the President's budget must focus on modernizing
DOD's [Department of Defense's] platforms. We must consider
cutting legacy platforms out of date for modern conflict and
investing in emerging technologies in cyber. And I believe I
speak for everyone here when I say I hope to see a budget that
recognizes the importance of our Cyber Mission Force; invests
in necessary cyber infrastructure, including technology and
human capital; highlights necessary cyber authorities; and
really pushes the Department out of its silos and into a
streamlined structure that prioritizes cyber agility and
responsiveness.
Our Cyber Mission Force has also matured, but we must
continue to identify cyber talent and train, equip, and support
our cyber force to improve our capabilities across the cyber
continuum and maintain superiority over hostile cyber actors.
So we took a lot of pivotal steps in this direction in last
year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act], and I know we
will continue to make progress towards our cyber goals again
this year, but the fundamental shift in thinking about cyber
will take more than just directives in the NDAA. It will
require leaders at DOD and throughout the government and in
Congress to think strategically and acknowledge that cyber is
now the critical domain to every facet of our national
security.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses today, and I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ranking Member Gallagher, for your
remarks.
With that, I will now turn it over to Ms. Eoyang and
General Nakasone for 5 minutes of remarks each.
Ms. Eoyang, you are recognized. You may proceed.

STATEMENT OF MIEKE EOYANG, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR CYBER POLICY, OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR POLICY

Ms. Eoyang. Thank you, Chairman Langevin, Representative
Gallagher, and members of the committee. I am pleased to be
here with General Nakasone, the Commander of U.S. Cyber
Command, to report the progress that the Department of Defense
has made in achieving the Department's objectives in
cyberspace.
This afternoon, I am testifying in my role as the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Cyber Policy. In that role,
I am responsible for advising the Secretary and Deputy
Secretary on cyberspace policy and the development of the
Department's cyber strategy and other cyberspace policy.
Congress has demonstrated that it views cyber defense as a
priority through not only its legislative work, but through
Member service on the Solarium Commission. And for that, we are
grateful for your ongoing support for this crucial issue in a
broad and bipartisan manner.
To start, I would like to offer our perspective on the
current global strategic context. As you note, 2020 was a year
of turmoil, with a global pandemic drastically altering our
day-to-day reality and increasing our dependence on the
internet. Our adversaries took notice of our growing reliance
on technology. Cyber criminals and nation-state actors alike
took advantage of COVID-19 by unleashing ransomware on
healthcare facilities, targeting vaccine production and supply
chains, exploiting fears to spread disinformation, and even
disrupting pipeline companies.
As a result, the cyberspace domain is both more important
and more contested than it has been in recent memory. Enhancing
the security of cyberspace, both in the United States and
around the world, is a top priority as the President's Interim
National Security Strategic Guidance prioritizes cybersecurity
and pledges to expand investments needed to defend the Nation
against malicious cyber activity and cyberattack.
Our competitors are using their cyber capabilities to seek
political, economic, information, and military advantages, and
to undermine our security by engaging in malicious cyber
activity. The DNI [Director of National Intelligence] assesses
that cyber threats from nation-states--particularly China,
Russia, Iran, and North Korea--and their surrogates will remain
acute, both in day-to-day competition and to seek advantage in
armed conflict.
As Secretary Austin said at his confirmation hearing in
January, China is the pacing threat for the Department,
including in cyber operations. China uses cyber operations to
erode U.S. military overmatch and economic vitality, stealing
U.S. intellectual property and research. Chinese malicious
cyber activity continues to this day.
Russia also continues to be a highly sophisticated and
capable adversary, integrating malicious cyber activities,
including espionage, influence operations, and mutually
reinforcing ways to achieve its objectives. They engage in a
wide range of malign cyber activities, including attempts to
interfere with U.S. elections, spreading ransomware such as
NotPetya, efforts to disrupt the postponed Tokyo Olympics, and
the most recent SolarWinds attack.
In addition to using cyberspace as an offensive tool, China
and Russia view the internet as a mechanism to control and
intimidate their own populations. While the United States
advocates for an open, interoperable, secure, and reliable
internet, China and Russia have created and employed a digital
authoritarian model using their technological and cyberspace
capabilities to manipulate narratives, repress free speech,
surveil their citizens, and quash dissent domestically. China
seeks to export digital authoritarianism to other repressive
regimes, remaking the internet in its image.
Beyond China and Russia, we remain concerned about the
cyber threat posed by Iran and North Korea. And further,
nation-state actors, such as criminals, terrorists, and violent
extremists, continue to leverage the internet to advance their
agendas. The line between nation-state and criminal actors is
increasingly blurry as nation-states turn to criminal proxies
as a tool of state power, then turn a blind eye to the cyber
crime perpetrated by the same malicious actors. This is a
common practice for Russia, whose security services leverage
cyber criminals while shielding them from prosecution for
crimes they commit for personal benefit.
We have also seen some states allow their government
hackers to moonlight as cyber criminals. This is not how
responsible states behave in cyberspace, nor can responsible
states condone shielding of this criminal behavior.
The President has made clear also the need to strengthen
our alliances. The Department is driving new approaches to do
that, and we continue hunt forward operations with partners
even during pandemic and cyber exercises, such as Cyber Flag,
to help our allies prepare for adversary actions.
President Biden is currently conducting a review of
national strategy, which will culminate in the issuance of two
key documents: the National Security Strategy and the National
Cyber Strategy. The President's guidance will inform our own
upcoming defense-level review of the National Defense Strategy
and follow on the Department's second ever Cyber Posture
Review, which will evaluate our ability to execute national and
departmental-level strategies to achieve our goals in
cyberspace. We look forward to delivering the strategy and
posture review to Congress once they are completed.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today,
and I look forward to the members' questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eoyang can be found in the
Appendix on page 36.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Eoyang.
And, General Nakasone, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF GEN PAUL M. NAKASONE, USA, COMMANDER, U.S. CYBER
COMMAND, AND DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY

General Nakasone. Chairman Langevin, Ranking Member
Gallagher, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am
honored to be here and testify beside Secretary Eoyang and
represent the men and women of U.S. Cyber Command.
Three major incidents over the past 6 months demonstrate
the importance of cyber security to our Nation. Well-resourced
and sophisticated adversaries are exploiting gaps in the
Nation's ability to monitor U.S. cyberspace infrastructure
while conducting operations from within the boundaries of the
United States.
The SolarWinds incident occurred through the highly skilled
means of an adversary against a U.S. company supply chain. At
nearly the same time, the server hack associated with Microsoft
Exchange showcased the ability of another adversary to exploit
vulnerabilities and attack systems around the world. The
Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack also demonstrate a growing
trend of companies and even government agencies being held
hostage by malicious cyber actors. These cases demonstrate the
broadening scope, scale, and sophistication employed by some
adversaries.
The United States Government, in tandem with industry
partners, must improve its defensive posture to prevent and/or
minimize the impacts, while contesting and defeating those who
would exploit such vulnerabilities and target American
companies and citizens. Cybersecurity is national security.
Over the past year, I emphasized the importance of
defending the election against foreign interference. We did
this through the Election Security Group, a combined team from
U.S. Cyber Command and the National Security Agency. We built
on lessons from earlier operations and honed partnerships with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Department of
Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, sharing information with those who needed it as fast as
possible. We also worked with the National Guard Bureau to
create a mechanism that enabled Guard units to share
information about incidents quickly, easily, and uniformly.
U.S. Cyber Command [CYBERCOM] conducted more than two dozen
operations to get ahead of foreign threats before they
interfered with or influenced our elections in 2020. I am proud
of the work the command and the Election Security Group
performed as part of a broader government effort to deliver a
safe, secure 2020 election.
CYBERCOM is building on recent guidance from the
Department, seeking to promote readiness, improve training, and
attract high-end talent. The cyberspace environment has changed
significantly over the past years. To your point, Chairman,
even over the past 14 months, we have seen a tremendous
difference in the environment. Adversaries are demonstrating a
changed risk calculus. They are undertaking malign activities
in cyberspace at greater scope, scale, and sophistication. They
desire to take on the U.S. in cyberspace below the level of
armed conflict.
To defend our security and our interests in this
environment, U.S. Cyber Command must continue to adapt,
innovate, partner, and succeed against such adversaries. The
men and women at U.S. Cyber Command look forward to working
with this committee and are truly grateful for the support
Congress has given to our command.
Again, thank you for your support, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Nakasone can be found in
the Appendix on page 54.]
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General Nakasone, Ms. Eoyang, for
your testimony here today. Before we begin procedure questions,
I just want to thank you again for your commitment to the
national security of the United States. And I wanted to just
point out as a matter of personal privilege, we all recognize
that our Nation is one giant melting pot, and I think diversity
is something to be celebrated. And I think this may be an
historic first for this committee in that we have two members
of the AAPI [Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders] community
testifying before us at the same time. So pretty cool to note.
And thank you again.
[Inaudible.]
Mr. Langevin. Very good.
I want to thank you both for being here, again, for your
testimony, your commitment to the national security of the
United States, and thank you for your remarks.
We are going to now proceed with questions. Each member
will be recognized for 5 minutes, beginning with myself.
And, Ms. Eoyang, I want to start with you, if I could. So
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and
Low-Intensity Conflict is responsible for information
operations, but the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland
Defense and Global Security is responsible for cyberspace
operations. Can you explain the logic as to why two separate
chains are established for operations within the same
information environments?
Ms. Eoyang. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question here. I
think--I am not sure that I can give the full history on how
that evolved from the Department's perspective in terms of why
those two things are in separate silos. Agree that there is a
fair amount of overlap there, but as you may know, the PSYOPS
[psychological operations]/information ops had traditionally
been held in the special operations community. And as
cyberspace grew up, it went through a number of evolutions and
has found itself within the Homeland Defense and Global
Security arena in part because of the focus, I think, on the
homeland security aspects of cybersecurity. But, certainly,
there are some coordination challenges in the division between
the two.
Mr. Langevin. So, to that point, you know, how do you and
the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special
Operations and Counterterrorism, a position that owns the
information and operations portfolio for OSD [Office of the
Secretary of Defense] Policy, coordinate and collaborate?
Ms. Eoyang. I am in regular communication with my
colleagues, and we are collaborating at all levels between our
two offices, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. That is something that we are going to have
to continue to work on, I think too, though.
General Nakasone, one of the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission's key outstanding questions was whether the Cyber
Mission Force, designed now 9 years ago, was properly sized.
You may remember that I asked you about this at last year's
hearing. We spoke about this yesterday when you and I met also
in my office, but last year, you had replied that you needed
more relevant data.
And without discussing the contents of the President's
budget before its release, can you tell us about whether you
acquired the information necessary to make a decision on the
size of the force and what insights you gleaned from this
information?
General Nakasone. Chairman, thank you. We do have the data.
And again, to your point, not to get ahead of the budget
submission, but in general terms, I would anticipate that as we
lay out the case, we have to look at some critical elements
that will influence the future size of the Cyber Mission Force,
now 133 teams. In the future, we have to account for the
growing importance of space. I think we have to account for the
importance of what we are seeing with malign cyber actors,
whether or not it is Russian cyber actors, Chinese cyber
actors, Iranian cyber actors, and their intent.
And I think the last piece is that we are in a period of
strategic competition, and I think the word is ``competition.''
So we have to have that balance of, not only what we are going
to support our fellow combatant commands if conflict was to
break out, but, also, if our adversaries are operating below
the level of armed conflict every single day, what type of
force do we need to be able to ensure that we can counteract
that, much in the same way that we have done in our support to
the national elections.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General. And, recently, one of
your subordinate commands, Army Cyber Command, established an
Information Warfare Operations Center. At nearly the exact same
time, U.S. Army Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg
separately established an Information Warfare Center. So
acknowledging that this is Army specific, it points to a wider
issue about lack of clarity on mission sets and an absence of
direction inside the Department. How do you distinguish what
Cyber Command and its cyber focus subordinate commands do
versus what Special Operations Command and its SOF [special
operations forces]-centric subordinate elements do?
General Nakasone. Chairman, I have a very, very close and
enduring partnership with U.S. Special Operations Command under
the leadership of General Rich Clark. We talk frequently on
this.
To provide a bit of perspective on this, I see it as only
natural that Special Operations Command, as they operate across
all the different domains, also has the capability within
cyberspace. I think the delineation is, you know, what is the
focus of U.S. Special Operations Command, what is the focus of
U.S. Army Cyber Command, what is the overall focus of U.S.
Cyber Command. I think we have worked through that.
I think to your point, there is still work to do on our
doctrine. We will continue to advocate for that work, but we
all realize that it is more than, you know, just conducting one
cyberspace operations. It is the entire information domain that
we have to understand and be able to operate within.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, General.
I will hold there and turn to the ranking member for his
questions now.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
General, you mentioned the challenge in the Colonial
Pipeline context of ransomware and criminal groups, and I think
it is safe to say that challenge is only going to grow in the
short term. Part of the problem that strikes me is an
authorities problem. I would be curious, to the extent you can
answer in open session, what tools you believe you have in your
kit to get at that challenge. Because I believe you also
mentioned that as NSA [National Security Agency] Director, you
are limited in obviously monitoring domestic U.S. IT
[information technology] infrastructure.
Do you think your CYBERCOM forces could be provided under
DSCA [Defense Support to Civil Authorities] to DHS [Department
of Homeland Security], for example, and used to conduct a sort
of monitoring analysis under DHS authorities at least until DHS
builds its own capabilities? How do we get at this in the short
term while we sort of build out a longer term answer?
General Nakasone. Ranking Member, I think to your initial
point, it is really important to look at this as a broader
element and how do we get after this criminal activity. I think
this is a whole-of-government effort. In the United States, it
is most appropriate that lead Federal agencies, obviously,
Department of Homeland Security, Federal Bureau of
Investigation. I don't think there is any problem with the
authorities in terms of what it's stated out to do.
But as we look at ransomware and as we continue to peel
this back, as we see criminal actors that are operating outside
the United States, I think what the administration obviously is
moving towards is how do we have a whole-of-government approach
that brings together our levers of power that includes
diplomacy, and certainly our economic and, if necessary and if
authorized, outside the United States, what the Department of
Defense might do.
To your last point, Ranking Member, with regards to support
for anything like this, well-established processes, as you
know, Defense Support to Civil Authorities, and I think that
those would be executed if lead Federal agencies needed to have
that support.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, as we attempt to step back and look at
it holistically, I think it is fair, at least with one lens, to
look at it as not just as this attack isolated but as a Russia
problem, right. And part of the problem is you have, at times,
opaque relationships between the Russian Government and
criminal groups.
Do we have the sufficient analytical capacity to tease out
those relationships, make those distinctions? Is there more
regional expertise that we need to apply to this problem? I
would be curious to the extent--again, the extent you can
answer in this session, how you think about those opaque
relationships and our ability to better understand them.
General Nakasone. Quite simply, I think about it in terms
of how do I provide the most intelligence I can as the Director
of the National Security Agency or Commander of U.S. Cyber
Command that provides both a viewpoint on intent and capability
of our adversaries. I think, you know, as any director of a
combat support agency would share with you is we need to do
more. And we can talk a little bit more in closed session
today, but, again, I think that overall, we have work to do
across U.S. Cyber Command and the National Security Agency.
Mr. Gallagher. And then finally, one of the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission recommendations that we are working on
right now is this concept of systemically important critical
infrastructure, which this case obviously brings up. Do you
support the idea of creating a codified relationship between
the United States Government and critical functions?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would say I support
anything that is going to ensure the security of our critical
infrastructure and key resources. My experience has been with
elections, but there are 16 other sectors. And I think that
what the administration has laid out in the 100-day plan
initially with regards to energy is a great start where we need
to figure out how do we bring the whole parts of the government
and, particularly important, how do we bring the private sector
into a greater partnership to ensure that we have outcomes that
will lead to greater resiliency and obviously security.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you. I guess the clock doesn't count
down when you are up this high on the dais, which is
interesting. But in the interest of time, I will still yield
back.
Mr. Langevin. Well, we follow the lead of the chair and the
ranking member on the full committee that the chair and ranking
member of the subcommittee are not on the clock. But with that,
I want to now thank you for your line of questions, and I also
want to commend the ranking member for his leadership as co-
chair of the Cyberspace Solarium Commission. I was proud to
serve on the Commission with you, and really appreciate your
commitment to our national security. That report went a long
way, I think, toward getting us to a stronger place in
cyberspace.
With that, I want to recognize now Mr. Larsen for 5
minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ranking Member Gallagher
will see the clock ticking now that we are on the others.
General Nakasone----
Mr. Langevin. I am watching it very closely.
Mr. Larsen. General Nakasone, section 1729 of the NDAA
required a conference and evaluation by the SECDEF [Secretary
of Defense] basically on how to use the cyber capabilities of
the National Guard. Do you have an update on the status of that
evaluation?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would have to defer to the
Secretary if she has one. I personally don't have one, but
certainly we can take that for the record, if necessary,
Congressman.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 65.]
Mr. Larsen. That is good. Thanks. Perhaps, Secretary?
Ms. Eoyang. Mr. Larsen, I just wanted to clarify. Since we
have had a number of congressional interest provisions on
National Guard, exactly which of the provisions are we
referring to?
Mr. Larsen. Cyber capabilities and interoperability of the
National Guard. It requires a comprehensive evaluation by
SECDEF on the mechanisms by which the Department is able to
improve the utilization of cyber capabilities resident in the
National Guard.
Ms. Eoyang. Our understanding is that we should have an
answer for you later this summer on that topic.
Mr. Larsen. All right. I have a list of questions that are
really more appropriate for a different setting, but I do want
to ask--where did my question go here? Oh. Perhaps for General
Nakasone. Can you highlight, perhaps, how you are leveraging
commercial threat information providers, and then how do you
share that information?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we have a number of
different relationships with the private sector. Sincerely, in
terms of being able to understand better the vulnerabilities
that exist in our private--in the same private companies is
critical for us. This is obviously sometimes a means upon which
we have early alerts to problems that might exist in the
private sector.
At the command, I assure you that any type of data is
looked at, screened, and carefully evaluated for U.S. persons
data. And if by rare occasion that we do have that, we will
certainly minimize, and we have processes and procedures upon
which to deal with that.
Mr. Larsen. And then in last year's NDAA, we authorized
some language that has CYBERCOM participating and contributing
to the Joint Cyber Planning Office at CISA [Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency]. How will you plan to implement
that provision?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we have had some experience
in working very closely with CISA, and it began with the
election. One of the things that I directed were a series of
planners to go over and to work closely with CISA as we put
together our strategy for securing the 2020 election. What we
found is that this truly is value added. The way that we do
planning operations is something that I think is very helpful
as we take a look at broad-based problems like election
security. We are going to continue to support that. That has
been an element that the Secretary has emphasized to us, and in
very close partnership, obviously, with CISA. So this will be
just the first of many steps as we go to work this closely.
Mr. Larsen. All right. And one final question, and this is
kind of related to the operations of NSA. But Congress has just
been notified, General, that there was a decision made to close
the NSA's onsite childcare center, creating a tough situation
for employees or parents. Can you speak a little bit about that
decision?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we were alerted several
weeks ago by the private company that runs the childcare center
that they were intending to close at the end of June. We have
spent the past several weeks doing a series of different
activities. First of all, working closely with those families
that are affected to ensure that they have information and
leads to other childcare facilities within the area. Secondly,
taking a look at mid- and long-term plans. As you know, we are
in the midst of a fairly large construction work at Fort Meade,
and so this was, I think, part of the impetus where the private
company decided to close at the end of June. But, clearly, it
begins with our engagement with the families that are affected,
and it has my personal interest, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Well, I am glad to hear that. Pre-pandemic, we
had a childcare crisis in the country. The pandemic has
exacerbated that. We have taken action through the American
Rescue Plan to try to alleviate some of that, but we don't need
to deliberately add to the problems of folks. So thanks for
updating me.
I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Right on time, Larsen. Very good. I thank the
gentleman for his line of questions.
Mr. Rogers is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Nakasone, the threats that you have described that
we face from adversaries in the cyber world, how imminent are
they?
General Nakasone. Well, I think--Congressman, to your
point, I think that what we are seeing right now are
adversaries that are increasing their scope, scale, and
sophistication. What do I mean by that? I mean that it no
longer is just a simple guessing of passwords or perhaps a
phishing email that our adversaries are starting to use. They
are using things like supply chain operations, as we saw in
SolarWinds, or they are utilizing zero-day vulnerabilities,
those vulnerabilities that the provider doesn't know about but
that an adversary can utilize, as we saw with Microsoft.
And so this is the world in which our adversaries are
operating below the level of armed conflict trying to do three
primary things: They are looking to steal our intellectual
property; they are looking to, you know, steal our personal
identification, whether or not that is, you know, passwords or
that is Social Security numbers or that is email addresses; and
they are looking to conduct interference and influence
operations either against our electoral processes or within our
economy.
Mr. Rogers. Are they looking to do that in the future or
are they looking to do that now?
General Nakasone. Oh, they are doing that now, Congressman.
Mr. Rogers. Yeah. So you would urge this committee to act
with haste on whatever you are going to recommend for us to do
in this year's NDAA?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would certainly focus
internally, and I am going to be ensuring that whatever we are
doing, we are doing at a pace that is accelerated.
Mr. Rogers. Well, my point is, if you are going to need any
additional statutory authority, you need to let us know,
because we are ready to act.
I talked to you yesterday about the committee's welcoming
of the recommendation from the National Defense Strategy
Commission, the suggestion of a Digital Service Academy to help
train up personnel to take on this challenge, and you mentioned
that you also had a retention issue. Can you talk more to the
committee about the challenges you face with retention of
quality personnel in this area?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, you asked me yesterday
about how the services were doing in terms of providing us
military and civilian members to outfit our 133 teams, and my
response is they do a spectacular job of doing that. It is not
the fact that our services don't do a great job in recruiting
and the fact that they do a great job in training, and then we
develop them at U.S. Cyber Command. At the end of the day, what
I think the most about is how do I retain this superior force,
particularly those individuals that are so much more capable
than their peers. And so retention is something that means a
lot to us.
And, you know, one of the things that I continue to work
closely with the services is how do we ensure that the best of
the best decide to stay with us, or if they are going to leave
us, how do they become part of our Reserve Component, our
National Guard, our Reserve force, or how do they continue to
contribute within the broader U.S. Government.
Mr. Rogers. Do you think you are going to need some
statutory leeway to be able to accommodate that challenge?
General Nakasone. So this is a point where that we will
work closely, obviously, with the Joint Staff and the Office of
Secretary of Defense to come back with some recommendations,
because I think that we have a growing amount of data that can
be helpful here for the Department to make an overall request.
Mr. Rogers. Great. Well, I look forward to receiving that,
and thank you for your service.
I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Rogers.
I will next go to Mr. Moulton. Welcome back from paternity
leave, and congratulations, Seth. And you are now recognized
for 5 minutes.
You are on mute.
Mr. Moulton. How is that?
Mr. Langevin. Go right ahead. You are recognized.
Mr. Moulton. Sorry. I was unmuted, but I was on the wrong
microphone, apparently. My apologies.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your remarks. It is good to be
back.
And to build off some of your comments on the need for
coordination between info operations and cyber operations,
General Nakasone, a few weeks ago the DC police was attacked by
the hacking group Babuk, which is reportedly a Russian-speaking
group. They accessed and published hundreds of confidential
documents, clearly damaging the public's confidence in the
police in the process.
In the past year, we have also seen influence operations by
Russian entities to undermine confidence in the police and
exacerbate societal tensions related to the police, so it is
not a stretch to imagine that an adversary could use a
combination of cyberattacks, like the one conducted by Babuk,
and influence operations to undermine faith in public
institutions further. In fact, Russia has clearly tried to do
just that in our elections by hacking our electoral
organizations while also running disinformation campaigns to
undermine the public's faith in the process.
How is your organization posturing itself to defend against
that kind of layered attack?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we are well-postured to
ensure that we provide the appropriate support to the lead
Federal agencies involved. Let me give you several examples.
So, first of all, I will begin with the elections. Our
focus at U.S. Cyber Command, at the National Security Agency,
is outside the United States to provide the insights on our
adversaries into what they are doing. We are well-practiced at
this, and I think we have demonstrated our proficiency in both
the 2018 and 2020 elections in doing this.
In terms of the recent concerns about domestic violence,
again, our focus is outside the United States for foreign
actors that might be doing one of three things: First of all,
generating content that might be utilized within the United
States; secondly, any type of violent activities that are being
called for by a foreign actor; and then thirdly, any type of
information that is being passed internally with regards to
gathering against the United States in any location. We work
closely with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] on that.
We work closely with the Department of Homeland Security. We
will continue to do that now and well into the future.
Mr. Moulton. General, how would you characterize the
interagency process and how effectively you are able to work
with these different agencies?
It strikes me, as an observer, that the lines of authority
are not particularly clear and it is hard to delineate who is
responsible for which operations, especially when, even just
given the example you just described, it is very easy to see
how a foreign actor like Russia can easily have a single
operation that goes into the territory of multiple U.S.
organizations.
General Nakasone. Congressman, I think the authorities, at
least from my perspective as both the commander and the
director, are clearly stated, and I know them very well. And I
know that our focus is outside the United States. I know that
our focus is enabling our partners within the United States.
And I think--I come back to the elections. There could not
have been a closer partnership between U.S. Cyber Command, the
National Security Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
and the Department of Homeland Security. To give you an
example----
Mr. Moulton. General, we are just short on time. Just to
give you an example of the problem here is that if the rest of
us don't see that partnership or understand how it works, then
you can have a situation where, you know, you have briefed us
that the last election was the most secure in American history,
and yet half the people in Washington today, all of one party,
are trying to make the case that it wasn't.
So how do we improve that understanding, even if it is just
a public understanding, of how these lines of authority work?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, in terms of the
election, you know, I speak to attempts by foreign adversaries
trying to interfere and influence our electoral process, and I
am very proud of the work that has been done and in partnership
with FBI and DHS on this.
Mr. Moulton. Yes. But you are not answering my question,
General, which is that if public perception does not understand
how this interagency coordination works, then it is easy to
think that these operations are not successful.
Ms. Eoyang. Mr. Moulton, if I may. Mr. Moulton, if I may.
Mr. Moulton. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. Eoyang. It is something that the Department works with
whole of government to protect our elections, and I think we
are very clear with the public about the work that we do in
this space. But we do not operate domestically, and so we have
to engage with the rest of government to make sure that the
American people are resilient to misinformation and
disinformation, and we will continue to work with our
interagency partners on that.
Mr. Moulton. Yeah. I mean, that is my point. And I know my
time has expired, Mr. Chairman, but I think we clearly need to
do work on that. And, you know, if I had time, I was going to
ask, you know, when I visit a Marine unit on the ground, are
they going to say that they are integrated with Cyber Command.
My questions all revolve around this coordination. It is very
difficult to do. And I am not trying to suggest that I don't
have confidence in your ability to follow your lines of
authority, but let's make sure that they work well, not only
internally, but that we can communicate them effectively to the
American public.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Gaetz, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this very important and timely hearing.
Millions of our fellow Americans are suffering right now in
their quality of life, in their ability to interact with their
jobs and their families as a consequence of a lack of
resilience to these foreign cyber threats. And, General, I
wanted to ask you, in circumstances where this opaqueness
exists that Ranking Member Gallagher referenced regarding the
connections between malicious cyber actors and state actors,
how should we think about the concept of deterrence and our
capability to deter against some of these more asymmetric
threats?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I think that in terms of
thinking about deterrence, it really is thinking about how do
we impose costs, and that is the way we have approached it at
U.S. Cyber Command within the Department. In terms of operating
outside the United States, when we see elements that are
operating, how do we try to impose the largest cost possible,
whether or not that is through being able to expose them,
whether or not that is being able to share the information with
a series of partners that we have, or whether or not when
authorized to conduct operations against them.
Mr. Gaetz. Can our fellow Americans who are dealing with
the impact of this last cyberattack assume that the imposition
of some cost is what is being contemplated by the Department of
Defense now?
General Nakasone. So while I won't get into, obviously, any
of the operations that are being considered, what I would say
is that, you know, my role as the Commander of U.S. Cyber
Command is to provide a series of operational opportunities or
courses of action for the Secretary and the President to
consider.
Mr. Gaetz. And I want to, again, delineate the types of
options that we would like to task you to develop as they
relate to state actors versus nonstate actors. I understand
that with governments, exposure and embarrassment can be a high
cost. Do you agree that with more asymmetric threats, the costs
have to be more direct and economic and kinetic?
General Nakasone. Congressman, what I would say is my
experience is that the type of threats that you have described
that are nonstate in nature, our response has to be persistent,
that it can't be a one-time effort. It has to be persistently
that we are going to enable our partners and to act when
authorized.
Mr. Gaetz. I also want to associate myself with the
comments of the ranking member of the full committee regarding
the workforce and recruitment. We all know why you have
retention problems. It is because the private sector pays
multiples what we would be able to pay people. And while pay
certainly isn't the only thing that motivates folks, it
certainly can contribute to a lack of retention of some of this
high-end talent.
It used to be the case, you know, not too long ago that the
brightest minds in Silicon Valley were working on cyber and
munitions and lasers, and the Department of Defense was the
most important customer and often the most important investor.
And now I am concerned that the brightest minds in America are
working on likes and shares and memes and other activities that
don't directly connect to the mission of the Department. And so
I think it is essentially critical for us to follow the thread
that Ranking Member Rogers laid out to actually develop more of
that pipeline earlier, understanding that there will be some
attrition. But a Digital Service Academy seems to be an
inspirational, patriotic, nationalist thing for us to be able
to do. I think it would inspire a great deal of confidence,
both in the public and the private sector.
Is there any advice you would give us going forward to
perhaps flesh out that idea from Ranking Member Rogers?
General Nakasone. So I think--I couldn't agree more in
terms of just the spirit of what both you and Congressman
Rogers has described with regards to opportunities future for
talent. I would only add, what we have to do collectively as,
obviously, the Department and the government, is to make it as
easy as possible for people to go from the private sector into
the public sector. And I think we still have work to do there.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah. I mean, I recall even from our first
orientation, the challenges presented by some of the
limitations and exclusions that the Department puts on people
for decisions or recreation that they engaged in that then
could disqualify them, and I would hope we would want to cast a
wide net for high-quality talent that can make that
contribution.
And, again, the earlier you get started with--you know, we
get to nominate these great patriots to service academies now,
and we see how in the 9th and 10th grade, they are already
making choices to try to earn those nominations and those
appointments. And so I think that building that pipeline sooner
would certainly be very helpful.
I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Gaetz.
Ms. Houlahan is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Chairman. I really appreciate the
chance to ask questions.
This one is for General Nakasone, and it is nice to see you
again. I am really interested in digital citizenship and
digital literacy. I think it is incredibly important,
especially in this time when we are, frankly, as a nation and
as a world, unclear on where the truth lies. I am wondering if
you could tell us how you, frankly both of you, are ensuring
that your cyber professionals are trained on how to identify
and root out disinformation. And if there is any specific
training that you are using for your own team, is there
anything that we could leverage or take advantage of to expand
to all of the DOD employees to be able to educate them in
sussing out the truth as well?
General Nakasone. So, Congresswoman, I will begin, and if
the Secretary wants to jump in. So I begin in terms of our
work, we have a very, very structured analytic development
program at U.S. Cyber Command that walks our analysts through
being able to understand the information that is presented.
I think, to your point, this is a dynamic environment, and
so our training continues to evolve. We continue to see our
adversaries utilize new means upon which they are trying to
influence, and that is one of the areas that we have focused on
is being able to have that ability to meter our training fairly
rapidly.
Ms. Houlahan. And is there anything that you can think of
that would be applicable to the broader DOD at large?
Ms. Eoyang. If I may, Congresswoman. I know that this is a
priority for the Secretary, increasing the resilience of the
DOD workforce, and it is something that he has been working on
as we have gone through and responded to the events of January
6.
And I think, to echo General Nakasone's comments about the
analytic work force, not just at NSA, but at all of DOD's
intelligence elements, we do teach a fair amount of critical
thinking to large parts of our workforce.
Ms. Houlahan. I would love to follow up with you both on
whether there is any applicability to the larger workforce and
not just the analytical aspects of our DOD workforce but the
body as a whole.
The next question. I would like to very much associate
myself with the remarks of Mr. Gaetz, and I know Mr. Rogers as
well, are interested in this concept of the Digital Service
Academy. I as well am very keen on exploring that and advancing
that as well. But in the meantime, highly skilled STEM
[science, technology, engineering, and mathematics]
professionals are definitely something that we are competing
with with the civilian economy. And I was wondering if you
could speak a little bit about the Cyber Excepted Service and
how it has either positively or negatively impacted DOD's cyber
missions, and what we can do in this space more to enhance our
workforce capabilities. Maybe General Nakasone speaks first.
General Nakasone. Thank you, Congresswoman. I am a huge
supporter of Cyber Excepted Service. What are we seeing with
it? We are seeing that it is an avenue for us to be able to go
to recruiting fairs and offer final job opportunities and
opportunities for young people to come and consider a career
with U.S. Cyber Command.
The other element is, is that I think it takes into account
that we have to hire differently, and so we are seeing a
dramatic drop in the number of processing days for those that
are hired under Cyber Excepted Service. Let me give you an
example. Traditionally, it has taken about 110 days to bring
someone into our civilian workforce. Under Cyber Excepted
Service, we are seeing that drop to somewhere in the 60-day
range, so that is a tremendous drop for us. That means that we
get people into our workforce much quicker. It is a much better
sign for those that are coming into U.S. Cyber Command that we
are serious about talent as our number one priority.
Ms. Houlahan. Ms. Eoyang, do you have anything further to
contribute to that?
Ms. Eoyang. I think that General Nakasone is right, and
building a strong and vibrant cyber workforce is certainly a
priority, and we have been working with our colleagues in
personnel and readiness to try and improve that.
Thank you.
Ms. Houlahan. And with the last couple minutes or couple
seconds of my time, is there anything further that we could be
doing in addition to things like the Digital Service Academy
and programs such as these that we can make sure that we are
including in this round of the NDAA? Ms. Eoyang.
General Nakasone. So, Congresswoman, if I might, let me
highlight DreamPort, which is an initiative that this committee
has supported. I think you will recall that DreamPort in 2018
was stood up. It is an unclassified facility just outside of
Fort Meade that we utilize for a number of different
initiatives, initiatives such as bringing young people in, a
series of high school interns for the summer, an ability to
bring together commercial industry with U.S. Cyber Command to
talk about key topics like, you know, new architectures for our
networks.
But what I have seen when I have gone over to a place like
DreamPort, a very small investment can have tremendous impact
on young people in terms of exciting them about coming into and
thinking about cyber as a career.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. As a former high school----
Ms. Eoyang. The only other thing that I would add that----
Ms. Houlahan. Go ahead.
Ms. Eoyang. I am sorry. The only other thing that I would
add to what General Nakasone says is that many of the people in
our workforce, they come to us because they are motivated by
the mission, that money is not their primary motivator. And so
the Congress' continued support for the ways in which we can
bolster the training and education of our workforce to help
them deepen their support to the mission, we appreciate the
support that you have given us so far, and we hope that that
would continue in the future.
Thank you.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, ma'am. And I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Houlahan.
Mr. Franklin is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And my first question would be for Ms. Eoyang and it is a
follow-up, really, to what Mr. Gaetz was referring to before,
asking about regarding the attacks we are seeing that are
coming from both nation-states and nonstate actors.
Specifically, with the nonstate actors that are being
financially backed by these states, do our tactics differ on
how we attack or how we deter those attacks, depending on
whether they are coming from the nation-states or nonstate
actors?
Ms. Eoyang. Certainly, nonstate actors who are engaging in
financially motivated crimes, the lead for responding to those
actors are the FBI and DOJ [Department of Justice]. The
challenge, I think, that we have is that when those attacks
first come across the networks and impact us, when we see that
malicious activity, it is always a challenge of attribution to
be able to pull it apart and figure out who are the state
actors and who are the nonstate actors. Which elements of
government would then be tasked with the lead to disrupt that
activity varies based on location and whether or not they are
criminal or not. But certainly it is clear that for nation-
states who are playing in this hybrid space, we consider that
irresponsible state behavior and would continue to call it out
where we see it.
Mr. Franklin. All right. Thank you.
In both of your testimonies, you make clear that the U.S.
can't go it alone here and we have this great need to work with
our allies when it comes to cyber specifically. In what ways
can you see that we can strengthen our current relationships?
And then, how do we go about building out new ones? And with
some of our tactics like, you know, hunt forward, has that
position changed over time, depending on which partner country
we are referring to?
Ms. Eoyang. Congressman, I would just say that as the
President has indicated, strengthening and reinforcing our
relationships with our alliances and partners is a very high
priority for him. We have demonstrated our commitment to
working with allies and partners in the face of the threat. We
have expanded our participation in Cyber Flag, and the
President continues to maintain a high interest and support for
hunt forward operations. I will let General Nakasone speak to
the specifics of that, but we continue to build relationships
with partners and allies.
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would just add, hunt
forward operations, where we are obviously coming at the
request of a foreign government, worked through the Department
of Defense and the Department of State, has been, I think, a
tremendous ability for us to show our commitment to
partnerships. And, you know, just during the defense of the
2020 elections, 11 different missions in 9 different countries,
you can see the importance that the Department places on this.
Mr. Franklin. Great. Thank you. That is all I have, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
Ms. Slotkin is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to our witnesses for showing up here. You guys have such an
important mission.
I want to associate myself with the comments that
Representative Gallagher said at the top of the session here. I
think it would be so important to really present a truly
transformational budget on cyber, you know, whenever you guys
submit it. I think that this committee is crying out for it. I
think that the country is crying out for it.
And we know that that will come at the expense of older
systems, legacy systems, pork, and that Congress has a
responsibility to help you with that, which we don't always
live up to. But I just want to encourage you to be bold and
provide something that really helps move us into the 21st
century so we can maintain our military edge.
I guess the question I have for both of you is, I am
running this task force, along with Mr. Gallagher, on the
Defense Department's supply chains and our vulnerabilities. And
cyber has come up at every single session that we have had 8
weeks in a row.
So can you tell us, particularly in the wake of SolarWinds,
kind of what CYBERCOM is doing to look at supply chain
vulnerabilities, either access by foreigners or just, you know,
whether it is intentional or benign? Can you talk to me about
supply chain issues?
General Nakasone. Congresswoman, what we have done in the
wake of SolarWinds is, again, taken apart and better understand
exactly what the adversary was able to do, and from that,
working with the National Security Agency and the Department of
Defense, have looked at the defense industrial base to be able
to share that information.
I would offer to you, however, that we are also getting a
tremendous amount of support and information from defense
industrial base companies that provide us kind of an indicator,
and I would be more than happy to follow up with that in a
future session.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. The other thing I guess I would ask is,
you know, in Michigan, we host a multi-domain exercise that is
Army, Air Force, and has now been integrating cyber into, you
know, the giant exercise. Tell me about what you have done to
try and encourage the cyber component of multi-domain exercises
all over world.
General Nakasone. Congresswoman, what we have done is
twofold. One is to try to encourage and support the Guard, not
only in exercises, but in real world. And so we created a
capability called the Cyber 9-Line, which allows any element
within the Guard, Air or Army, to be able to access our big
data platform, to share information at an unclassified level
with the simple use of a common access card, which is your ID
card. Every single element within the United States, the 54
elements of the Guard in our States and territories, has
utilized that.
The second piece is, is continuing to support, not only
within our exercises, Cyber Flag, as the Secretary mentioned,
but also within Guard exercises to have robust cyber play.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. And I guess, you know, this is more of a
comment than it is a question. But along the lines of what
Representative Moulton was saying, it is so hard to explain to
the American public what we are doing to respond when they see
these very visible attacks, whether they are from a foreign
entity, ransomware, or whatnot.
Our constituents, they are on the front lines of these
attacks, and yet they can't feel--they don't know what their
country is doing to respond. And I know that that is a
difficult position for you all. What you do should be under the
radar, but I would just note that there is a real sense that
there is just no deterrence on a cyberattack, that a Russian
group, a Chinese group can just attack us with impunity. They
can steal a million records, you know, the SF-86 forms of a
million Federal workers, and we put out a strongly worded press
release.
So we are going to need to figure out how to not just do it
in the shadows but communicate to the American people that we
are not leaving ourselves open as this becomes kind of the
primary form of attack on the average American citizen. So I
will leave it at that.
Thanks very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Slotkin.
Mr. Fallon is now recognized for 5 minutes. Mr. Fallon, are
you with us?
Mr. Fallon. Yes. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me?
Mr. Langevin. We can hear you now, yeah.
Mr. Fallon. Oh, wonderful, thank you.
Well, my colleagues have asked some very good questions,
excellent questions. And I wanted to ask Secretary Eoyang, the
Cyber Mission Force has only reached full operational capacity
by 2018. And given that personal computers and the internet
have been a part of our daily lives for 30-plus years, why do
you think it took so long to gain this capability and capacity?
Ms. Eoyang. Congressman, I think--while I wasn't here in
the Department in 2018, I think that it is a growing
recognition of the importance that cyber plays.
Prior to this, many of the cyber response capabilities for
the Department were resident in the services, but as we
realized the need to integrate and think about those things
more broadly, the Cyber National Mission Force was stood up.
And I am happy to let General Nakasone speak to what the
evolution of that has been and the capability that they have
developed.
I think we are at the beginning of being able to see the
role of the Cyber Mission Force and its integration into the
rest of DOD's responses, but I think that its role will
continue to grow for us in the Department.
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would say, we began
building the force in 2014 based upon a decision at the
Department. The command stood up in 2010. Twenty-eighteen was a
pivotal year for us. It is not just the fact that we achieved
full operational capability. With the help of this committee,
with the help of Congress, we received the right authorities
within the NDAA that identified cyber as a traditional military
activity, and that was instrumental for the work that we did in
the 2018 midterm elections.
The force is mature, it is moving on, it is getting better,
it is innovating, it is improving. You know, I can't speak to
the length of time to why it took us until 2018 to finish it,
but what I can speak to is, is that I am very proud of the work
that it has done and where we are headed.
Mr. Fallon. Well, General, I would say, thank you for your
answer. But I would be little bit more concerned not so much
that we finished the beginning really, or we had the end of the
beginning in 2018, but we didn't start till 2014. I think this
is something that probably should have been done back when you
were a company grade officer in the 1990s, and it is
unfortunate that it hasn't happened. It seems like we are
playing a little catch-up.
Since 2018, General, what do you see as the notable
accomplishments that have been achieved by your command?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would begin with security
of the elections in 2018 and 2020, a much different result that
came about based upon, again, the authorities that came to us
from both the legislative and the executive branch.
There are other series of operations that have been
conducted since then, that I would welcome to be able to
comment this afternoon in a different forum. But I think I
would close with just the ability for the services and the
Department to evolve pretty quickly in terms of, not only the
fact that we stood up a force, but the fact that the services
now have established cyber services and cyber branches, and
then being able to move quickly to react to how we need to
outfit those forces.
Mr. Fallon. General, what kind of collaboration exists
between CYBERCOM and DHS's CISA?
General Nakasone. Daily collaboration, Congressman. As I
mentioned, we have a series of planners that are there. We have
worked such initiatives as, you know, the protection of the
vaccines within this country. We have also looked at a series
of exercises to posture ourselves for support to DHS in the
event of a crisis. So it is an ongoing, robust relationship
with CISA.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, General, Secretary. And thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Fallon.
Ms. Escobar is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Really appreciate the
opportunity. Many thanks also to our witnesses for their
service to our country, as well as for bringing their expertise
to this subcommittee.
You know, as our daily lives and as more of our security
and the utilities that we depend on migrate toward the web, and
as we see recent attacks like what we saw with Colonial
Pipeline, the urgency of this issue could not be more pressing
for our committee.
I am very interested in exploring innovation. And, General,
you mentioned innovation and, Secretary Eoyang, you did as
well. But, Secretary Eoyang, I would like to explore a little
bit more the Department's initiatives to engage institutions of
higher learning, not just for recruitment when it comes to
cyberspace, but also as partners for this badly needed
innovation.
The University of Texas at El Paso in my home district is a
National Center of Academic Excellence in cyber operations. And
so I am curious about just how much the Department prioritizes
collaboration with universities, you know, as you described
DOD's key partners outside the U.S. Government. And I want to
give you a chance to elaborate on this and, again, not just in
terms of recruitment, but also as a key partner.
Ms. Eoyang. Yes, absolutely, Congresswoman. Research
universities like UTEP [University of Texas at El Paso] and
others, who have a focus on cyber, do provide tremendous
benefit to the Nation. Universities, as part of our research
and engineering efforts in the Department, are a key source of
ideas and innovation for us, and we have prioritized funding to
those institutions.
We will have to--we can reengage with you when the
President's budget is submitted about specifics related to
that.
General Nakasone. Congresswoman, if I might just add to the
Secretary's comments. As you well know, the National Security
Agency sponsors over 300 Centers of Academic Excellence in the
United States, of which I believe UTEP, as you indicated, is
one of them.
We will continue to do that as an agency. It is critical,
not only in the sense, as you noted, with regards to the
development of our young people, but also in the development of
curriculum that changes and matters to what our universities
are working on. So I think this is a rich partnership that we
will certainly continue well into the future.
Ms. Escobar. General, I really appreciate that. And, you
know, one of the things that I would add, in addition to
bringing that innovation that universities and institutions of
higher learning can bring, an institution, as you know, like
UTEP, which is a Hispanic-serving institution, brings badly
needed diversity to the way that we operate as a country, as a
government. And so I appreciate that, and I look forward to
continuing to work with you all on ways to expand opportunities
for institutions like UTEP, but also to really rely on that
innovation that I think will help get us out from being behind
the curve and to being more in front of it.
Secretary Eoyang, one last thing. I want to explore the
Pathfinder program. You said you partner with DHS on this, in
which you assist private companies by enhancing their ability
to protect their own networks. Can you describe the results of
the Pathfinder initiatives?
Ms. Eoyang. So I believe we owe Congress a more fulsome
answer on our analysis of the Pathfinder program, but as we see
today with the interruption of Colonial Pipeline, the
Department's ability to partner with private sector in order to
be able to help them identify threats on their networks is an
important defensive step that we can take to help secure the
whole of nation. And I think perhaps General Nakasone has some
thoughts on additional public-private partnerships in that
area.
General Nakasone. So, Congresswoman, I think my experience
has been, we have worked closely with both the financial and
the energy sectors on that. If we might have--if I can take
that for the record, though, to provide you a more fulsome
answer.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 65.]
Ms. Escobar. That would be great. I appreciate it. Thank
you both. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Ms. Escobar.
Mrs. Bice is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing. And thank you to both the witnesses for
joining us today to share your perspectives.
I appreciated your comment, General, in the beginning that
cybersecurity is national security, and I think that the things
that we have seen over the last, you know, week or two
especially, have highlighted the importance and the swiftness
at which this issue needs to be addressed.
As both of you know, the DOD currently relies on thousands
of data centers that are often stovepiped, disconnected, and in
many cases, have reached their limits of life service. They can
no longer be upgraded to meet current cyber threats our Nation
is facing.
I understand there is a directive for DOD agencies to
migrate to milCloud 2.0, but the adoption has been slow. For
both of the witnesses, but specifically to Secretary Eoyang,
could you provide me with your perspective on the migration to
milCloud 2.0 and the degree to which the migration can help
address DOD's current cyber vulnerabilities?
Ms. Eoyang. So as you know, the Department takes a number
of steps to defend its networks and its data, but as to the
specifics of migration, I will have to take that for the
record. I want to make sure that I have coordinated that with
my CIO [Department of Defense Chief Information Officer]
colleagues.
Thank you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 65.]
General Nakasone. What I would add to that, Congresswoman,
is, what we have learned over the past 6 to 12 months is that
we have to think about defense differently. In terms of as we
move to, you know, cloud-based capabilities to secure our data,
many people think that we will just put it into the cloud. It
doesn't work quite that way.
And so ensuring we have the right contracts written,
ensuring that we have our defensive forces trained to a higher
degree in terms of their abilities, ensuring we have the big
data capabilities that are necessary, that is what I would add
to it.
Mrs. Bice. Follow-up question specific to that topic, and
that is, do you believe that we are investing enough in
cybersecurity?
And I will elaborate on that. I feel like we tend to focus
when we are looking at budgets, on people and, you know,
equipment, but we are not looking at that cyberspace as much as
I believe maybe we should be, and maybe some of the things that
we are seeing now are highlighting some of that.
Ms. Eoyang. Certainly, we have tremendous risk in
cyberspace, and we are facing persistent adversaries in this
space. I think that the questions of the resourcing are things
that we have to take into consideration in light of the other
demands that are placed upon the Department and the Nation.
While we certainly could make use of additional funds, whether
or not--how that all works out, we are happy to engage the
committee when the President's budget is released.
General Nakasone. Congresswoman, I am at a bit of a
disadvantage because you are asking the combatant commander in
charge of cyber to comment on a question like that. Here is
what I would say: We have to use every single dollar that is
provided to us by Congress in probably a much more efficient
way.
And the way I would characterize that is that, working
very, very closely with the DOD Chief Information Officer,
where do we prioritize our last dollar of defense. He has done
a tremendous job, John Sherman, in laying that out. We have
clear guidance from the Secretary that accountability means
something with regards to cybersecurity.
So it is not just the fact that we need more money. We need
to be able to use the money that we have to the most efficient
benefit of our Department.
Mrs. Bice. On that note, do you believe that flexibility in
making those acquisitions in a timely fashion would be of
benefit to you? Because one of the concerns I have is that we
spend a lot of time planning, developing, and then procuring,
but it could be 2 years by the time that actually takes place,
and at that point, the technology that we are acquiring is no
longer, you know, of use in many cases.
How do we address the timeliness of making sure that we are
keeping up with these cybersecurity challenges?
Ms. Eoyang. I do think this is one of those areas where we
have to think differently, given the speed of the threat. The
traditional acquisition models that the Department has used for
concrete weapons systems may not be applicable to cyber, given
the speed of things, but that is something that we need to work
out with our colleagues in Acquisition and Sustainment, and
happy to come back to you guys with some additional thoughts on
that.
General Nakasone. I appreciate the committee's elimination
of the $75 million cap on acquisition, in the last NDAA. That
was incredibly important for us, because we are starting to now
grow this ability to do acquisition at the command. We need to
go faster on that, but that is an example of something that
helped us tremendously.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you for your time today. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mrs. Bice.
Mr. Morelle is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Morelle. Thanks very much, Mr. Chair, for this
important hearing. And I want to not only thank you but thank
the witnesses for their considerable contributions to the
country.
And, General, it is nice to see you. I had an opportunity
with the freshman class in 2019 to visit with you at Fort Meade
and was very impressed with the operation, and I know how
critical this is.
I want to just--and these may have been questions, as I am
thinking about it, may have been asked in one form, but maybe
you could just drill down a little.
I have some questions about how private industry, the
private sector innovation can help CYBERCOM address increased
cyberattacks, whether they can, whether, in your opinion, some
of those [inaudible] I know the private sector is working on
it.
Secondly is whether or not the command is well-positioned
to implement cutting-edge technology from the private sector.
So is it available? Is there help out there that you think you
could use? Are you positioned to be able to implement help and
resources and innovation in the private sector?
And finally, are there obstacles preventing you from
acquiring and implementing technology that we need to address,
that we need to help you, you know, through the NDAA or other
means to help you with a greater collaboration?
And I would ask of both witnesses.
General Nakasone. Congressman, just to start out, I would
say that, is there initiatives in the private sector that could
certainly help us? Yes, most definitely. And we see that. We
are working with the Defense Innovation Unit. We are working
through a series of partnerships that have been established.
And then we are bringing it to, you know, a common location
like our DreamPort facility where it is unclassified. We can
have a discussion. They can understand in the private sector
what our priorities are. That is among the most important
things that we have to do at the command, is list each of the
challenges that we need assistance on. Private sector is seeing
that. They understand that.
The other piece is that I think that perhaps what we have
to do even more prevalently is be able to have the culture that
sometimes we don't have to develop it, that it has been
developed in the private sector. So when we talk about new
architectures for our network, there is a lot of networks in
the United States, a lot of really well-run networks in the
United States; we should be able to leverage that quite
rapidly, and that is what we are doing.
The last piece, in terms of obstacles, if I might, again,
just working through our folks and then back to the Department,
if I can provide some thoughts on that as well.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, General.
Madam Secretary, do you have any additional thoughts?
Ms. Eoyang. I think that obviously the private sector has
been----
Mr. Morelle. I am sorry. I can't hear the Secretary.
Ms. Eoyang. Sorry. The private sector has a tremendous
amount of capability and innovation. I think the Department is
looking for innovative ways to be able to bring that innovation
in to benefit our mission. The challenge, I think, is while the
private sector may move fast and break things, we, in the
Department, can't afford to have things break. We need to move
fast and fix things. So we welcome private sector partnership
to work on that.
Thank you.
Mr. Morelle. Very good.
Mr. Chair, I think this is an important subject. I would
love to continue to be a part of the conversation and be
helpful to both the Secretary and the General as they meet what
are emerging and obviously very serious threats. With that, I
will yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Moore is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. Obviously, a very pertinent
and important conversation today, so I am glad and appreciate
having the time and the witnesses for being here.
I think the American public would be able to categorize
this as these things--these issues keep happening. We have got
Colonial, we have got SolarWinds.
My two questions are for General Nakasone. They are about
deterrence and talent. So let me jump into the first one.
We have now set a precedent, we are naming Russia as the
culprit in a couple of these situations, in these attacks. Is
that a plan going forward? Is it meant to be a deterrent for
future hacks? Will it be a deterrent? Could you provide some
context on our approach to that and even more broadly with
respect to deterrence?
General Nakasone. If I might start, and then I am certain
that the Secretary may have some comments on that as well.
Mr. Moore. Please.
General Nakasone. So with regards to what we are seeing by
adversaries operating against us in cyberspace, this is going
to continue. And so the Department's position in terms of
defend forward, operating outside the United States, and U.S.
Cyber Command's ability to do persistent engagement is what we
are doing, and we need to do more of it. We need to be able to
enable our partners better, and we need to act, when
authorized, more effectively, and I think that this will be
certainly where we are headed.
In terms of specific options regarding any of the
adversaries, I would defer that until this afternoon. But there
are, from my vantage point, a series of options that we
continue to develop and provide when necessary for a number and
a range of opportunities for the Secretary and the President's
determination.
Mr. Moore. Excellent.
Ms. Eoyang. Congressman, thank you for that very important
question. I think deterrence is certainly the Department's goal
when it comes to cyberspace, but I think we need to be specific
about what kinds of deterrents and against which types of
adversaries.
Since some of the activity that you referenced is what we
would consider cyber espionage, and while we would expect that
there is nothing that an adversary could do to deter U.S.
intelligence-gathering efforts, there is likewise, we may not
be able to deter adversary activity in that space to zero. That
is not to say we can't impose costs, both by calling it out and
making their lives harder, and engaging through other means to
try and limit the scope of that activity. And I think that
there are other ways that we can think about deterrence by
denial.
I would just note that in terms of cyberattacks that would
rise to the level of an armed attack, we have not seen that
type of attack from the adversary on the U.S., from a nation-
state adversary on the U.S. And we would, I think, continue to
maintain a strong deterrence posture against any type of attack
of that nature.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Thank you. And I look forward to
discussing more through our closed briefing.
Quickly, just with respect to the pool of cyber talent in
the DOD, how, ultimately, are we going to be competitive with
the commercial industry? How can we better avoid the attrition
that we oftentimes see within the DOD that is both an expense
and, you know, a dearth of talent that exists?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, I would begin. Our
number one competitive advantage in this space is our mission.
There is nowhere you can do some of the things that you can do
at U.S. Cyber Command, legally, in the United States. And so
that is something that we continue to obviously reinforce with
our members.
The second is that we have world-class facilities. Whether
or not you are in Fort Meade or Georgia, Texas, Hawaii,
Colorado, anyplace that we are operating, one of the things
that we have been the beneficiaries of is a very, very high
standard of facility that we operate.
And thirdly, one of the things that we continue to
obviously leverage are a series of financial incentives that
the service's Cyber Excepted Service has provided to us. But it
will never be about money. It needs to be about what we are
doing in the mission and the folks that they are working with.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Welcome any other thoughts,
Secretary.
Ms. Eoyang. Thank you, Congressman. We really appreciate
the committee's focus on this. And while we seek to retain the
best possible cyber talent for the Department, we do have the
benefit of, as we train cyber personnel, General Nakasone's
personnel complete their military service and return to the
private sector, we are also helping to fill a shortage of cyber
talent across the Nation.
So while we need to make sure that we can meet our
retention requirements and readiness requirements, it is not a
complete loss for the Nation because we send more people out
there to defend in the private sector space as well.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Looking forward to discussing more.
I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
And with that, I want to thank our witnesses for their
testimony, the members for their questions. To our witnesses, I
know that members had some questions that required follow-up
and members may have additional questions. I ask that you
respond in writing at the earliest opportunity.
And with that, we are going to close out the open session
of this hearing, and we will move now to CVC-200 for the
classified portion.
With that, the hearing stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:32 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 14, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 14, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

May 14, 2021

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LARSEN

General Nakasone. USCYBERCOM defers to Office of Secretary of
Defense.   [See page 11.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. ESCOBAR
General Nakasone. Cyber Command participated in two Pathfinder
initiatives with Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
The first was with DHS, the Treasury, and the Financial Systemic
Analysis & Resilience Center (recently renamed to simply the Analysis &
Resilience Center) to look at vulnerabilities in one of the financial
sector's most critical systems, the Wholesale Payment System. The
results of this collaboration over a 15 month period were collaborative
analysis, mitigation development, and information sharing to provide
better threat identification and early warning to improve security of
critical financial infrastructure.
For the second, USCYBERCOM partnered with DHS, Energy, and a
private energy sector reliability coordinator in order to evaluate ICS/
SCADA vulnerabilities highlighted by Energy's Cybersecurity Risk
Information Sharing Program (CRISP) and DHS's Automated Indicator
Sharing (AIS) System. This effort demonstrated the usefulness of CRISP
and AIS to utility companies, reliability coordinators, Treasury and
DHS, and underscored the requirements that remain for USCYBERCOM to
derive impactful information from these sharing initiatives to drive
military cyber operations.
Perhaps the most important outcome from these Pathfinder efforts
was the acknowledgement and increasing understanding of how USCYBERCOM
must interoperate with DHS as the lead federal agency for CIKR
cybersecurity. We have demonstrated this understanding successfully, on
a small scale, through efforts enabled by legislation like Sec. 1650 of
the 2019 NDAA. As a result of this legislation, USCYBERCOM continues to
support DHS with personnel that provide a critical and sustained link
between our Departments. Additionally, it is important to note, the
Pathfinder efforts are not the only venues or conduits for
collaboration but have been important in testing new processes and
developing useful routines and habits, which CYBERCOM has found
valuable.   [See page 24.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. BICE
Ms. Eoyang. DOD-authorized commercial cloud services, such as
milCloud 2.0, provide a computing infrastructure that can be more
secure than the legacy computing infrastructure. However, milCloud 2.0
infrastructure alone may be insufficient to address potential
vulnerabilities in the software components and IT operations that
compose the complete system. This is because Cloud computing generally
consists of three layers: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform
as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). MilCloud 2.0
only targets the IaaS layer, and thus it is still necessary to redesign
legacy applications to take full advantage of the Cloud, including
updating any out-of-date software components. Fully addressing the
range of potential application vulnerabilities often necessitates
adopting strong access management tools and policies for access to
cloud resources, implementing effective security automation, and
improving the application's cybersecurity controls.   [See page 24.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 14, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KIM

Mr. Kim. Section 1729 of the FY21 NDAA requires the Secretary of
Defense to conduct an evaluation of the statutes, rules, regulations
and standards that pertain to the use of the National Guard for the
response to and recovery from significant cyber incidents. This
evaluation is due to be submitted to Congress no later than June 29.
Can you provide an update on this study, including when Congress should
expect to see the results and any preliminary findings?
Ms. Eoyang. DOD completed the evaluation and intends to deliver its
results no later than June 29, 2021, as required by section 1729 of the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (NDAA for FY
2021).
Mr. Kim. Recently, NSA purchased a cybersecurity curriculum for use
in its educational programs to build talents within DOD to address
future workforce needs in the critical cyberspace field. However, it is
my understanding that DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA) already owns and operates a more comprehensive curriculum
for cybersecurity through Cyber.org that achieves the same goals and is
available to NSA for use. Can you explain why the purchase of this
additional curriculum was necessary and assess the level of information
sharing and cooperation between various agencies when it comes to
workforce development programming in the cyberspace field?
General Nakasone. NSA did not purchase the referenced cybersecurity
curriculum to use in its educational programs; the National Cryptologic
Foundation (formerly Museum), a private entity separate from NSA,
procured this product for use in its Center for Cyber Education and
Innovation.
CISA's Cyber.org program focuses on K-12 curriculum, whereas NSA's
cyber education programs focus on college-prep curriculum for the
pipeline into Centers of Academic Excellence. That said, NSA is a
partner with CISA, and all efforts are fully coordinated to achieve
complementary programs for cyber education, with collaboration on
informational materials to provide clarity to government partners and
educators on the attributes and recommended usage of their programs,
and how to access materials and resources. For instance, NSA's GenCyber
Program uses the Cyber.org curriculum.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. The DOD currently relies on over 2,500 data centers that
in many cases have reached the limits of their service life and can no
longer be upgraded to meet current cyber threats. How will migration to
the cloud address these shortcomings?
Ms. Eoyang. Cloud environments enable data center consolidation by
allowing organizations to focus less on servers and storage and more on
software applications and the data environment. DOD has used its Data
Center Optimization Initiative (DCOI), a Department-wide effort to
optimize data centers for greater efficiency, performance, security,
and affordability, as an opportunity to evaluate which applications
should be retired, consolidated, or replaced, and to migrate needed
applications to the Department's cloud services. By 2025, this will
allow the Department to close a projected 2,100 data centers that have
reached the end of their service lives.
The reduced and re-ordered data center inventory has also enabled
DOD to manage cyber vulnerabilities more effectively and to focus
investments in cyber security in its enterprise data centers. The DOD's
DCOI end-state is projected to have approximately 1,500 data centers
Department wide.
Mr. Moore. The DOD's Cloud Strategy identifies three clouds:
milCloud 2.0, the Defense Enterprise Office Solution (DEOS), and the
JEDI general purpose cloud. 4th estate agencies were directed to move
to new systems, but adoption has been slow. Will the DOD enforce the
2018 mandate directing cloud migration by the 4th estate?
Ms. Eoyang. Yes. DOD is enforcing the 2018 mandate by directing the
14 Fourth Estate agencies to migrate to cloud services through the
Cloud and Data Center Optimization Initiative, a subset of the
Department's DCOI.
Mr. Moore. The DOD's Cloud Strategy identifies three clouds:
milCloud 2.0, the Defense Enterprise Office Solution (DEOS), and the
JEDI general purpose cloud. 4th estate agencies were directed to move
to new systems, but adoption has been slow. Will the DOD enforce the
2018 mandate directing cloud migration by the 4th estate?
General Nakasone. USCYBERCOM defers to the office of the DOD CIO
within OSD.

[all]
