[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 117-84]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED
PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST

FOR U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND COMMAND

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 28, 2022

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-632                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona, Chairman

RICK LARSEN, Washington              TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
JIM COOPER, Tennessee                DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  SAM GRAVES, Missouri
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           DON BACON, Nebraska
JIMMY PANETTA, California            LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida, Vice   C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida
Chair

Craig Greene, Professional Staff Member
Patrick Nevins, Professional Staff Member
Will Braden, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Franklin, Hon. C. Scott, a Representative from Florida,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     2
Gallego, Hon. Ruben, a Representative from Arizona, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     1

WITNESSES

Clarke, GEN Richard D., USA, Commander, U.S. Special Operations
Command........................................................     5
Maier, Christopher P., Assistant Secretary of Defense, Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict..........................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Clarke, GEN Richard D........................................    31
Gallego, Hon. Ruben..........................................    21
Kelly, Hon. Trent, a Representative from Mississippi, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations    22
Maier, Christopher P.........................................    23

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Kelly....................................................    47
Mr. Scott....................................................    47
Ms. Sherrill.................................................    48

FISCAL YEAR 2023 BUDGET REQUEST FOR U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND
COMMAND

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 28, 2022.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:30 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ruben Gallego
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RUBEN GALLEGO, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ARIZONA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS

Mr. Gallego. Thank you, everyone, for being here.
I am going to have to read preliminary words for our
session online.
Members who are joining remotely must be visible onscreen
for the purpose of identity verification, establishing and
maintaining a quorum, participating in the proceeding, and
voting. Those members must continue to use the software
platform's video function while in attendance, unless they
experience connectivity issues or other technical problems that
render them unable to participate on camera. If a member
experiences technical difficulties, they should contact the
committee staff for assistance.
Video of members' participation will be broadcast in the
room and via the television/internet feeds.
Members participating remotely must seek recognition
verbally, and they are asked to mute their microphones when
they are not speaking.
Members who are participating remotely are reminded to keep
the software platform's video function on the entire time they
attend the proceeding. Members may leave and rejoin the
proceeding.
If members depart for a short while for reasons other than
joining a different proceeding, they should leave the video
function on. If members will be absent for a significant period
or to depart to join a different proceeding, they should exit
the software platform entirely, and then rejoin if they return.
Members may use the software platform's chat feature to
communicate with staff regarding technical or logistical
support issues only.
Finally, I have designated a committee staff member to, if
necessary, mute unrecognized members' microphones to cancel any
inadvertent background noise that may disrupt the proceeding.
All right. Good afternoon. I call to order this hearing of
the Intelligence and Special Operations Subcommittee, a review
of the fiscal year 2023 budget request for U.S. Special
Operations Forces and Command.
Special operations forces are at an inflection point. The
2022 National Defense Strategy focuses the U.S. military's
capabilities on strategic competition toward countering China's
growing multi-domain challenges and Russia's persistent
threats, which have only been further magnified by its
unconscionable invasion and the ongoing war in Ukraine.
U.S. Special Operations Forces have a significant role in
countering competitors and adversaries as well as deterring
strategic attacks against the United States. We continue to
live in an extremely dangerous and volatile world, and special
operations forces should be prioritized as a capability to
counter these dangers through its counter-violent extremist
organizations mission and other non-kinetic authorities.
Today's hearing is focused on the fiscal year 2023 budget
request for Special Operations Command and special operations
forces. The budget request highlights SOCOM's [U.S. Special
Operations Command's] support to the National Defense Strategy,
which creates ``a strategic, asymmetric advantage for the
Nation by bolstering the integrated deterrence capabilities and
enhancing campaigning activities and building enduring
advantages through innovation and modernization.''
I would like to hear from our witnesses how the SOF
[special operations forces] community is postured to accomplish
this. I would also like to understand how 1202 authorities and
SOCOM's Military Information Support Operations, MISO, can
support our defense strategy and counter threats from China and
Russia.
With that, let me introduce today's witnesses:
The Honorable Christopher P. Maier, Assistant Secretary for
Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict; and
General Richard Clarke, Commander, U.S. Special Operations
Command.
This will be General Clarke's last posture hearing before
this committee as the commander of SOCOM. We appreciate your
service to this Nation and all you have done for the special
operations forces.
In the interest of time, I ask the witnesses to keep their
opening remarks brief, so that we will have more time for the
closed session.
With that, let me again thank our witnesses for appearing
before us today.
I would now recognize Mr. Franklin, in Ranking Member
Kelly's place, for any opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gallego can be found in the
Appendix on page 21.]

STATEMENT OF HON. C. SCOTT FRANKLIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
FLORIDA, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Ranking Member
Kelly is here this afternoon briefly. He is going to have to
leave. And so, he has asked that I would cover for him, and I
appreciate that opportunity.
And in light of that, I would like to request unanimous
consent to submit Ranking Member Kelly's opening comments for
the record.
Mr. Gallego. No objections.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelly can be found in the
Appendix on page 22.]
Mr. Franklin. And I thank our witnesses for joining us this
afternoon. I appreciate that late in the afternoon that you
take the time to be here with us and to talk about this fiscal
year 2023 budget request for Special Operations Command.
I commend the critical investments contained within this
request, especially in the undersea capabilities and the
continued procurement of Armed Overwatch. I am, however, as we
have discussed offline before, deeply concerned with the top-
line budget amount. Now the fiscal year 2023 request is $13.2
billion. That is a lot of money, but it is the exact same
amount as the last year. And when you take the record inflation
into account, this represents a cut in real dollars. I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses about the risks
associated with these cuts.
Also, I would like to express support, also, for SOCOM's
1202 authority. It is critically important that we codify this
authority in U.S. Code and increase the funding level to allow
for appropriate growth. I look forward to working with all my
HASC [House Armed Services Committee] colleagues this year to
make this a reality.
Additionally, I stand with Ranking Member Rogers in support
for increasing our force posture along NATO's [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization's] eastern flank, especially with our SOF
formation. It is critically important for us to support our
eastern NATO allies, like the Baltics, Poland, and Romania.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
We will now hear from our witnesses, and then move into
question-and-answer session. Immediately following questions,
we will reconvene for the classified session, which will take
place in Rayburn 2212.
And I now recognize the Honorable ASD Maier.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER P. MAIER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE, SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT

Mr. Maier. Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, and
Congressman Franklin filling in for ranking member, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the global posture of our Nation's
special operations enterprise.
I am honored to testify alongside General Clarke, one of
our country's most dedicated military professionals. On a
personal note, I would like to thank General Clarke for his
leadership and very important partnership during his tenure as
the SOCOM commander during a time of major transformation and
strategic importance.
I also appreciate the leadership of Command Chief Master
Sergeant Greg Smith, who is here today, who models the senior
enlisted leadership that is so critical to the success of our
special operators.
The dedication, service, and sacrifice of our SOF leaders
and the SOF community motivates me each and every day to ensure
we are doing all we can to provide them the ways and means to
win, regardless of the challenge.
I would also like to thank Congress, and particularly this
ISO Subcommittee, for its steadfast support for our SOF
warriors and their families.
Ever since the establishment of USSOCOM, our strong
partnership with Congress has been instrumental to fielding the
world's most capable and elite special operations force. We
continue to make progress in advancing Congress' intent to
institutionalize the role of the office I lead, Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict, or SO/LIC, within the
Department of Defense.
Sustaining and enhancing the competitive advantage of the
U.S. military depends on our effectiveness in providing
civilian oversight and backing of the SOF enterprise. This
group of extraordinary military, civilians, and contractors has
proven itself to be essential to the U.S. military and our
strategic success.
In today's increasingly complex security environment, the
SOF enterprise provides our Nation's leaders with agile,
scalable, and discrete options to address challenges across the
spectrum of competition, crisis, and conflict. SOF play an
essential role in the National Defense Strategy by holding
adversary systems at risk and by enhancing our allies' and
partners' ability to resist aggression and malign influence.
Even as we transition the SOF enterprise to achieve
enduring advantage through integrated deterrence and active
campaigning in the gray zone, we continue to enhance our
capabilities to conduct high-priority counterterrorism and
crisis response operations.
The President's fiscal year 2023 budget request for SOF
reflects these priorities in modernizing our maritime
capabilities and investing in artificial intelligence and other
key technologies. The budget also supports the Armed Overwatch
program to ensure our SOF have the required support in remote
and austere environments where they operate.
As reflected in the fiscal year 2023 budget, we continue to
invest in the well-being of our SOF warriors and their
families. Our flagship Preservation of the Force and Family
program, or POTFF, complements service-administered programs to
address the unique physical, cognitive, psychological, and
spiritual performance needs of our SOF community.
Our ability to draw upon a diverse set of talents and
perspectives is essential in our success in a changing
operational environment and to SOF's unique ability to engage
and collaborate with allies and partners around the world.
This week, General Clarke and I issued the USSOCOM
Diversity and Inclusion Implementation Action Plan, which
incorporates key initiatives to optimize our service diversity
outreach programs, recruiting opportunities, and identifying
barriers to accession for our teammates.
Women continue to make major impact within the SOF
community. And in the past 2 years, the first three women
successfully completed Special Forces Qualification, and last
year, the first woman qualified as a Naval Special Warfare
Combatant Crew member, or SWCC. We are proud of these warriors'
individual achievements and continue to actively promote a
career in SOF for all who meet our rigorous standards.
Lastly, I would like to briefly mention the ongoing war in
Ukraine. Among many observations, it serves as a daily reminder
of the importance of building the capabilities and resilience
of our allies and partners. As we watch the Ukrainians employ a
number of elements of irregular warfare against a larger force
to great effect, we should internalize the need to continue to
grow our own irregular warfare skills and continue to develop
and refine irregular warfare options for our Nation's leaders.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maier can be found in the
Appendix on page 23.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you very much.
And now we have General Clarke.

STATEMENT OF GEN RICHARD D. CLARKE, USA, COMMANDER, U.S.
SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND

General Clarke. Chairman Gallego, Ranking Member Kelly, and
Mr. Franklin representing, thanks. It is great to be here, and
thanks for the opportunity. I am honored to testify next to the
Honorable Maier with me today.
Joining, also, is Chief Greg Smith, USSOCOM Senior Enlisted
Leader. This is Greg's final time appearing before this
committee before he retires after 33 years in uniform. Most
importantly, he is representative of the 75,000 men and woman
of this command, and I am extremely grateful each and every day
for his wise counsel.
Your special operations forces create strategic, asymmetric
advances for the Nation across the spectrum of conflict.
USSOCOM bolsters deterrence through our campaigning activities
daily. We are innovating and modernizing to build enduring
advantage, while strengthening our force and family.
Amid continual changes to the rules-based international
order, maintaining a range of credible options underpins our
Nation's strategic advantage. We have witnessed Russia's
unprovoked and unjustified invasion of Ukraine, China's
coercive and malign activities in the Indo-Pacific, and efforts
by other states and non-state actors, including violent
extremists, to sow instability.
In this dynamic environment, SOCOM's enduring value resides
in our ability to combat those asymmetric threats, particularly
in the gray zone and below the threshold of conflict. We employ
precision and surprise to prevail in conflict and respond in
crisis, and our formations support the resilience and
resistance efforts of our allies and partners, often through
sustained, long-term partnerships with their special operations
forces.
Regardless of the threats we face, SOCOM represents a
critical strategic hedge to respond in crisis. Exquisite,
tailored capabilities enable us to undertake sensitive and
high-risk missions, crucial to safeguarding our citizens and
protecting our Nation's vital interests.
A cornerstone of these efforts remains in our longstanding
partnership with ASD(SO/LIC). The oversight, policy guidance,
and advocacy within the Department of Defense provided by
ASD(SO/LIC) are essential for the modernization, readiness, and
well-being of our special operations forces and their families.
Together, we are committed to sustaining trust by
strengthening our culture of accountability. We are preparing
for future threats by unlocking our Nation's diverse talent,
and we are leading with our values through our continued
efforts to mitigate civilian harm.
As we speak here today, more than 5,000 men and women from
SOCOM are defending our Nation and standing shoulder to
shoulder with partners in over 80 countries worldwide. The
courage and commitment of our 75,000 members of our special
operations community are inspiring.
As this may be my final opportunity to appear before this
subcommittee, I would emphasize it has been the honor of my
lifetime to serve with these men and women every day. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Clarke can be found in
the Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, General Clarke.
And we will jump into questions.
The first question is for ASD Maier. Do you believe the
1202 authority is an enduring requirement and should it be
permanent in law?
Mr. Maier. Chairman, I do believe it is an enduring
requirement. I would leave it to the Congress to determine
whether it needs to be permanent, but I see no reason why,
based on the strategic environment we have and the direction we
have from the National Defense Strategy, that an authority that
allows irregular warfare and closer cooperation with partners
is not going to be essential for decades to come, sir.
Mr. Gallego. General Clarke.
General Clarke. I do appreciate the advocacy of this
committee for that enduring authority. We can see the benefits
of it directly from Ukraine, where our special operations
forces have been working with the Ukrainians for the last 7
years. And I can see, can greatly see its use in other
environments.
Mr. Gallego. Chris, ASD Maier, with the Principal
Information Operations Advisor [PIOA] onboard, do you believe
this office will be able to provide oversight on IO operations
across the Department? And is the Office of ASD(SO/LIC) using
this office and its authority to ensure synchronization and
coordination of efforts for information operations and MISO?
Mr. Maier. Chairman, I think, to answer your second
question first, we are using this office. We are having to
build it. So, it is not at its full power in terms of both
capabilities and people. But the key point of the legislation
was to do a posture review, and then a strategy. I think that
will point the way to what additional requirements are needed
across the Department.
I have had a number of conversations, even in the last
week, with Secretary Austin about the need to build our
information capabilities across the Department, and I think we
see that very well manifest, as General Clarke already alluded
to, in some of our Ukraine irregular warfare needs. And, I
mean, the Ukrainians are doing an incredible job, and we take
small measure in the work we have been able to do with them.
And I think that is a good example for what we would see in the
future.
But, to the PIOA, the most important part of that is having
an advocate at the direct-report level to the Secretary. So,
the Under Secretary for Policy is that PIOA. We need to
continue to build the bench of IO professionals that can help
further reinforce and get a degree of irreversible momentum in
the Department, sir.
Mr. Gallego. And this is a very dangerous question to ever
ask. But, General Clarke, what is your number one funding issue
or priority?
General Clarke. The majority of our funding is to ensure
that we are conducting the proper operations that we need to do
going forward, and that covers a wide swath. But it is really
to make sure that the operations and maintenance funds that
allow our special operators to deploy, to protect this Nation,
are the most important thing that we need to fund.
Mr. Gallego. And with that, I hand this over to the ranking
member standing in for the ranking member, Mr. Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Clarke, as we have discussed, the $13.2 billion
budget is essentially flat for 3 years, which, in light of
inflation, does represent a cut, as we had talked about. For
the first time in the organization's history, you are going to
be looking at personnel cuts. What would you not be able to
accomplish with this budget that is high on your unfunded
requirements list?
General Clarke. Congressman, the aspect with this budget is
that just we won't be able to go as fast as we would like to in
some of our modernization and some of our future capability
development. And so, as you hit it, what we did was submit an
unfunded requirements list.
Mr. Franklin. Yes.
General Clarke. And that list points to some of those
specific things that we would like to accelerate, if that
additional funding was given. We submitted 28 different
requirements for about $650 million for SOCOM, which is about 6
percent of our budget.
Mr. Franklin. Very good. I am supportive of increasing our
force posture in Eastern Europe; specifically, Baltics, Poland,
and Romania, and especially with our SOF personnel. Do you see
value in increasing SOF's presence along NATO's eastern flank?
General Clarke. I think it is not as much the increase in
people as it is the capability to make sure that we have the
right capabilities in the right places. As you well know, we
have been in the Baltics and we have remained a partner of
choice, I believe, with our SOF partners in Eastern Europe for
a while. I would have to reevaluate with General Wolters and
our Special Operations Command Europe for specific additional.
But, for the current Ukraine crisis, we put additional people
and capabilities forward to assist with that crisis.
Mr. Franklin. And that is an investment that has been going
on for some time. As we have talked about and has been noted in
the press, the Ukrainians have put up a much stronger fight
than a lot of people are going to give them credit for. And I
think a lot of that credit goes back to the partnerships that
have been formed over these years. I don't know if this is the
forum where we want to talk about that, or if there is anything
in the UNCLASS [unclassified] setting, could you elaborate a
little bit on the benefit that we have seen from those
partnerships?
General Clarke. Congressman, in this setting, those
enduring partnerships that we have had with the Ukrainian
forces in the Ukraine since they were invaded by Russia in 2014
have been critical. They have been enduring. And it is not just
the U.S. and the Ukrainian, but we have also brought in many of
our NATO allies, have also been shoulder to shoulder with us in
the Ukraine, you know, training side by side with the Ukrainian
partners. So, it is the relationships that we have built with
many of our NATO allies that have really helped tie this
together.
Mr. Franklin. Well, I am reminded of the old ``train like
you fight, fight like you train.'' The time to figure it out is
not when the war is hot.
General Clarke. That is exactly right.
Mr. Franklin. The fiscal year 2023 budget request cuts
funding for maritime support vessels; namely, the Carolyn
Chouest for you all. Does the requirement still exist, and if
so, what is SOCOM unable to do without this capability?
General Clarke. Well, Congressman, we are working very
closely with INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command],
specifically, for the maritime support vessel that you were
talking about. That vessel, just like any afloat staging base--
and as a former Navy officer, you understand how important
proximity is in locations--but the maritime support vessel in
and of itself is not a SOF-specific requirement or SOF-specific
funding issue. We are really looking to the services--in this
case, the Navy and INDOPACOM--to provide that capability that
will allow us better proximity to some of the issues in the
Indo-Pacific, so that we can be placed in the right positions.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you.
Representative Sherrill.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you.
And, General Clarke and Command Chief Master Sergeant
Smith--yes, I did have to read off the Air Force enlisted
designation--I just want to take a minute to thank both of you.
Few people in our military have seen more combat than the two
of you. You have spent a lifetime serving this country in some
very difficult circumstances. I don't think I can overstate the
debt of gratitude our Nation owes to both of you. And so, I am
very sorry to see both of you leave, but well deserved. So,
thank you so much for your service.
On a bit of a lighter note, I also would like to take just
a minute to recognize a great member of the class of 1994,
Colonel Brooks, who was just picked up for general. You have
made our class incredibly proud, and thank you for your service
as well to our Nation.
General Clarke, I believe that irregular warfare and
information operations are extremely important to the modern
joint force. The unconventional operations underway in the
European and Indo-Pacific theaters are a testament to their
importance. Do you think that the President's budget provides
adequate funding for the continued success of, and expansion
of, the unconventional warfare program?
General Clarke. Congresswoman, we have sufficient budget to
execute those programs in this budget. However, as we look at
some of the specific, as you talk about, information operations
programs, I think with additional funding we could speed up the
modernization and the capabilities for our forces and apply
additional technologies, like artificial intelligence and
machine learning.
As you have visited, I believe, our Joint MISO WebOps [Web
Operations] Center, and seen how we pull that all together,
additional funding towards the information operations programs,
which is in our unfunded requirements list, I think will make
us better, and it will provide additional capabilities.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you.
And, Mr. Maier, the fiscal year 2023 budget highlights
provided by SOCOM list $13.6 million for SOF tactical vehicles,
and more specifically, quote, ``the development and testing of
joint light tactical ECPs and integration and testing of diesel
hybrid electric capabilities.'' Could you talk a bit more about
these efforts to incorporate hybrid electric/diesel motors into
the SOF tactical vehicle family? And are such efforts being
employed across the spectrum of the SOF mission portfolio? Is
the command exploring electrification and hybrid options for
platforms used in special reconnaissance, foreign internal
defense, and counterterrorism missions?
Mr. Maier. Congresswoman, this is actually a Department-
wide initiative to look at various different ways to make our
capabilities more survivable and more sustainable over time.
And we view this, I think, not only at the Department level,
but at the special operations level, as an operational
imperative. It is entirely possible that there will be
circumstances in which having alternative fuel vehicles will be
necessary.
And I think we have all seen the effects, objectively, of
global warming. And so, climate change becomes a driver, as we
look for a sustainable force over decades to come, ma'am.
Ms. Sherrill. And then, the Armament Center at Picatinny
Arsenal, New Jersey, plays a significant role in modernizing
the U.S. Special Operations Forces' ammunition and equipment to
meet the needs of the warfighter. Through the efforts like
fielding and sustaining the 105-millimeter and 30-millimeter
ammunition for AC-130 gunship fleets, and through projects such
as the next-gen IR [infrared] seeker decoy and multi-mission
small unmanned aerial systems, the Armament Center's importance
cannot be overstated.
As the SOF community continues to modernize against global
strategic competition, will special operations forces look to
the Armament Center for ammunition and equipment modernization?
What sort of projects or initiatives that are underway at
Picatinny would SOCOM like to see supported in the future?
And I don't know, General Clarke, if you have any thoughts
as well.
General Clarke. The partnership with all the armament
centers, and what we do with the services, really helps. We
take projects, and Picatinny specifically has helped us with
some of our light machine guns and with some of our medium-
level machine guns and sniper weapons. And they do a tremendous
job, and it really helps leverage a SOF requirement. And then,
sometimes the other services will pick up those requirements
and see the value of a certain weapon system, and then, they
can scale it. So, we really appreciate what Picatinny, in
particular, but other armament and military systems do for us.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Sherrill.
We now have Representative Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, gentlemen, thanks for being here.
A couple of my questions have already been answered: the
persistent engagement with partners like Ukraine. The 1202
authority that the chairman asked about, I think we share the
desire to make that permanent.
A quick question on that: the definition of ``irregular''
with regard to irregular warfare; if there are adjustments that
need to be made in that definition, I think it would be helpful
if you could share that with us, whether in this setting or
another setting, or if the definitions are good and we simply
move ahead with what we have. Secretary, are the definitions
what you need?
Mr. Maier. Congressman, I think the definitions are sound
enough. The one point we always make when we talk about
irregular warfare is that, while SOF may be the lead or the
preponderance of the corps on this, we need the rest of the
joint force to be effective in that space. But 1202, as I think
your question poses, the definition of irregular warfare there,
I think we are comfortable with it, and it has proven to be
effective, sir.
Mr. Scott. Okay. General, my understanding is that, if
something is not changed, that you could see a reduction of as
many as 400 personnel. Is that correct?
General Clarke. That is correct, Congressman. There is a
SOF-directed cut of slightly over 400 for fiscal year 2023.
Mr. Scott. Okay. And that cut is in an appropriation
language from the past year, is that correct?
General Clarke. Do you know if it is in the President's
budget?
Mr. Scott. I apologize. Secretary, do you know where that--
--
Mr. Maier. Congressman, it is part of the President's
budget. It requires a cut of about 440, and most, if not all,
of that is in unfilled billets or headquarters at this point.
Mr. Scott. Okay. All right. We will look for that language,
and I think most of the people on the committee will probably
look to remedy that as best as possible. If we are looking
about expanding the operations of irregular warfare, it seems
to me that we need to be very careful about how many personnel
we would reduce.
One thing that I have tried to focus on is SOCOM. And it
bothers me, General and Secretary, that we lose so many
Americans to the illegal drug overdoses, the majority of which
comes from Central and South America. And it seems to me that
Southern Command kind of gets the leftovers, if you will. And
yet, more Americans die because of what happens in that part of
the Western Hemisphere than have ever died because of
terrorism.
The budget request that you have, do you have the resources
that you need to dismantle the illegal drug networks operated
by the international cartels in Central and South America?
General Clarke. Congressman, that specific mission for the
Department has not been given to USSOCOM.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
General Clarke. We do employ forces underneath SOUTHCOM
[U.S. Southern Command], where we are assisting certain
countries in the SOUTHCOM area of operations, to assist them
with some of the terrorist and some of the threats to their
countries. There is clearly a nexus between criminal
organizations and terrorist organizations.
Mr. Scott. Sure.
General Clarke. So, I think, by extension, some of that is
impacted. But the funding that you talk about as being
sufficient isn't necessarily a SOCOM aspect.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
General Clarke. But I think Mr. Maier would have a comment
further on that.
Mr. Maier. I would say, Congressman, too, the broader DOD
[Department of Defense] mission is principally to support law
enforcement in these spaces. And the DOD mission is really
monitoring and helping with interdiction generally. Where we
see shortfalls at times is the lack of law enforcement
capability to act on even some of the tipping and queuing we
are able to do for law enforcement. So, I think it is a
complicated problem, sir, that probably deserves more
explanation than we have time here to provide.
Mr. Scott. I think at one point we were letting more than
90 percent of the shipments go that we actually had actual
intel on. And I think that is something that we, as the United
States, need to do a better job with.
But I appreciate all of you, and thank you for your time.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Scott.
Representative Murphy.
Mrs. Murphy. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, General Clarke and Chief Smith, I am sad to see you
two joining me in the great retirement, but I do want to
associate myself to what Ms. Sherrill said, and thank you both
for your incredible service to this country. And just note that
it has just been a real pleasure working with you both, and I
know that you will run through the tape, just as I plan to do,
and I hope we can continue to work on some of these
initiatives.
And to that point, I mentioned this to you yesterday, and
we have heard a bit of conversation today about 1202. I am
working with Congresswoman Stefanik to make it permanent, as
well as to increase the annual funding for the authority to $25
million.
And I will reserve my question about how you would use that
additional resources for the secure portion, but move on to ask
you that I see that you have requested $14 million to support
the Joint Task Force Special Reconnaissance Enabling Command.
That is a mouthful. Can you tell me more about this JTF and how
is this funding going to be used?
General Clarke. Congresswoman, the Joint Task Force Special
Reconnaissance Enabling Command is something that this command
stood up as a subordinate command. It is commanded by a one-
star, in this case, Army general. It could be a joint; it could
be any service going into the future.
And it is specifically to look at, for SOCOM, our most
sensitive activities that we could be conducting global. And it
is to synchronize and enable and deploy the capabilities that
exist within SOCOM to be able to take these problems and ensure
that they are properly coordinated with the interagency and
with the other combatant commanders, and with the Department of
Defense.
In a closed session, I can give you some type of specific
things that they would be doing. But as we look at our most
vexing problems globally that SOCOM needs to put attention on,
this command enables us to, in fact, tackle those problems.
Mrs. Murphy. Mr. Maier, what do you see as SOCOM's primary
role in an era of great power competition? I know there has
been a lot of conversation about how to balance the continued
need to focus on counterterrorism missions with the evolving
challenges of actors like Russia and China.
Mr. Maier. Congresswoman, I think that is a critical point.
This evolution we are underway is not one of moving wholly away
from where we have been, but making what we have been doing
sustainable for the Nation--counterterrorism and crisis
response--while we increasingly support the joint force in what
we know is going to be a complicated strategic environment with
peer adversaries or near-peer adversaries like China and
Russia.
Specifically, I think some of the attributes that SOF has
demonstrated over the last 20 years to great effect still apply
here. So, the partners and allies have proven to be very, very
useful, and I think Ukraine has proven that. And it is, indeed,
a comparative advantage we have vis-a-vis the Chinas and the
Russias. And that is something that has been built over lots of
years of close interaction.
SOF also has placement and access in places that the rest
of the joint force does not have, and that in some cases
unlocks much greater capability that we and our allies can
bring. And I think, ultimately, you know, we talked a little
bit earlier about the irregular warfare; some of that is the
inherit problem-solving or ability to look at a complicated
problem and bring other aspects of the interagency or the
Department of Defense together in a way that often isn't baked
in the same way in other communities.
So, I think General Clarke would share this view--we have
talked about it a lot--the lessons we have learned over the
last 20 years and put into practice apply here. We just need to
do them differently--in some cases, faster, in a more
technology-empowered way.
So, I am very bullish, and I think we have got the right
task. We just need to make sure that we are doing it in the
right way, in a thoughtful, balanced way, ma'am.
Mrs. Murphy. Great. Thank you, and I look forward to
hearing the additional specifics on 1202 and the JTF when we go
to closed session.
Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Murphy.
Representative Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you.
I appreciate you both being here. I appreciate your
leadership.
I congratulate both the commander and the command chief for
a wonderful career, and you have been wonderful to work with.
All my questions are directed more to General Clarke. Your
obstacle was high, is high, and will be high. And yet, if I
understand right, the budget for SOCOM is flatlined. Is that
the case? It is a flat-line budget? You are getting zero
increase?
General Clarke. That is correct, in the requested budget at
this point, yes.
Mr. Bacon. Right. And yet, we have 8.5 percent inflation.
So, that works to about an 8.5 percent cut to your budget. So,
you have touched on this a little bit with the previous
questions, but what does an 8.5 percent cut to your budget--how
does that affect the future of SOCOM? What are those impacts?
General Clarke. It really goes to speed and how quickly can
we modernize. And so, we have to make tough decisions. We have
to balance to still conduct the missions that we have going
forward, and prepare and train. And we are going to do that
within the budget we have, but I think it goes to the speed
that we can modernize. And we look at some of our adversaries
and how quickly they are modernizing, and we may not keep pace
with the capabilities that we need to develop.
Mr. Bacon. But by definition, with an 8.5 percent inflation
and a flat-line budget, this is a reduction for SOCOM. I just
think we ought to be clear about that. And the budget overall
was a 4 percent increase for DOD, but domestic non-military
spending was a 12 percent increase. So we see the priority of
the administration here: non-military spending, 12 percent;
military, 4 percent--with inflation at 8.5 percent. And the
budget for DOD overall was inadequate. And I think you are
paying even a bigger price on there. So, I just wanted to make
that clear.
Before I go to my next question, I want to congratulate the
whole team, though. What you did in Ukraine from 2014 until
now, most people do not know about it. You were training
Ukrainians how to defend themselves, how to organize. Can you
touch on that a little bit, General Clarke, because this is an
unheralded part of what America did. I give credit to
Ukrainians for fighting hard and putting their hearts and souls
into this fight, but we were helping with that training. And if
you could touch on that, I would be grateful.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. Our special operations forces
helped develop and work with other allies to come into Ukraine
and help build up the Ukrainian special operations forces,
where during that time they doubled in size; but I would say
they also not just increased their size, but they increased
their capabilities over that time. And it was the collective
organizations that did that. And I think we have also got to
give credit to some of the National Guard forces that were also
training the Ukrainians at the same time.
But I think one aspect is that it was a lot of our civil
affairs, our psychological operations, and our special forces
that were also working side by side with the Ukrainians. So, it
wasn't just combat forces, but it was also other parts of
special operations that work very closely with their Ukrainian
partners.
Mr. Bacon. I think this is a point of pride for our
country, the great work that you did.
Your number two unfunded requirement is the procurement of
counter-unmanned aerial vehicles to counter the UAVs. And I
think this is critical. We are seeing them all over the world.
They are attacking in Saudi Arabia. They are attacking us in
Iraq.
What does it mean for you to have this capability or to not
have this capability, if you don't get it funded?
General Clarke. Thanks for bringing this one up because, as
you just pointed out, the threat from unmanned aerial systems
from our adversaries is already here and it is growing. And the
capabilities that we, as a nation, need to continue to develop
for in the combat zones today, where some of our forces are
being attacked, to places in the future where they could be
used, it could even come back into our homeland.
And I think we have to look very hard as a nation in making
sure that we put efforts into this. SOCOM already has a
significant investment in this portfolio, but as you note, we
have asked for additional funding in our unfunded requirements
list to ensure that we are developing the capabilities. As I
said earlier, our unfunded request would speed them up, so that
we can make sure that we have the capabilities we need today.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I think this is something we can work
on, as a committee, to make happen.
Thank you.
Mr. Gallego. Representative Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks.
General Clarke, thanks for coming in today. The first
question is for you, and it is about the recently published
Diversity and Inclusion Implementation Plan of March 2022. With
you and Master Sergeant Smith leaving soon, one concern I would
have is the handoff and ensuring that the new uniformed
leadership of SOCOM has a strong commitment to its
implementation. Can you discuss where this is going to sit and
the handoff?
General Clarke. Yes, sir. Well, one, it is cosigned with
Mr. Maier. So, is ASD(SO/LIC) providing that oversight and
guidance? I have no doubt--because, you know, we have talked
about it--that he will ensure any future leadership puts this
in place.
But I think, more broadly, this is about culture, and this
is about making sure that the entire organization has bought
in. And as you and I discussed but for the broader committee,
every single commanders' conference that we come together as a
command--we do these quarterly with all the commanders in
SOCOM--this, along with culture and accountability from our
Comprehensive Review, are at the top of the list, and we talk
about how we have to get better.
So, I believe that it is great that Chief Smith and I are
bought into it, but I would also suggest that our subordinate
commanders and their commanders and senior enlisted leaders are
also bought into unlocking and making sure that we have the
talent of America that wants to come to SOCOM is welcome, and
that once they are here, we are inclusive of and we retain
them.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks.
And, ASD Maier, on that point, the new vision and strategy
that you both signed off on does include the strategic plan and
[inaudible] desire to increase the ``diversity of ethnicities,
races, beliefs, perspectives, and experiences, in our formation
to meet the complex challenges facing the Nation.''
Essentially, that, honestly, the face of the U.S. is changing
and we need to change with it, so that we reflect the U.S., but
also take advantage of the opportunities that gives us. Can you
talk about your commitment to the implementation of the D&I
Plan?
Mr. Maier. Congressman, so echoing General Clarke's points,
one of the benefits of the structure that Congress has set up
here is that, in the context of civilian oversight, we have a
continued role to ensure that the force and the command stay
focused on this. I have no doubt whatsoever that the
leadership--because I have joined many of those discussions
that General Clarke was referencing--is focused on this.
I think, to get to the specifics of your question, not only
do we need to be reflective of the Nation that we represent,
but there is capabilities and richness in that community that
can be applied operationally and strategically to the
challenges we have. It is a different fundamental problem set
when you are going against terrorists than it is against peer
adversaries that have allies and partners around the world.
And if we can't do some of the core things I already
mentioned in the context of placement and access, allies and
partners, then some of the imperatives that SOF brings is lost.
So, not only is it the right thing to do for the health of the
force and some of the things that General Clarke already
mentioned, there is an operational reason to do it. It just
makes us better in taking on the Nation's challenges, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
I want to shift to the Preservation of the Force and Family
program, or POTFF. It is another issue we discussed, General,
earlier. And I understand that, with the budget that has been
proposed, there is a potential real cut to POTFF and the
support for families. Can you discuss that and where that sits
in your unfunded priorities requirement?
General Clarke. Certainly. As we looked at the Preservation
of Force and Family and we looked at SOCOM's overall budget,
the Preservation of the Force and Family internal would take
about an 8 percent cut to next year's budget. I did not put it
in the unfunded requirements because, really, the focus on that
was on modernization and building capabilities.
What I think the real cuts could be is it could come to
some of our service providers that are out at the tactical
formations, that we may have to make some tough decisions and
potentially reduce a slight amount of services to some of our
service members and their families.
Mr. Larsen. Given that, ASD Maier, then what can you tell
us about your commitment to the future of POTFF?
Mr. Maier. POTFF is critically important, I think, for our
forces. It's, as I said in my opening statement, Congressman,
really the standard. I remain very committed to that, including
the additional--some of the cognitive care aspects that we
think is very important.
One of the challenges, though, to be very direct, is POTFF
is very expensive, and with it, the more that we add additional
elements of the SOF enterprise, the more expensive it becomes.
So, it is a challenge, and it is one of the things that I talk
regularly to some of the component commanders that are closer
to the problem, and they express some of those same challenges.
As it has become more attractive and more people are using it,
the usership goes up, and therefore, it becomes in more demand.
So, it is something that I think, from the force readiness and
care of our service members and their families, it is clearly
important on my list, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks. Maybe in the course of the folks who
want an $800 billion defense budget over here, they can throw
some peanuts at the POTFF budget and top it up. So, thanks.
Appreciate that.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Larsen.
If there are no further questions, the open session of the
hearing is adjourned, and we will reconvene in 2212 for the
classified session.
[Whereupon, at 5:18 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 28, 2022

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 28, 2022

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 28, 2022

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KELLY

Mr. Kelly. How does SOCOM currently use commercial geospatial
imagery? What would you identify as intelligence gaps within SOCOM in
geospatial imagery? Are these gaps being met or can they be met by
using commercial imagery from Earth observation companies? Given
SOCOM's global mission, is there a capability currently within the
Command--commercial or other--that monitors the entirety of the Earth
every day that could be used to inform other assets of change? If not,
could a capability like this--a daily data global imagery feed--benefit
SOCOM?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Kelly. General Clarke, operators in USSOCOM are the some of the
most highly trained and capable operators in urban environments. During
urban combat operations, USSOCOM operators have proven themselves to be
highly capable in clearing operations. It is my understanding that
their capabilities in these types of operations have been enhanced by
commercial off-the-shelf capabilities allowing them to complete their
missions more safely in communications and GPS denied environments.
What role do you see that same technology playing in the crisis of
Ukraine, particularly as the increasingly urban conflict demands more
humanitarian support/recovery and clearing operations?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. Is SOCOM looking at utilizing directed energy for
current and future capabilities to provide non-kinetic effects for
SOCOM missions?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Is SOCOM experiencing any challenges in acquiring
critical/emerging directed energy non-kinetic technologies? If yes, how
can Congress help address those challenges?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. The United States must continue its transition away from
COIN to Great Power Conflict. Much like other services, SOCOM must also
adapt by adopting emerging and disruptive technologies such as
autonomy. Given the decrease to SOCOM in the FY23 budget, how does
SOCOM plan on using autonomy to amplify and supplement a reduction in
the end force manpower?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. In what operational environments and against what threat
actors will SOCOM find the greatest utility in employing autonomous
systems?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. What lessons can we learn from the war in Ukraine about
the role of autonomy in future conflicts and its applications for the
SOF community?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Is the United States Special Operations Command prepared
for large scale combat operations today?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Can you talk about the value of persistent and continued
engagement with the Special Forces of Romania?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Can you talk about the value of persistent and continued
engagement with the Special Forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Can you talk about the value of persistent and continued
engagement with the Special Forces of Poland?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Can you talk about the value of persistent and continued
engagement with the Special Forces of Georgia?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
Mr. Scott. Chief Warrant Officer-3 Jason Gambill, U.S. Army, wrote
an article entitled ``China and Russia Are Waging Irregular Warfare
Against the United States: It is Time for a U.S. Global Response, Led
by Special Operations Command'' in the November 2021 issue of
Proceedings. According to the author, ``The U.S. can create an enduring
IW GPC strategy to conduct measured actions through a Joint Interagency
Task Force (JIATF), that combines resources and authorities. Individual
members of a JIATF will need to call on their partners in private
industry to pursue necessary technology and expertise needed to address
Chinese advantages in economic and technological IW. An overarching
JIATF can ensure the ends are properly supported with enough means and
ways properly planned and executed to reduce strategic risk.''
Moreover, according to the author, ``DOD lacks the structure and
methodology to synchronize the capabilities of its various services,
combatant, and functional commands to conduct global irregular warfare.
To tackle these problems, U.S. Special Operations Command (SOCOM) could
act as the synchronizer for all USG IW efforts as the single global
coordinating authority. SOCOM could also lead DOD's efforts to
collaborate, coordinate, and execute an irregular warfare strategy for
great power competition across the interagency, with private industry,
and with international partners.''
Should the United States establish a joint interagency task force
led by SOCOM to better command and control irregular warfare efforts?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL
Ms. Sherrill. The rapid increase in the presence of adversary small
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) in operational theaters has highlighted
the importance of Counter small Unmanned Aerial System (C-sUAS)
solutions to protect our tactical advantages. The Department of Defense
recognized this as a requirement and designated the U.S. Army as the
Executive Agent for C-sUAS. As this organization matures I note that
there are a number of excellent systems being fielded for fixed sites,
but I am not seeing a concerted effort related to on-the-move
solutions. A particular area that is relevant and important for SOF.
From a SOCOM perspective, where are we on this front and how can we
accelerate deployment of OTM such solutions for SOF units and then move
the mature technology into larger Army programs of record?
General Clarke. [A classified response was provided and is retained
in committee files.]

[all]
