[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 117-41]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MILITARY READINESS

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 9, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-441                    WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman

JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut            DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
JACKIE SPEIER, California            JOE WILSON, South Carolina
JASON CROW, Colorado                 AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan, Vice       JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
Chair                            MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine               MARK E. GREEN, Tennessee
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan
KAIALI'I KAHELE, Hawaii              BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah
MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington

Jeanine Womble, Professional Staff Member
Ian Bennitt, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     2

WITNESSES

Allvin, Gen David W., USAF, Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force..

Lescher, ADM William K., USN, Vice Chief of Naval Operations,
U.S. Navy......................................................     6
Martin, GEN Joseph M., USA, Vice Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.......     4
Thomas, Gen Gary L., USMC, Assistant Commandant of the Marine
Corps, U.S. Marine Corps.......................................     5
Thompson, Gen David D., USSF, Vice Chief of Space Operations,
U.S. Space Force...............................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Allvin, Gen David W..........................................    78
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    41
Lescher, ADM William K.......................................    68
Martin, GEN Joseph M.........................................    43
Thomas, Gen Gary L...........................................    53
Thompson, Gen David D........................................    88

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Garamendi................................................    99
Mr. Golden...................................................   101
Mr. Lamborn..................................................    99
Mrs. McClain.................................................   101
Mr. Moore....................................................   102
Ms. Strickland...............................................   105

FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MILITARY READINESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 9, 2021.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. John Garamendi (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. Ladies and gentlemen, I call to order this
hearing of the Readiness Subcommittee of the House Armed
Services Committee.
Without objection, my prior remarks will be read into the
record about how we have to operate. Now, the counsel is happy,
or at least I am going to be able to debate with him.
I am going to move directly to my opening statement. I
don't see our ranking chairman on yet, but will be--hopefully
will be by the time I finish my statement.
With that, let's get us up and operating.
Military readiness covers a vast breadth of topics, many of
which we have covered in depth in other hearings. One of the
through-lines of this committee's work is finding the right
balance between sustainment of existing platforms and
facilities and the modernization necessary to meet the threats
of tomorrow.
While it is important that we invest in systems and
equipment that will put us at the cutting edge, we must never
forget or ignore our current arsenal. Upgrading and updating
these systems are a must if we are--if we hope to be successful
in any near-term engagement. This balance is the very essence
of readiness, and our preparations for near-peer competition
require nothing less.
The same can be said of our installations. A major theme of
my work as chairman over these last couple of years has been
prioritizing installation resiliency. For years, the services
have taken considerable risk in the installation portfolio,
deferring necessary maintenance and upgrades on existing
buildings in order to fund new platforms and systems.
Deferring maintenance is a chronic issue. We see this
across the entire Readiness Subcommittee's jurisdiction. The
services consistently fail to fund sustainment, and I look
forward to hearing from each of the witnesses today if your
budget request reflects the status quo or if the necessary
investments are being made so that when the next Hurricane
Michael or Hurricane Florence hits our installation--hits, our
installations will remain more resilient.
Another theme of the committee's work is to ensure that the
military services continue to have the resources they need to
effectively train our service men and women. Our personnel are
the most important part of our Armed Forces, and it is
imperative that they have the proper preparation for whatever
future fight they may encounter. That includes the right
investments in everything from basic training to flight hours
and everything in between, as well as what happens on our
Nation's ranges. As we look to the future, we know that the
field of battle will change and will require the necessary
training to ensure that our service members are ready.
As this committee and the military addresses these three
principal concerns, we must be aware and vigorously address an
overarching challenge that addresses and dramatically affects
all three of these principal areas. That challenge is the fact
of a rapidly changing climate.
The Department of Defense is the single largest consumer of
carbon energy in America and quite possibly the world.
Therefore, to meet the climate crisis, every service must seek
to reduce energy consumption with conservation strategies and
quickly move to noncarbon energy sources. This has been and
will continue to be the central theme of this committee during
my chairmanship.
I would appreciate each witness sharing with this committee
how they intend to address this challenge. As I scrutinize your
budgets, I do not see the necessary commitment.
And finally, along these lines, over the past year and a
half the world has been forced to confront a challenge that it
has not seen in over a century--the COVID-19 effect on every
facet of our way of life, and it has killed over 600,000
Americans. I look forward to hearing how each of the services
have confronted this threat and weathered the global pandemic.
More specifically, how did COVID-19 affect the readiness of our
forces, both in a tactical and strategic sense?
I see Mr. Lamborn has joined us.
Doug, if you would like, I can read that all again or we
can move directly to your statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 41.]

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am prepared to make
my statement, as you have just made yours, and thanks for
having this hearing.
Today, we will hear from the service vice chiefs of staff
on the current state of military readiness and how the fiscal
year 2022 budget request will support military training, weapon
systems maintenance, and efforts to meet readiness requirements
in alignment with the National Defense Strategy.
As DOD [Department of Defense] continues to shift its
primary focus from countering violent extremist organizations
to great power competition, our subcommittee remains very
interested in how we are balancing current readiness with
modernization investments.
Unfortunately, the budget request did not continue the
progress made under the Trump administration to rebuild our
military by requesting a 3 to 5 percent increase over the
inflation-adjusted fiscal year 2021 enacted level. We cannot
and should not ask our men and women in uniform to prepare to
execute an array of missions and tasks and then fail to provide
them with the resources necessary to accomplish those
assignments.
I strongly believe that we must continue to invest in our
military as our adversaries grow, especially China. If we do
nothing, over the next decade, China will fully modernize its
military, potentially bringing it into parity with our own.
I remain highly interested about the progress in standing
up the new Space Force. This recognition of the importance of
space as a warfighting domain is long overdue and is vital to
the future readiness of the joint force.
I am also looking forward to learning more about ways our
newest service intends to increase the lethality and resiliency
of our space assets, especially in light of increased
competition and confrontation with Russia and China.
In January of this year, the Air Force selected Huntsville,
Alabama, as the preferred basing location for the Space Force.
Since that time, both the GAO [Government Accountability
Office] and the DOD IG [Inspector General] have begun reviews
about the process by which that location was selected.
As you know, I do believe that Colorado Springs was the
best option, based on many factors ranging from location,
civilian and military workforce, and the range of expertise in
space warfare and operations, and the--specifically, the
existing infrastructure and capabilities that are located
there, in addition to quality of life for service members and
their families.
So I eagerly await those reviews as we work to support and
stand up this new service and rapidly reestablish SPACECOM
[U.S. Space Command] to confront the existing and growing
threats in the space domain.
I was happy to see that the fiscal year 2022 operations and
maintenance for the Space Force did include an increase of
almost $1 billion over fiscal year 2021 enacted levels. I look
forward to hearing how the Department is contemplating and
prioritizing readiness for its unique force design requirements
as compared to the other services.
I also look forward to hearing about any lingering or
projected COVID-19 impacts to training and readiness of the
service departments.
COVID presented challenges to training with many exercises
being canceled, despite reports that there has been no
degradation in readiness and that readiness levels are at
historic norms. So there seems to be a discrepancy there that I
would like to explore.
One of our key readiness enablers is the organic industrial
base. Our depots provide the capability to maintain warfighting
capabilities throughout their life cycles, but recapitalization
plans will require significant investment over many years at a
time when we continue to have a number of other major funding
challenges.
I am committed to working with the chairman and the rest of
the subcommittee to ensure that depot recapitalization is
prioritized.
Finally, and as I mentioned last year during our posture
hearings, I am concerned about people. Air Force pilot
shortfall numbers have held constant over the last few years,
unfortunately. The fighting--excuse me--the fighter community
is experiencing the largest gap, both in Active and Reserve
Components. It is unclear to me how we will reduce this backlog
without robust funding, and I would like to hear more about
that from the Air Force.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you very much, Mr. Lamborn. I
appreciate what you are saying. I particularly share your
concerns about the location for Space Force. And certainly my
view is that that entire process should be paused until we have
those full reports from the two agencies.
Now I would like to introduce our witnesses: General Joseph
Martin, Army Vice Chief of Staff; Admiral William Lescher, Navy
Vice Chief of Naval Operations; General Gary Thomas, Assistant
Commandant of the Marine Corps; General David Allvin, Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff; and General David D. Thompson, Space Force
Vice Chief of Space Operations.
With that, we will go through and hear the opening
statement from each of the presenters. We will start with
Martin--General Martin, and then we will go through the list as
I just introduced them.
General Martin, you are up.

STATEMENT OF GEN JOSEPH M. MARTIN, USA, VICE CHIEF OF STAFF,
U.S. ARMY

General Martin. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the
Secretary of the Army, the Honorable Christine Wormuth, and the
Chief of Staff of the Army, General James McConville, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the Army's readiness. And thank
you for your steadfast support of our soldiers, families, and
veterans.
The challenges of the past year highlight the importance of
having a ready Army. Our soldier--our soldiers answered the
Nation's call by distributing vaccines and medical supplies to
combat COVID-19, also supported local authorities during the
civil unrest, responded to natural disasters, and helped secure
our southwest border.
Abroad, the Army has 105,000 soldiers deployed in over 140
countries as we speak, combatting transnational terrorism,
deterring adversaries, and strengthening relationships with our
allies and partners.
The Army is busy, and our ability to meet these challenges
demonstrates a high level of readiness we built over the past
several years. We could not have done it without your steadfast
support.
However, readiness is fragile and relative to the
challenges we face. Our adversaries are achieving significant
military advancements and now threaten many of our long-held
advantages. Technological progress is shifting the ground
beneath our feet as we sit here and speak to each other. The
world is changing, and the Army must change with it.
To meet future challenges, the Army is undergoing the most
significant transformation in the past 40 years. This
transformation, the bedrock of future readiness, will enable
the Army to support the joint force with credible land combat
power necessary for deterrence and decisive victory.
The next war will be an all-domain fight. History warns us
not to rely on a single domain or any nuanced capability to win
in combat. Victory in the future will require the application
of combat power from all domains and the joint team.
The size of the Army is equally important. The Army must
maintain its end strength to meet the needs of the joint force.
Even today, we are unable to meet all the global requirements
asked of us. End-strength reductions will further reduce our
ability to provide the combat power request of us and place
excessive hardship on our soldiers and our families.
I save the most important thing for last. People are our
number one priority, and caring for them is a fundamental
aspect of maintaining readiness. The harmful behaviors of
sexual assault, sexual harassment, racism, extremism, and the
factors leading to death by suicide directly affect readiness,
and we must take them very seriously.
We stood up the People First Task Force to take a whole-of-
Army approach to stamping out these harmful behaviors. We are
on a solid path to build and maintain readiness now and in the
future, but readiness gains and the Army's transformation
require timely, adequate, predictable, and sustained funding to
survive.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to speak today. I am
looking forward to your questions and working with you to
ensure that your Army remains ready to serve the American
people.
Thank you, Chairman.
[The prepared statement of General Martin can be found in
the Appendix on page 43.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you very much, General Martin. And
your full testimony will be into the record, as will the full
testimony of the other witnesses.
I now turn to--just plain lost my list here. Let's go to
General Thomas, and then we will get back to the order on the
list.

STATEMENT OF GEN GARY L. THOMAS, USMC, ASSISTANT COMMANDANT OF
THE MARINE CORPS, U.S. MARINE CORPS

General Thomas. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of this subcommittee, I am pleased to
appear before you today to discuss Marine Corps readiness and
the fiscal year 2022 budget.
While common conceptions of military readiness often center
on current availability of forces, we define readiness as the
ability to create a warfighting advantage. The mere
availability of Marines and equipment does not equal readiness
to deter aggression or to defeat rapidly evolving threats. As
such, our focus is not on simple and short-term metrics of
availability, but instead, on a readiness to impose significant
risks on our competitors and adversaries, both today and in the
future. We must build a shared understanding of how we can best
measure and achieve that readiness in order to prepare for the
challenges ahead of us.
We appreciate the support provided by this subcommittee as
we made our initial force design changes and recovered
readiness after years of steady combat deployments. Our fiscal
year 2022 budget request supports our continued force design
efforts to enable naval and joint campaigning across the
competition continuum in all domains. This force will be able
to persist forward within the range of an adversary's weapons
systems while providing reconnaissance, counter-reconnaissance,
and long-range fires.
While we have made much progress toward this goal,
significant challenges remain in areas such as logistics
sustainment, communications networks, and energy solutions.
Through careful analysis and wargaming, we continue to
implement the concepts, forces, and capabilities that will
achieve forward presence, credible deterrence, and preserve our
advantage at sea. Congressional support in these areas will
further our progress toward our unique contribution to the
joint force.
Our modernization focus does not mean that we are
neglecting the rest of our current equipment, facilities, and
missions. Our fiscal year 2022 readiness accounts are fully
funded, and we are committed to maintaining the combat
credibility, safety, and overall readiness of the force while
we modernize.
Staying ready today and being ready for tomorrow will
require consistent funding, prioritized and accelerated
modernization, and the willingness to divest of capabilities
that no longer serve our best defense interests. Your support
and oversight of our readiness efforts will enhance and
preserve the lethality of the Marine Corps as the Nation's
naval expeditionary force in readiness.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Thomas can be found in
the Appendix on page 53.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, General Thomas.
I think all of the members of this committee are aware
there is a very, very significant change in the U.S. Marine
Corps posture going forward. We are going to be spending
considerable time on working with the Marine Corps as they deal
with a very different structure in the days ahead. I will come
back to that.
Admiral Lescher, I lost my place here, and you were the
next up. So with my apologies, and with no offense to the
Marine Corps, it is your turn, Admiral.

STATEMENT OF ADM WILLIAM K. LESCHER, USN, VICE CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS, U.S. NAVY

Admiral Lescher. Appreciate it, Chairman. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn,
and distinguished members of the House Armed Services
Subcommittee on Readiness. On behalf of the sailors, the
civilians, and the families to the United States Navy, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on this important
topic of readiness.
Our Navy depends [inaudible] its advantage at sea
[inaudible] to sustain today's strong readiness posture, but
also to build on recent learning the best practices to drive
improved readiness, performance, and outcomes. We see a strong
opportunity to accelerate learning the momentum across our
major warfare communities to improve the transfer function
between the critical inputs in people, dollars, and
infrastructure, and our key readiness outcomes.
As an example, I think the committee is well aware of our
aviation enterprise has achieved and sustained 80 percent
mission-capable rates in our squadrons across the majority of
our aircraft models, scaling across naval aviation the key
innovations, process changes, and leadership behaviors that we
have learned while improving Super Hornet readiness from the 55
percent baseline in 2018.
We look forward to working with the defense committees to
sustain and capitalize on these hard-earned gains, improving
lethality in the high-end fight by balancing this increased
mission-capable rates with the required increased flight hours
for our pilots.
In our afloat force, we also are leveraging this
fundamental learning, the ``get real, get better'' tools
embedded in Perform to Plan and Navy sustainment frameworks, to
improve performance in our public and private shipyards and in
how we man the force.
Since 2019, the Navy has achieved positive trends in on-
time completion and reduced days of maintenance delay working
through significant COVID impacts in 2020. Yet, clearly, our
voyage to drive substantial shipyard maintenance performance
improvement is at an early stage, and I see much opportunity
and work to be done to close to the target of ships routinely
completing maintenance on time and lifecycle maintenance plan
design durations. We look forward to working closely with our
private shipyard partners in this work to share systematic
approaches for improving depot maintenance productivity.
We are similarly focused on improving the manning of our
surface ships. Since 2016, we have increased the billets
assigned to surface ships by over 8,500, and have assigned
3,000 additional sailors to operational sea duty. That increase
in billets authorized drove a near-term decrease in the
percentage of billets filled as we assessed, trained, and
deployed sailors to fill the new requirement while conquering
COVID-related pipeline friction.
We are making strong progress. Today, we have the highest
number of sailors on operational sea duty since 2014 and have
reduced gaps at sea by over 4,100 since last October.
It is not just about the inputs, however. Also
complementary to this progress, we continue with implementation
of condition-based maintenance with centers now aboard
[inaudible] ships, circadian rhythm watch billets to counter
fatigue, and service [inaudible] assignment policy, building on
what we learned with aviation maintenance experience metric to
help sailors and billets afloat do their jobs better and more
safely.
Overall, the Navy's fiscal year 2022 budget request funds
our readiness accounts to an affordable level and builds on
these recent gains, and it balances the need for future force
readiness and modernization.
I believe it is important to note, and we will talk today,
about the consequence of the fiscal year 2022 request, which
reflects a decrease in real terms in the 2021 [inaudible] a
larger fleet. That is the context, along with our peer
competitor, that drives many of the hard choices that you see
in the request to maximize naval power.
I am going to do a quick radio check. Did we drop offline?
Mr. Garamendi. We heard all that you said. Please continue.
You were off for a few seconds.
Admiral Lescher. Okay.
Just to wrap it up, the 2022 budget does include major
aviation and ship readiness [inaudible] infrastructure
[inaudible] airmen. The Fallon Range Training Complex in
particular is a critical link that requires modernization to
enable training to both our and our adversaries' newest
capabilities. So we look forward to working with the committee
and other stakeholders to ensure our team is able to maintain
the competitive edge with that training range.
We have funding of shipyard infrastructure optimization
[inaudible] to revitalize those facilities and equipment,
coordinate that in the fleet.
And, finally, to highlight our most important asset, the
700,000 sailors and civilians that provide our competitive
edge. The request includes critical investments in training, to
include ready relevant training, live, virtual, constructive
training, as well as investments in increased toughness and
cohesiveness of our force, and increases in mental health,
sexual assault prevention, inclusion and diversity, and family
care infrastructure to include fleet concentration area
childcare.
Overall, Chairman and Ranking Member and members of the
committee, I look forward to discussing these topics with the
committee today, and I thank the committee for your leadership
and your partnership and sustained focus on the core issue of
keeping the greatest maritime fighting force ever ready to
fight and win at sea.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Lescher can be found in
the Appendix on page 68.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you very much, Admiral Lescher. We
appreciate your testimony. And your written testimony--full
written testimony will be, without objection, in the record.
Let me just do that for all of you. I forgot to ask
permission from all of you.
Without objection, written testimony will be entered into
the record.
So ordered.
We now turn to General Allvin, Air Force Vice Chief of
Staff.

STATEMENT OF GEN DAVID W. ALLVIN, USAF, VICE CHIEF OF STAFF,
U.S. AIR FORCE

General Allvin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member Lamborn, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of Acting
Secretary of the Air Force John Roth, and our Chief of Staff,
General C.Q. Brown, Jr., thank you for the opportunity to
testify on Air Force readiness and for your continued
partnership and advocacy.
Your Air Force mission is to fly, fight, and win, to
deliver air power anytime, anywhere our Nation needs it. We
remain committed to building the ready forces that can do just
that, both to deter and respond to the threats of today and to
address the even greater challenges of tomorrow.
This year's Presidential budget request builds upon our
last 4 years of effort to restore readiness. We are pleased to
report that despite some of the early impacts from COVID, in
many areas our readiness has largely been returned to pre-
pandemic levels.
To maintain the momentum on the progress that you made
possible, we are focused on several key readiness drivers, all
very familiar to this committee. First and foremost, we are
focused on readying our most important weapons system, our
airmen. Tomorrow's airmen will serve in some of the most
challenging environments witnessed in generations. To win, it
is critical that we ensure that nothing prevents them from
reaching their full potential.
This year's budget request sustains the Air Force's strong
commitment to our airmen and their families, expanding funding
for advanced training, ensuring ready access to safe and
reliable family housing, and investing more than an additional
$7 million in combatting the deleterious behaviors, such as
sexual assault, interpersonal violence, and self harm.
As an Air Force, we must pay particular attention to the
health of our aircrew manning, which continues to be at risk
given the global aircrew manning shortages. This budget
includes requests for continued retention measures, as well as
several new initiatives to grow pilot production to the target
of 1,500 aviators per year.
At the same time, the PB-22 [President's budget for fiscal
year 2022] budget request invests heavily in our training
infrastructure to ensure that our airmen are prepared for peer-
level combat. This budget funds the flying hour program to the
max executable level and upgrades several of our training
ranges, including notably both the Nevada Test and Training
Range and the Joint Pacific Alaska Range Complex.
To ensure our airmen have ready equipment, we are
continuing to invest in the weapons system sustainment with
this year's investment on par with those made in fiscal year
2021 at $15.4 billion. We must note, however, that this
program's funding is not keeping pace with the escalating
costs. The total fiscal year 2021 requirements grew by more
than $800 million as we brought on new aircraft without
retiring legacy platforms.
This year's budget includes several recommendations to
scale back our investments in that force structure which is no
longer relevant to the future fight in order to affordably
balance our weapons system sustainment accounts.
Finally, we are making key--several key adjustments to our
operational employment constructs to ensure our forces are
optimally postured to build and sustain readiness for peer
competition, including realigning the Air Force's force
generation model back to the joint forces ``reset, ready, and
commit'' [inaudible] standard. This preserves our ability to
execute more robust, high-end training required for peer
competition while also enabling support of dynamic force
employment taskings as envisioned by the National Defense
Strategy.
Again, thank you for your support. We remain committed to
accelerating the readiness recovery this committee makes
possible and working together to secure the highest returns on
the considerable investments you make in our Air Force.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Allvin can be found in
the Appendix on page 78.]
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you very much, General.
We will now turn to General Thompson, Space Force Vice
Chief of Space Operations.

STATEMENT OF GEN DAVID D. THOMPSON, USSF, VICE CHIEF OF SPACE
OPERATIONS, U.S. SPACE FORCE

General Thompson. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member
Lamborn, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today in my capacity as Vice
Chief of Space Operations. On behalf of the Chief of Space
Operations, General Jay Raymond, and our service secretary--our
acting service secretary, the Honorable John Roth, and joined
by those service chiefs--vice service chiefs, it is a pleasure
to provide you details on readiness for the newest U.S.
military service.
I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude to
Congress for its bipartisan support in establishing the U.S.
Space Force on December 20, 2019, and for your leadership in
addressing the threats and challenges the Nation faces in
space.
Year one of the Space Force's existence has been focused on
standing up the new service. In collaboration with the services
represented here, DOD staff, and Congress, the U.S. Space Force
has made tremendous progress in this endeavor. This includes a
mission-focused organizational structure, addressing force
design and force generation models, new approaches to talent
management, and the initial design and establishment of a field
command solely focused on training and readiness, the Space
Training and Readiness Command, colloquially known as STARCOM.
Chief Raymond's direction to the U.S. Space Force in year
two is fundamentally readiness-focused and includes integrating
the Space Force into combatant commands and with allies and
partners, and training and developing guardians as warfighters
and effective joint force partners.
In executing this guidance, the Space Force is doing the
following. First, the Space Force is developing and refining
operational models for presenting forces to combatant command.
An important first step in this effort is U.S. Space Force's
participation in U.S. Indo-Pacific Command's upcoming Pacific
Sentry 2021 exercise, which will be the first major combatant
command exercise with a Space Force service component.
Second, the Space Force is in the process of standing up
this new field command, STARCOM, which will have
responsibilities to recruit, develop, train, and retain
guardians to protect the high ground of space. STARCOM will be
instrumental in inculcating a body of knowledge, expertise, and
experience required of those guardians to conduct operations
and protect U.S. interests in the high ground of space, a
unique operational domain. This approach was first encapsulated
in the inaugural doctrine publication, Spacepower, Spacepower
for--or Doctrine for Space Forces, issued in August of 2020.
Additional activities include more threat-focused unit
training syllabi, programs to develop elite cadres of
operators, cyberspace warriors, and intelligence and
acquisition professionals; increasingly challenging and
sophisticated training exercises like Space Flag; and a
continuation of our Schriever Wargame series that has been a
key element for allied and partner engagement for many years.
Third, the Space Force is placing major emphasis on
modernizing our infrastructure and space installation readiness
and executing a Space Force-unique weapons system sustainment
portfolio that ensures we maintain readiness of existing space
capabilities even as we begin fielding the advanced
capabilities required to meet the evolving needs of the joint
force in the face of the growing threat. This approach also
recognizes that our people, our guardians, are as vital as the
space systems they employ to meeting current and future
readiness needs.
Without guardians standing at the ready, the Nation's space
systems cannot operate in a manner required to effectively
provide for our security. The guardian approach adopts new and
innovative capital management and talent management methods for
civilian and military members alike under the authorities
granted by and with the assistance of Congress. And as
documented in our vision for a digital service released earlier
in May, it builds digital fluency into the workforce to ensure
the Space Force is able to function effectively in the digital
world of today and far into the future.
Finally, I must uncategorically state that our success
today could not have been possible without fully committed
partners in the Departments of the Air Force and Defense. That
begins with our closest and most committed partner, the United
States Air Force, and extends to the sister services
represented here today, who are currently and actively engaged
in working with us to transfer functions and resources to
fulfill critical missions and ensure we provide capabilities
that they need for the joint fight.
In this, we share a common goal; that is, to maintain
mission execution and meet warfighter needs without adverse
impact to any personnel or to the missions of the other
services.
On behalf of General Raymond and Secretary Roth, thank you
again for the opportunity to appear before you, and I look
forward to addressing your questions today.
[The prepared statement of General Thompson can be found in
the Appendix on page 88.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, General Thompson, and
we appreciate having what will be the first of an annual review
of the work of the Space Force. And congratulations to you and
the men and women of the force for standing it up and operating
what is now almost a 2-year period of time. So we thank you for
that.
There are many, many questions that need to be asked. Many
of those are probably answered in your--over in your lengthy
written testimony. But just a couple of things come immediately
to mind.
I said earlier that the central theme of this Readiness
Subcommittee last year and as we move into this year is that
the military be prepared for the contingencies of the future.
Certainly, that--one contingency is the possibility of conflict
with an entity somewhere around the world. We talked about near
peer, and that is important.
But there is also a other--another contingency out there,
and that is climate change. We have driven resiliency into much
of what we hope you are doing with regard to your
installations. And so I would like each of you--and we will go
in reverse order here, because I am not sure General Thompson
has a whole lot to do right now, but if he ever has a specific
base, whether it is Colorado or Alabama or some other place,
the resiliency issue will be on your shoulders, at least
insofar as the bases.
So let's go--let's talk about resiliency, how you are
addressing that, and then, along the way, efforts that you are
making to reduce the consumption of greenhouse gas along the
way.
General Thompson.
General Thompson. Chairman Garamendi, thanks for that. And
I will let you know there are, in fact, Space Force bases and
installations under our charge today, on the order of a dozen.
I won't go through the entire list. I will tell you they are
our responsibility. But our partner, the United States Air
Force, is joining with us, and they are operating those bases
on our behalf, just as the Air Force civil engineers, security
forces, personnel and others have for decades. But they are our
responsibility.
In terms of climate change, I will address a few things and
save a few of those features for General Allvin to address. But
first of all, as you noted, space bases are our power
projection platforms. In fact, we operate space systems from
those platforms. We do the command and control, the data
dissemination. Data lands at those locations and is provided to
the joint force. And so the resiliency of those bases is
incredibly important to us.
In conjunction with the Air Force, and especially as we
look at lessons learned over the past several years, as we
examine our infrastructure--primarily, in our case, our
facilities and our power infrastructure, as we go through the
modernization and sustainment activities, we look for means by
which we can take those current facilities today and improve
their energy and their installation resilience in the face of
many of those climate issues. In the case of ours, it often is
hurricanes on the Florida coast, earthquakes and other natural
disasters, to include blizzards on the front range.
And so as we upgrade and sustain those systems, we look for
all of them, especially from the standpoint of power
resiliency. We ensure that the power is clean, the power is
conditioned, the power is sustainable across any sort of
natural disaster. And, in fact, if in fact we have to sustain
ourselves for a 24/7 mission, we build that into our plans.
For our future capabilities, our future installations, from
the design--from the beginning, we build energy resilience into
those designs from the beginning, as well as new methods and
new standards for energy efficiency and effectiveness.
And let me stop there and allow the other service chiefs to
join in.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, General. I agree that you not
spend a lot of time talking about resiliency in space. I know
that is an issue of the Strategic Forces Committee as well. I
don't know that I want to get into Mr. Cooper's turf, but we
might.
Since you have focused on the Air Force, let's go to
General Allvin, and you pick up the question from there if you
would, please.
Hit your mute button. Thank you.
General Allvin. Sure. In the interest of time, I will
really add to what General Thompson said and try not to repeat,
specifically will narrow in on the area of climate change.
As you know, two of our installations were--fell victim to
natural disasters that were impacted from the climate, the
hurricane that hit Tyndall, and then the massive flooding that
was at Offutt. And so as we look at to learn from those, we are
garnering the lessons learned in reevaluating our uniform
facility criteria. So we are looking at adaptation and then the
idea of resilience as well.
But the adaptation to the effects of climate into the
future, we are integrating into our--as we are rebuilding those
installations, making sure that we understand not only what
today's flood plain is, but the potential trend of those flood
plains and ensure that we are building above those in the case
of Offutt, looking at what the rising water levels may be in
the case of Tyndall. And so those are the immediate lessons
that we are learning to be able to put into the development of
the installations of the future.
But in the maintenance of our current installations,
understanding that it is not only hurricanes and floods, but
there are natural disasters--fire and high winds, et cetera--as
we are looking at our sustainment requirements across all of
our facilities, looking to harden our utilities area against
wind, against fire, and that sort of thing.
And so we are looking at that, at the adaptation of what
the climate is doing to our current installations, but we need
to build in and are looking at in our future design building
digital models to fully understand how we might be able to
build that into the installations that we are going to upgrade
and update into the future.
Mr. Garamendi. General, thank you very much. I noted that
there was an evacuation at Beale Air Force Base yesterday
because of a fire. So you don't need to talk about that in
detail, but it is an example of the problem that you are facing
perhaps around the world but certainly here in the West.
Okay. Let's turn now to General Thomas, the Marine Corps.
Resiliency, we can go into some detail about--about this issue.
If you could talk to us about this, and also about the
survivability of some of your bases if you could. Specifically,
I would like to hear how both Camp Lejeune and your induction
center nearby can survive in the face of climate change and
existing hurricanes.
General Thomas. Thank you, Chairman. Let me begin with some
of the resiliency initiatives that we have undertaken,
including making Marine Corps Logistics Albany, for example,
our first net-zero installation, which produces as much
electricity from renewable energy now as it consumes from
utility providers.
We have also installed two smart grids at Marine Corps
Recruit Depot, San Diego, and Marine Corps Air Station Miramar,
which enables continuity of critical infrastructure functions
in the event of a power outage. And, of course, all of our new
MILCON [military construction] projects will be in accordance
with new code, which takes all of these into account.
You mentioned, Chairman, you know, Parris Island. In
October of last year, we completed the Marine Corps first
climate change adaptation and resilience plan that addresses
sea level rise and climate change. We are going to take that
same approach and apply it to some of our other installations,
including Camp Lejeune.
Mr. Garamendi. I am going to drive a little bit deeper on
this, General. In discussions I have had actually 3 years ago
now, it appeared as though Parris Island could not survive a
Category 3 hurricane, and I, therefore, raised the question
about, so where is the next induction center when that one gets
wiped out? It won't get wiped out once; it will be a continued
problem with sea level rise.
Have you--has the Marine Corps thought about how to--what
to do about Parris Island, either a different location, or what
might be done given the fact that--I will say fact that Parris
Island is in jeopardy?
General Thomas. Chairman, you know, based on, you know, the
climate challenges the chief articulated, in addition to the
steps forward that we are taking with integration of recruit
training, we are, you know, evaluating our facility
requirements for recruit training across the board for the
reasons you just articulated. We have not yet made any
decisions related to, you know, recruit training facilities or
particular locations.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. I raise this question as a heads-
up not only to you, General, but also to the committee that
this issue is going to be before us in the months ahead,
perhaps this year, but probably maybe--certainly the following
year. And we will be dealing with this issue. Hopefully and
prayerfully, there will not be a hurricane that will make this
a more immediate issue. I thank you very much, General.
There is a whole series of questions that I mentioned
before having to do with the Marine Corps of the future, and we
will want to get into those in detail in the days ahead.
Admiral Lescher, same set of questions. Climate change, are
you going to issue waders for Norfolk?
Admiral Lescher. Sir, yeah. Thank you for the question. The
focus that we are bringing, very similar to the other services,
I would highlight, first of all, of course, is safety of the
workforce, resilience of the mission, the ability to execute
the mission operationally, and then to preserve our natural
resources. And as you highlighted with Norfolk, now is where we
are laser focused on sea rise as well as the severe weather,
and a classic or recent example being Hurricane Sally, which
impacted Pensacola, Whiting Field, Panama City.
The tools we bring to this work, I think in some respects
are mature and in some respects are reflecting the 2020 NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] language, bringing them
into installation master plans. We have, across our seven major
installations, been using the mission assurance assessments
which comprehensively look at all hazard threats, to include
cyber, floods, earthquake, damaging winds, those type of
elements, analyze the probability of impact and then proposes
mitigation based on that.
And then in compliance with the 2020 NDAA, this year we
will have completed five installation development plans that
have incorporated those mission assurance assessments, and we
think we will be on a vector to complete all of them by the end
of 2022.
So that is really the overarching look at how we are
looking at the assessment of the planning and the development
of plans and then use that to drive choices on mitigating.
You also asked about other elements of energy efficiency,
and there is many of that. San Diego is a classic example of
the tremendous amount of solar power that has been put in
place. And then operationally as well, we have initiatives on
advanced battery development, propulsion efficiency, energy-
efficient engines for our autos and other elements of--I can
certainly highlight in more detail with the staff.
Mr. Garamendi. Good. Admiral, thank you very much. I would
suspect one of my colleagues will pick up the issue of the
shipyards and questions around the shipyards. So I see Mr.
Golden there looking at a quarter of a billion dollars.
General Martin.
General Martin. Thank you, Chairman. So, over the past 2
years, the Army evaluated all 116 installations using what we
call the Army Climate Assessment Tool. We are on glide path to
evaluate all Army installations and complete the installation
energy and water use plan in accordance with the NDAA by 2022
for all of our installations, so no issue there.
Last year was the fifth year in a row we continued to grow
our renewable capabilities on our installation. As I speak to
you, 7.7 percent of the Army's energy is generated by
renewables.
But resilience is really important. A great--I have got to
talk about the Fort Hood example, where they had that ice storm
last winter, and a good part of mid to north Texas is relying
upon a mixture of renewables and natural gas-generated power.
And when that ice storm came, that--there was power, but it
came at a very high premium because they could not rely upon
the renewables for about--about a week.
And so we have thought through that, and understanding that
you can't rely just 100 percent on renewables, but they need to
be a part of your power generation to be responsible in your
power generation and your power requirements.
Since 2007, the Army has decreased its use of water by 28.2
percent. We are in the process--it is not something that is in
the program yet, but we are actively planning the grid that we
will need, the infrastructure we will need to be able to host
what we anticipate to be a 100 percent GSA [U.S. General
Services Administration] electrified fleet if that happens so
that we are not--you know, we have got the cars, but we can't
charge them.
And we just approved about a month ago an effort to
electrify--it is really--it is a hybrid, but it is the third--
it is the third and it is the most--it is the best form of a
hybrid--the JLTV, the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle. And so we
are looking at that. That is the first big vehicle that we have
taken a look at dealing with that. But those are some of the
efforts that we are doing to decrease our reliance on carbon
fuels.
Mr. Garamendi. General, thank you very much.
I just remembered a conversation with a major--Marine Corps
major, a tanker. We were talking about hybrid vehicles, and he
said, If I could have a hybrid tank, you know what it would
mean to me?
And I said, No, what are you talking about?
He said, Well, most of the time, we sit around. We have got
the air conditioner going. We have got the communications
going. And the turbines are going too. He said, If that was a
hybrid, it would probably be another 15 minutes of fuel, and
that means I live.
So, food for thought. And thank you for the comment on the
GSA hybrids and electric vehicles. We are moving--we would like
that to take place. You raised an important question, and that
is, okay, what do you plug them into? And so thank you for your
work on that.
I have gone through a series of questions having to do with
installations, the work that we have been doing over the last
couple of years, and I am going to now turn to my colleague, my
ranking member. He has on his screen Dale Anderson, who I think
must be one of his staff.
Mr. Lamborn, you are up.
Mr. Lamborn. That is right. We have had some technical
difficulties, Mr. Chairman, so I had to switch over to the
screen of one of my staffers, like you just said, my chief of
staff, to be precise.
And thank you for having this hearing.
General Thompson, I have a question for you on Space Force.
Can you describe to us the need for and the advantages of a
Reserve Component for Space Force and what that would do for
readiness?
General Thompson. So, Representative Lamborn, thanks so
much for that. I will tell you--let me start by saying today
that the National Guard and the Reserves are a vital part of
our space missions today. We couldn't execute the missions we
do every single day without them. They bring, as you noted,
vital surge-to-war support and other sorts of support that have
served the entire Armed Forces well over the years.
At the same time, we have got an opportunity to look as a
21st century at what a 21st Regular, Reserve, and Guard
construct might look like for a brand-new service, and we have
done exactly that. We have spent about a year now inside of the
U.S. Space Force with our counterparts in the Air Guard and the
Air Reserve and with OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense],
and I think we have developed a proposal that we believe will
serve our needs in the future, but also take advantage of the
most important features of the current Guard and Reserve.
We owe a report [to] Congress [on] that through the
Secretary of Defense. It is in its final stages of approval,
and we expect it to be submitted soon.
And as I said, I can't share details until approved by the
Secretary of Defense, but what I will tell you is we think it
is an innovative approach that preserves some of the
outstanding features of the Guard and Reserve but still looks
at it through a 21st century lens.
We look forward to delivering that report and then working
with you on and Congress on the features related to it and the
changes that may be required to implement it.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you, General. I look forward to
seeing that report and helping to make sure that we do enter
the next--this century and into the future with the best
Reserve and Guard Component possible.
General Martin, we were talking the other day, and you
mentioned that in the--with the potential, you know, God
forbid, but the potential of great power competition concerning
the Army--and this is for General Martin--that there would
still be a role for the Army, even in, like, at the Indo-
Pacific theater. Could you explain a little bit what you--
elaborate on what you meant by that?
General Martin. Congressman, thank you. So, as I said in my
statement, we--to prevail on the future, to be able to respond
to crisis, to win in competition and prevail in a conflict, you
are going to need an all-domain capability to do that. You are
going to need an entire joint force. It is not going to be one
single service. It is not going to be a couple of services. You
are going to need everything from the space to the information
environment, to the cyber environment, to the air, to the sea,
below the sea, and on the land. You are going to need all those
capabilities combined.
And so as it pertains to the land domain, most of the
partners--the potential partners--and you need a partnership to
be able to prevail against a threat like China--most of the
partners there live on land, and most of the partner nations
there, their largest component of a security apparatus is land
forces.
And so to build relationships with those land forces
matters in a future fight, because we don't want to do that in
a crisis or, God forbid, in a conflict, and so it takes time to
do that. And so that is where the Army, with its security force
assistance brigades and its various units and their exercises,
can build upon those relationships that will allow us to
achieve access, presence--temporary episodic presence, but also
influence on the development of the military forces, making
them better than they were before, and increasing opportunities
for not only for the Army to posture capability there to deter,
but also for our partners in the joint force to posture
capability--dynamically employed capability to those countries
that we continue to build relationships with.
So the land domain matters, and the Army is at the center
of building multinational partnerships there, and we believe we
are a valid component of that as we look to the future both in
the Indo-Pacific and also Europe.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. That does help elaborate on
what we were talking about and what you were referring to.
Admiral Lescher, you have touched on and we have had
certainly a lot of questions in previous hearings about the
recapitalization of the Navy shipyards. Could you elaborate on
where we stand currently with the recapitalization plan and
where that stands in terms of the years needed to do that and
what we are going to need each year in the budget, and is that
included in this year's budget to achieve that goal?
Admiral Lescher. Yes, sir. Thanks for the question. It is
included in this budget and, as well, a 5-year plan and a 20-
year plan. And [inaudible] chairman's question as well about
let's have some prespecificity with that. In this budget, there
is $830 million to specifically focus on shipyard
infrastructure optimization, and that is really focused on two
specific dry-dock improvements, one at Portsmouth and one in
Norfolk.
And as well, there is ongoing work in terms of doing
digital twin modeling of each of our four public shipyards, an
area of master plan development. The digital twin models are
forecast to be complete across all four of the shipyards by
fiscal year 2022. And the digital twin models are core to being
able to do the optimization piece.
In the 5-year plan, I would say what is most consequential
is immediate work on six dry docks, so basically given after
that element is important upfront. There is also capital
equipment investment as well as FSRM [facilities sustainment,
restoration, and modernization] as well.
The overall level of investments I would expect to be north
of $4 billion for the 5-year plan, and certainly that is work
that needs to be done. There is some learning taking place on
this.
I had a chance to chat with the professional staff about a
bid that came in well above what we expected for the Portsmouth
dry dock, project 381. And there is some strong learning for us
in that, both in terms of current market conditions driving
volatility in raw materials, the complexity of these projects,
because a pacing element is not just funding, it is the ability
to also preserve and do maintenance while we are recapitalizing
these shipyards.
And we also saw that we didn't have the competition that we
would have expected, and it is a well-proven unhappy fact when
you come down to a single bidder for these type of projects,
there is a price premium applied. So I have asked our naval
facilities team to take a very hard look at that, this being a
learning organization.
This project is still in negotiation, but then we have to
bring that insight into how--what that means for our 5-year
plan as well and adjust and adapt. We still want to bring a
sense of urgency to this. We want to a bring a clear sense of
prioritization to this. So that, in a nutshell, is what is
taking place in the 5-year plan.
The 20-year plan will really reflect that learning from the
digital twin modeling, the optimization approach that we see,
as well as continue to prioritize recapitalization of specific
infrastructures.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And, General Allvin, this is my last question. And you
already have talked about this in your opening statement, but
when it comes to the fighter pilot shortage, you gave some good
and specific measures, like I believe retention bonuses and so
on, and those are good steps.
Is it too early to tell whether this is being successful or
not and driving some higher numbers, or is it still prospective
in the future and we are waiting to see how it comes out?
General Allvin. Thank you, Representative Lamborn. I would
say more the former than the latter, and I--the reason why I
would say this is, is we are looking at six specific
initiatives.
So, first of all, we will talk about the retention. The
retention is great because, right now, we are at a current
pilot shortage of 1,925 pilots, give or take, of what we think
we need. So we targeted 1,500 pilots a year production to be
able to get there. Unfortunately, we haven't met that in the
last couple years. We expected actually it to be a little bit
worse through 2019 because of COVID. And as it turned out, we
only produced--or in 2020, we only produced 13 less than the
year before. Still not satisfactory, because we hadn't hit
1,300 yet. So it says that the bathtub didn't get worse, but
that was the only real good news.
So the initiative--the six separate initiatives that we are
looking to increase pilot throughput to get more production in
there are all--each one of them could provide a significant
uplift. And I will go over them very quickly.
First is there is--we are understanding that you do not
have to put everyone through the same pipeline. We are learning
more about the capabilities outside of the Air Force and how to
do proper risk management in assessing for potential pilot
candidates.
So on the Accelerated Path to Wings, we are doing a small
pilot group and evaluating them and taking them just through
the T-1 only program, and then assessing them as they go
through the first few years in their follow-on actual weapons
system.
So to your point of do we know if we have actually got the
right solutions yet, I think we will gain confidence every year
as we see them perform down the line, because the most
important thing--we can put quantity through, but we can never
sacrifice quality.
So we evaluate each of those, these increased pilot
production through the T-1 Path to Wings. We are going back to
just sending potential aviators right to helicopter training.
We did that in years past, then we started putting them through
fixed wing. We are going back to the future. We are evaluating
their performance. As you can see, that is less time in the
training pipeline, that is more pilots on the line.
We are also looking at ensuring we can put instructor
pilots on the line doing instruction, flying instruction. We
are doing that through some increased civilian--incentives for
civilians doing simulation, doing the simulators, overseeing
the simulator instruction, and also maybe incentivizing remote
simulator instruction, because some of the places are hard to
attract some of the civilian workforce talent, to ensure we can
fully man the simulators with civilians so we can put the
instructor pilots back on the line so we can move more pilots
through the pipeline. So both of those are ways that we are
looking at increasing production.
Also looking at, through civilian Path to Wings, assessing
people early on and looking at their civilian experience and
see if what--we might be able to shorten their pilot training
experience.
In the past, it didn't matter. It didn't matter if you were
an experienced pilot or brand new. You went through the same
pipeline. Didn't really make sense.
As we are looking at each of those, they offer the
opportunity, when you put them all together, to really produce
about one additional base's worth of pilot production per year,
and our target for knowing that will be about fiscal year 2024.
But we want to make sure we are assessing each of these and
figuring out where we might want to put more emphasis. And as
we do that, we will put more pilots through the pipeline, but
then we also have to manage them throughout their career to
make sure the bathtub doesn't move just from company grade
officers to field grade officers. So we need to manage them
through their entire life cycle, and that will be a challenge
going forward. But we have several irons in the fire that are
starting to produce some outputs. We are going to evaluate to
see which ones are the most lucrative of an investment.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. These sound like good plans, and the
whole committee would love to see the results as you go
forward. It is somewhat tentative, so I am, you know, not
convinced yet that this is going to succeed, but I am hopeful
that it will. And I appreciate your keeping us abreast of this
as we go forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back to you.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Lamborn, thank you very much for your
questions.
The next two on the gavel list are Mr. Courtney, followed
by Mr. Wilson. On the completion of Mr. Courtney, I will give
the following two after that.
So go ahead, Mr. Courtney. You are up.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all the witnesses.
Admiral Lescher, as I think you know, before the budget
came out, this subcommittee had a hearing on the backlog in
ship repairs for both submarines and surface ships. And, you
know, your update regarding the funding for the public shipyard
improvements, you know, I think it shows real effort. But, on
the other hand, it certainly shows it is still going to be a
long game. And we obviously still have to deal with what is
happening in the immediate present as far as particularly the
Los Angeles-class submarines, who as we heard previously is
sort of at the end of the buffet line in terms of getting help.
So I did notice on page 3 of your testimony that Boise is
now fully funded to go into Newport News and the Hartford is
fully funded to go into Groton, which is good. I guess, if
maybe you could just talk for a second about whether or not
hopefully we will figure out ways to not only get them in but
also to get them out faster. And I know the ``Smart Start''
approach, which is to try and get some of the public yards and
the private yards sort of talking to each other and working
together about getting materials and design plans to move the
process along, is that hopefully, you know, going to get these
boats turned around faster than we have seen in the past?
Admiral Lescher. Sir, it is a superb question, and it has
to. And it is not just those elements, you know, the Smart
Start and the other elements. We are going to put a strong
premium on sharing the lessons of learning, the body of
knowledge that we are bringing into the public shipyards with
our private shipyard partners as well. And I see elements when
I point to the private shipyard leadership that leads me to
believe we need to have a stronger conversation on this
dimension. For example, when I see their assessment of the
percents of new work or growth work, it is substantially
different than what we see in our public shipyards doing the
same maintenance availabilities which I can [inaudible]. We
need to come to a common site picture on that planning and have
more of that in the contract [inaudible] as new or growth work.
Our four shipyard [inaudible] are under the leadership of
NAVSEA [Naval Sea Systems Command] Bill Galinis and his
Executive Director Giao Phan. They are on a strong path with
what we call Naval Sustainment System-Shipyards to drive
productivity increases in ways that I think are [inaudible] and
ought to be brought into both the surface ship private
shipyards and our private shipyards [inaudible] to look at
everything from production control as well we see the first and
second line supervisors that they are an opportunity to have
them more involved in and [inaudible].
So I will hold there, but I have the same site picture that
you do, which is we need to strengthen that conversation,
strengthen the learning together, and get after bringing these
private shipyards nuclear submarines prepared [inaudible].
Mr. Courtney. I mean, clearly like I said, I think there is
strong support across the board for boosting the public yards.
But I think, in the meantime, you know, the handwriting is on
the wall. We are still going to have to use the one shipyard
approach for the private and public sector.
General Thomas, last time you were with us, we talked about
the devastating AAV [assault amphibious vehicle] accident out
in San Clemente. And I was just wondering whether you could
sort of talk a little bit about whether what is in the budget
is going to address in terms of training or the equipment in
terms of lessons learned from that accident.
General Thomas. Thank you, Congressman.
There were a couple of key aspects of that that are in the
fiscal year 2022's budget. First, of course, is the sustainment
of the vehicle, which will be fully funded through the end of
the service life in 2025 or 2026. But it also includes some key
investments for systems that did not perform well, you know,
communications and some of the lighting on board for example.
And then also significant investment in training; we are
adding some egress training, as well as the underwater egress
training to ensure that our Marines and sailors are fully
prepared should they find themselves in an emergency.
Mr. Courtney. You know, again, thank you. I know both of
these issues which I have raised are something that are going
to be an ongoing, enduring issue for the subcommittee. And
certainly I am glad that there is space in this budget to
follow up with, again, a lot of the comments, particularly
addressed to the families after that accident.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Wilson, you will be up next, followed by Golden and
Scott.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chair Garamendi and Ranking Member
Doug Lamborn for your leadership.
And we are all inspired by the witnesses today, their
commitment, their service on behalf of the American families,
defending American families. And it will be bipartisan working
together to back you up in every way that we can. Along with
that, I am really grateful that I represent Fort Jackson, South
Carolina, where Brigadier General Milford Beagle and his team
has been masterful in adapting and overcoming the challenges of
the Wuhan virus. Fort Jackson trains more than 50 percent of
the Army's new warriors. And I commend the Army on maintaining
100 percent capacity of its training capabilities despite the
pandemic.
My concern is the impact on readiness, and this is for
General Martin. With above the tactical level, the pandemic
caused the cancelation of numerous partnered exercises,
including exercise Maple Resolve, Panama 2021, Command Post
Exercise CPX, and the Allied Spirit 12. Does the fiscal year
2022 budget general request provide for sufficient funding to
reschedule the training events and to regain the
interoperability readiness?
General Martin. Congressman, thank you for the question.
And so it was very unfortunate with COVID and the impacts on
our ability to be able to train with our multinational
partners. That being said, we did do Defender Europe, and we
did a smaller Defender Pacific. Both exercises, smaller scale.
And the training with our partners in those various exercises
was a direct byproduct of what they were allowed to do and what
we were allowed to do given protecting our soldiers and
protecting their soldiers during the conduct of those
exercises.
We've learned a lot through the course of this year. The
2022 budget has many multinational training opportunities in
it. In fact, in 2022, we have got Project Convergence 2022.
This year, as you well know, is going to be a joint campaign of
learning, where all of our joint partners are going to
participate. We have got multinational partners that are
actually going to come and watch and discuss what they see as
far as the developments in Project Convergence this year. And
then, next year, it is going to be in 2022, it is going to be a
multinational event working on the mission partner environment
and the multinational interoperability capabilities. So we have
got lots of exercises programmed in 2022, ready to go. And
anticipating that, you know, we will be well beyond the herd
immunity for COVID and our partners will have made progress. We
shouldn't have any problems with that. So we look forward to
those opportunities.
And I will tell you, I talk to our partners often, and they
miss those opportunities, and they miss the progress that we
missed because we had to protect our soldiers. But we have
learned, and we are moving forward, and the program includes a
robust multinational experimentation and exercising schedule
for your Army.
Mr. Wilson. And I will share your appreciation. I have
traveled with Chairman Garamendi throughout Central and Eastern
Europe. And to see our allies, our near allies there, how much
they appreciate Novo Selo, MK, to be working together. And so I
am grateful this will proceed.
General Allvin, in your written testimony, I appreciate
your recognition of the importance of our nuclear
recapitalization efforts to the credibility of our nuclear
deterrence. In the fiscal year 2021 National Defense
Authorization Act, this committee recommended a two-site
plutonium pit production plan to recapture our Nation's ability
to build and maintain nuclear weapons to provide deterrence for
peace. What is the Air Force doing to modernize its leg of a
nuclear triad? And, specifically, what are the cost
implications of another potential Minuteman life extension?
General Allvin. Sir, thank you very much for the question.
I think fundamentally we really believe that the cost of the
recapitalization of the nuclear fleet is actually something--it
is an imperative. We are trying to drive down costs, but we go
against what we believe the threat is. This, our nuclear triad,
has been the foundation of strategic deterrence for well over
half a century. And so, the recapitalization is something that
is necessary.
There have been several independent assessments on the cost
of doing anything other than that. And to your point about the
cost of another recapitalization of Minuteman III, there are
several studies that show that it becomes increasingly
expensive to the point of the diminishing parts and the
capability would almost require building a brand new Minuteman
III. And the idea is, if you are building capability to provide
a credible deterrent, you would want to have that deterrent to
be against the threat that you see coming.
And so, therefore, our GBSD [Ground Based Strategic
Deterrent], which is--it is not inexpensive, but it is one of
our programs that through our new digital acquisition approach
and our way of doing our modeling and baking in sort of long-
term sustainment costs and all those things into it and holding
the requirements for them, it is actually meeting schedule and
cost in a way that very few programs have ever in the history.
So it is not inexpensive, but it is unaffordable not to have
that sort of a nuclear deterrent in the world that we find
ourselves now and into the future.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you for your input.
I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
This last subject will be debated going forward.
Let's see, we have--Mr. Golden, you are up next.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Admiral Lescher, I would like to talk about the readiness
impact of the Navy fiscal year 2022 budget request. I am
concerned that, despite making clear to this committee that it
requires additional anti-air and ballistic missile capability
in order to operate in a contested security environment,
particularly in the Indo-Pacific region, that the current
request before the committee cuts a Flight III DDG-51 [guided-
missile] destroyer in contravention of not only the Navy's
stated shipbuilding planning guidance but also the current DDG-
51 multiyear procurement contract. And I am, of course,
concerned that this proposed cut in DDG-51 production, which is
the backbone of our Nation's frontline surface combatants, is
occurring at a time when our Navy requires more and not less
capabilities, particularly anti-air and ballistic missile
defense capabilities to address the increasingly lethal
capabilities, including advanced anti-access/area denial
capabilities of our potential adversaries, most prominently
China.
The Flight III DDG's unique capabilities, including
strategic land strike, anti-aircraft, anti-surface ship, and
anti-submarine warfare are crucial for keeping pace with
China's evolving military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific
region. I would say, in particular, the Flight III's SPY-6
radar system is crucial for addressing the China anti-access/
area denial ballistic missile threat to our forces in the
Pacific. And the current ballistic missile threat, as well as
the proposed retirement of seven Ticonderoga-class guided-
missile destroyers, makes the potential air and ballistic
missile defense impact of a cut in the DDG program even more
concerning.
These proposed cuts impact not only the readiness of our
current naval force structure and capabilities but also the
readiness of our sailors to gain necessary experience in
addressing air defense command vessels, as these cuts would
eliminate potential air defense command opportunities with no
foreseeable alternatives. I believe these ships are vital in
providing necessary command opportunities for naval career
officers.
So could you please describe both the impact of these cuts
on the Navy's anti-air and ballistic missile capabilities,
particularly our ability to be ready to operate in a contested
environment in the Indo-Pacific, but also, what is the Navy's
plan for maintaining large surface combatant command
opportunities?
Admiral Lescher. I appreciate the question, Representative.
I think it for sure is worthy of strong and ongoing
conversation. I would highlight as a couple of elements of
context and then get into some details behind that as time
permits.
CNO and the Secretary of the Navy have been very clear with
this budget that the first principle that drove many of these
hard decisions--and as you well appreciate, this isn't the only
difficult decision in this balance--the first principle is to
provide the most ready and lethal Navy that is achievable
within the resources provided. And this was a very deliberate
decision and very analytically founded. When we briefed the
committees on elements of that analysis in the Future Naval
Force Study and the Integrated Naval Force Structure Assessment
and related analysis, mission-level analysis. Within that first
principle, provide the most ready and lethal Navy within the
resources provided, the fiscal context is relevant. I
highlighted it briefly in my opening verbal statement.
I will just highlight as another element the context. In
fiscal year 2018, we had a budget that supported a fleet of 286
ships; in fiscal year 2022, we are submitting a budget that
supports a fleet of 296 ships. And it is essentially the same
level budget in real terms in constant dollars [inaudible].
That is not a [inaudible] to continue to grow the Navy, and it
requires these types of hard decisions.
So the fundamental question on the second DDG in fiscal
year 2022 is not, is this a valuable ship? The question is,
what would come out of the balance we have that we would say
would--to resource the second ship? And I will just highlight
for you how that conversation would go. We would have to look
across other elements of both procurement and readiness to get
after this urgent need.
Now I will just say it is a high regret aspect of this
budget--is example why it is the number one item on the CNO's
unfunded priority list. But as we look across personnel, would
we reduce that? No. Of course, we need to get after and close
our gaps in manning.
What about ship depot maintenance? We want to [inaudible]
and are committed to not having a hollow force. What about
spares and ordnance? Again, our choice is to not pull parts off
the shelf or put ordnance out of the magazines to buy the
capacity that can't be fully balance resourced from a readiness
perspective. In terms of networks, in terms of infrastructure,
the same sorts of things apply, including the imperative of the
investments in shipyard infrastructure.
And then there is modernization as well we could look at.
And our site picture there is across a DDG(X), SSN(X), Next-
Generation Air Dominance. All of those elements are critical in
this budget. So I am sketching for you just an awareness of the
hard choices, but the very deliberate choices, the very
analytically based choices that led to the balance you see
there. So hopefully that is helpful to answer that question.
Mr. Golden. I am out of time. So, Mr. Chair, I am certainly
ceding back. I appreciate the response and look forward to
continuing this conversation in future hearings.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Golden. And I appreciate your
awareness of time.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And at the end of my questions I am going to have to step
off for another Armed Services meeting. I do want to mention
just briefly, and I know the admiral brought up bids coming in
higher than expected. I do think that--and I would be
interested in written responses, but will not have time for
responses orally here.
The supply chain disruptions that we are seeing throughout
the world, the increased cost of steel, the other things along
those lines that are going to create constraints with regard to
procuring new equipment and repairing old equipment. I mean,
even down to the cost of wire today being significantly higher
than it was just a few months ago. I am interested in any
comments that you may have on that, time permitting or in
writing, if you so see fit, but not necessary. But I just want
to make sure we are paying attention to that as we push
forward.
General Allvin, I want to focus on the Advanced Battle
Management System with my first question. It is obviously
critical to the readiness of the force in the future to defeat
our peer competitors. Can you explain ABMS in a concise and
simple way and just describe how it is central to our future
force design?
General Allvin. Thank you very much, Congressman Scott, for
that. I believe I can. I think sometimes the terms become very
complex, but the idea is very simple. It is command and
control. It is as old as warfare. There has always been the
need for senior leadership in the execution of a battle to have
better situational awareness than the adversary to understand
what the adversary is doing. So, in ancient warfare, they sent
out scouts, and they would run, and the fastest scout would
find out and get the information. And they would send them in
different directions. And they would come back, and they would
aggregate that information to help the commander make the
decisions about battle. You go through warfare, and then it was
on horseback, and it was carrier pigeons. But the idea was you
wanted to be able to connect and be able to have the
information aggregated in a way that paints a picture for you
that advantages you in that battle.
And in its essence, it is really not that much different
when you think about the Advanced Battle Management System and
how it feeds into Joint All-Domain C2 [command and control], is
that now there are many sensors everywhere. So the important
part is to be able to bring these sensors together, that all
these sensors and platforms that were designed as individual
platforms and not designed to be as part of a network, we need
to spend the time, the money, and the effort to connect them,
to put them together with the massive computer processing power
in order to take that sensor information, turn it into
decision-quality information, and then use that across all
domains to help the commanders decide where we should prosecute
the fight. What we need to defend, what we need to attack. The
things that we are going after, are they going to be there in 5
minutes, in 2 minutes, in 1 minute? And so, it is that speed,
that Advanced Battle Management System connects all of the
sensors together, connects them and makes sense of the
environment, and provides the commander with the information he
or she may need to prosecute the battle. And that is as simple,
as concise as I can make it.
Mr. Scott. General, one of the big debates right now and
the decisions that Congress and the leadership in the military
is having to make decisions on is the maintenance of legacy
systems versus new technology, and I have been a little taken
aback at what we pay to maintain some of the legacy fleets for
what are pretty simple parts, just not readily available.
The Air Force has an Advanced Technology and Training
Center in Warner Robins, Georgia. It is using new technologies
like 3-D printing. What are investments in these new
technologies like 3-D printing and robotics and artificial
intelligence that you have included in the fiscal year 2022
budget? What are they helping us do to maintain the Air Force's
commitment to those legacy fleets? And does the Air Force
maintain the three-depot strategy?
General Allvin. Congressman, I will answer the last
question first since it is the easiest one. Yes. We are
committed, and the 2022 budget reflects that commitment to a
three-depot strategy.
I like that you brought up the idea of some of these new
and exciting technologies in advanced manufacturing, 3-D
printing, and the like, because they are offering opportunities
for us, as we transition to the force that we need in the
future to be able to make that more of a graceful transition
because we understand that the capabilities we have today are
things that combatant commanders are asking for today. But if
we solely focus on just servicing that need, then we will have
a perfectly ready force today, and we will be broken tomorrow,
and we can't give that to the next generation. So those sorts
of technologies and capabilities allow us to sort of gracefully
move as we can to provide resources to invest in the new while
we are sort of gracefully aging out the old.
And I would say, in fiscal year 2022, we have in the
manufacturing science and technology, we have got an initial
$12 million and another $91 million looking at some of these
product applications and how we characterize materials and
things. So we have got over $100 million just in that
particular space because we see that as critical on our path to
transition to the force we need to be ready in the future as
well, sir.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, General. Ultimately, I think it saves
us a lot of money.
My time has expired, and I have to step off to talk about
what we are going to name General Martin's bases.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, before you go, it may be useful for
this committee to ask the services to have an advanced
manufacturing seminar at one of the depots and invite all of
the folks out there that have new ideas about how to do
manufacturing to come and strut their stuff because I know I
hear, and I suspect all of you do also, different concepts,
different ideas about how you can make something that is no
longer available on the market.
General Allvin. Chairman, we would love to have you at
Robins Air Force Base. We volunteer.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, we are going to take bids, and we will
see who provides the best ice cream.
Moving on here. Who is next? Better get this computer up.
Mrs. Elaine Luria, followed by Mr. Green.
Mrs. Luria. Thank you.
Admiral Lescher, I will start out by saying I am very
disappointed by the Navy budget submission, and I assume you
are too. Firstly, I want to say this is not yours or Admiral
Gilday's fault because, honestly, you have been handed a bag of
you-know-what from your predecessors going back 20 years.
There are lots of things wrong with the budget. I don't
have time to cover them all. So I just wanted to start with the
divest-to-invest strategy, noting that in the 2007 budget we
also used the divest-to-invest words in order to build the LCS,
the DDG-1000, and the Ford. And I hope that we are not heading
toward the same mistakes today.
I noted in this budget that you cut weapons procurement,
you cut aircraft procurement, ship procurement, and education.
But increased R&D [research and development] by 12.4 percent,
including continued R&D for the Ford 25 years after the CVN-21
program office was established.
Looking back in fiscal year 2019, you said that you would
build 11 ships in fiscal year 2022. Then, in fiscal year 2020,
you dropped that to nine ships in 2022. And in fiscal year
2021, you had dropped that to seven, but with an ending overall
fleet size of 306. Today, you have a present budget that cuts 1
DDG, decoms [decommissions] 7 cruisers, and results in a fleet
size of 296. That is a change of 10 from just last year.
When I was a kid, I used to love to watch that cartoon
``Popeye.'' And honestly this budget reminds me of the
character Wimpy who says, ``I will gladly pay you Tuesday for a
hamburger today.'' So what I would say is this budget does not
advance our near-term realities of China. And I have heard many
Navy leaders saying: Well, just wait for our fiscal year 2023
submission.
And, yet, we see a memo yesterday from Acting Secretary
Harker saying that you are only going to get to pick one major
program. And we know that the priority maintains the Columbia.
So I wanted to focus on something that you gave in your
testimony. You said that the Navy steamed 23,000 days last
year. At first, that sounded like a lot. And I started
thinking: 23,000 divided by 365 days, that equals 63 ships per
day on average across the year underway, so 21 percent of the
fleet.
In the budget book you submitted, it says that average
daily deployed ships was 110 in fiscal year 2021. That is about
a difference of about 50 ships. And what is getting masked in
there is that there is a very small number of ships doing the
lion's share of the work and many others that can't deploy. So
I would like you to comment on the delta between that number of
the 23,000 days steamed and the budget book that says 110
underway per day.
Admiral Lescher. Okay. Thank you for the questions. And
there are many elements there for me to respond to so I will
just work through the order. I am confident that this is the
strongest balance in alignment with the strategic guidance for
facing threats with the resources we have. Like I said, it is
very deliberate choices, very [inaudible] derived, and eager to
continue to work with the committees to show that underpinning
in that balance.
You highlighted the POM 23 [fiscal year 2023 program
objective memorandum] memo from the Secretary. I will just
highlight that that is obviously very early in the POM 23
process. But to this point that we have to make choices about
phasing SSN(X), DDG(X), Next-Generation Air Dominance, that is
not a new concept. And I have seen some of the media
interpretation that, hey, it is pick one. I believe the
Secretary said: Pick one to prioritize. But fundamentally it is
the conversation that we had both in this budget cycle and will
continue to have, which is we have to prioritize within
affordable levels how to create not only current readiness but
future overmatch. And that is for sure the lens that is being
brought [inaudible]. And then that balance of how much
[inaudible] readiness [inaudible] ready to fight tonight, and
your Navy is absolutely ready and lethal to fight tonight,
versus how much we continue to advance capability for advantage
in the future is essentially the [inaudible] you see in this
budget. That is why you see the R&D in the proportion that you
observe. And I think that is the right element.
In terms of the figure in the budget book versus my
testimony, I will happily take that for the record and
reconcile the differences that you note.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mrs. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you. And I would look forward
to knowing that and having further conversations about this
balance. But something we did talk about in our conversation
yesterday that I found very encouraging: You mentioned
something called Task Force Greyhound. It is something I had
been talking about in reference to the OFRP, the Optimized
Fleet Response Plan, potentially using more of an FDNF [forward
deployed naval forces] model for some of our forces based in
CONUS [continental United States]. So I was wondering if you
could elaborate a little bit on that and how this budget would
support that.
Admiral Lescher. Sure. First, I will observe from a
budgetary perspective, it is essentially neutral to have some
slight increased costs over--outside the current budget year.
The concept that you talked about is to respond to an
operational need for increased readiness in our [inaudible]
ships out of Norfolk to [inaudible] with a small pilot that
will be four DDGs to field the two additional ready DDGs. To
your point, with an excursion from the Optimized Fleet Response
Plan, more FDNF-like, which would say more frequent, smaller
availability. So incremental availabilities and continuous
maintenance availability to the [inaudible] as you are well
aware of.
And so we will move forward to do this tailored
maintenance, to do this, again, this excursion from [inaudible]
both to generate some increased [inaudible] operational
availability [inaudible] and then to learn and to see, because
as I told you in our conversation, it is not a complete no-
brainer. There is some learning to be involved in terms of what
does it mean, in terms of the executability of the maintenance,
but we think it is a strong approach, and it reflects, to your
point, much of the conversation that you had about other
excursions off the OFRP baseline.
Mrs. Luria. Well, thank you. And I just wanted to note that
I think it does, like you said, increase operational
availability, which in effect can increase the effective size
of the fleet. So, in fact, if we can get more out of the ships
we have and use them more efficiently, it is as though we have
a larger fleet. So I am very encouraged by this idea.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mrs. Luria.
We now turn to Mr. Green.
Dr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
your leadership, and, to the ranking member, your leadership,
and putting this together.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses today. It is great
to get this chance to hear their perspectives.
My question is going to start with the oldest of services.
General Martin, I will start with you, if that is okay. I
represent Fort Campbell, Kentucky, which happens to be about 85
percent in Tennessee. I guess a Senator at the time had a
little more power, and the flagpole went to Kentucky, but most
of those individuals, a good portion of them live in my
district, and it is important to me, the 101st Airborne
Division, the 160th SOAR [Special Operations Aviation
Regiment], and 5th Special Forces Group.
As I look at the budget, it doesn't appear to me that there
are any significant cuts to those units and to that
installation. I just want it confirm from you that, in this
budget, there aren't significant cuts to Fort Campbell.
General Martin. Congressman, there are no significant cuts
to Fort Campbell that I am aware of.
Dr. Green. Thank you for that. And I really appreciate I
think Fort Campbell's strategic footprint, particularly with
its airfield, the size of its airfield, and its deployability
because of that. I really appreciate the wisdom there.
You know, we have got some significant problems with our
barracks in the 1st Brigade. Mold. They moved the troops out.
They cleaned it up. They put them back in. Mold reappears. It
is really time for those barracks to go. We keep pushing it to
the top of the list. DOD keeps pushing it to the bottom of the
list. I would like to ask if you would just take a personal
interest in that for me, that would be important. We have got
to get those barracks replaced.
My next question--obviously our brigade combat teams are
the fighting force of the United States Army and the 101st here
with three infantry brigade combat teams and then aviation
assets, et cetera. Can you kind of describe for me how the
ReARMM [Regionally Aligned Readiness and Modernization Model]
program is going to work to make sure they are ready to fight
and fight a near peer?
General Martin. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
What ReARMM is going to do for the Army is it is going to
allow us to create an environment of predictability while we--
to maintain a ready Army now, regionally align our various
units with regions of world, unless, of course, they are part
of the Global Response Force. And we can't talk about that on
this particular network as to who is who. But it will provide
each of our units purposeful direction, purposeful timing. And
it will allow them to train for future deployment requirements,
be ready to deploy when [inaudible] requirements.
But unlike the ARFORGEN [Army Force Generation model],
which we all knew from the past, where in ARFORGEN, if you were
going to modernize, you had to do that simultaneously and it
had to compete with your time for training and when you are
resetting the unit after coming back from combat; well, in this
particular case, in these 8-month blocks that we are going to
allocate for modernization, that is all you are going to do.
You are going to divest old equipment, and you are going to
draw new equipment, and the Army is synchronizing all of its
activities in terms of modernization and the activities of our
operational units to synchronize to a level that we have never
seen before. And it is going to literally drive activity. We
will make decision based on who we want to have what when and
so that our units will--that are more likely to have to deploy
next will be the most modernized units in the Army. So we
really look forward to it.
I appreciate the question because it is something we have
been working on really hard. It will be a full operating
capability by 2022.
And I know you wanted to move on to the question, but I do
commit to taking a look at Fort Campbell to see what we can do
to help with the infrastructure there as we continue to make
our investments with our facilities infrastructure investment
plan.
Dr. Green. Well, thanks for that. And one last question
because it looks like I am running out of time, and I will ask
it very quickly. It looks like the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command] commander is really demanding a lot from the Army. Can
you tell me how those assets are being utilized? And is it on a
rotational basis? Is it going to be--and then what is the
downstream effect to the Army as a whole?
General Martin. Congressman, there are units that rotate on
a predictable cycle. And there are units that rotate there as
they exercise. And then, with this dynamic force employment, we
are actually deploying units there to practice our emergency
deployment readiness exercises and what have you. And so there
is a multitude of different ways that the combatant command
asks for and we support with our forces there. I am told that
we make up about 58 percent of his joint requests during the
course of any given year with the rotational exercise and other
like joint requirements requested by the combatant command.
Dr. Green. My time has expired. I will submit a couple of
other questions in writing. And I appreciate everyone being
here and the testimony.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Green, thank you very much. Also, you
proved what I know is a truism, and that is all politics are
local. Every one of us have mentioned our own districts. You
did mention something that applies to all of us, I believe, and
that is the barracks situation. We are investigating the
possibility of a public-private partnership, a significant
improvement on the base housing program in which a barracks
could be built as a modern apartment building, might be built
by an apartment developer. We are looking at that. The Army did
this some time ago, probably maybe a decade or so ago. We are
looking at that as a possibility. And it would probably be
across all the services that are here. It might solve this
funding problem. It does provide a specific, a known and
presumably a well-behaved tenant.
So we will move on here. I believe we have, Ms. Speier, you
are next.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
I am going to ask three questions at the outset and then
ask Admiral Lescher, General Allvin, and General Martin to
respond.
Admiral Lescher, my question to you is: The Navy has seen
failed acquisitions, cost overruns in major products, chronic
delays in routine maintenance. And I am finding it hard to
understand why the Navy has already started reassigning 200
employees of the Navy Audit Service to nonaudit jobs as it
reduces head count to 85 auditors when you compare it to the
Army Audit Agency of 458 and the Air Force at 531. So my
question to you is why is the Army decimating its internal
audit function without consulting Congress?
To General Allvin, we all know the flight hours are very
important to pilots. However, the cost to operate the F-35A is
much higher than expected. It is more like $7 million per tail,
as compared to about $4 million, as it was originally planned.
The Navy and Marine variants are also more expensive to
operate. But the difference between actual and projected costs
is far greater in the Air Force. What explains the
extraordinary overruns in the cost of the F-35 to run?
And, finally, General Martin, what we found at Fort Hood
was a toxic command climate that went through every aspect of
the installation and a damning report that followed. You
reference high-risk formations. I don't think Fort Hood is the
only one. And I would like to know what you are doing to ensure
command climate data is taken seriously and the commanders are
held accountable for fixing the situation.
To you, Admiral Lescher.
Admiral Lescher. Thanks for the question. I will start by
highlighting that the Navy strongly believes in spotlighting
issues and transparently having conversations, taking action to
correct. And this is more than happy thought. It is essential
to much of the trajectory we have seen in improved performance
over the past 3 years. I touched on it briefly in my opening
statement when I talked about the get real, get better. So
audit function in aggregate is core or get real, understand
what our baseline performance is, then use that to understand
how to [inaudible].
But there is a case of the Audit Service, the [inaudible]
and when the Acting SECNAV [Secretary of the Navy], who was
also the Assistant Secretary for the Comptroller, he very
promptly looked at the scope of work that is being done to
illuminate these elements of oversight, monitoring, and
remediation and looked at the scope of the work across Navy IG,
DOD IG, NCIS [Naval Criminal Investigative Service], the
independent public auditor management internal [inaudible]
program. What we see when we look at that and fundamentally the
drive here is to get this in the best aggregate place to drive
outcomes. The first thing I observed----
Ms. Speier. Admiral, I am going to have to cut you off
because I want to make sure those other two questions get--I
just want you to know that I am going to be watching because I
think that what is happening with this audit function is very
disconcerting.
And I will now move to General Allvin, please.
General Allvin. Yes, ma'am. On the question of the
difference in the cost per tail per year I think is what you
are referring to, the $4 million versus the $7 million, because
as it turns out, the cost per flying hour actually our
projections are very close to what the other services are, and
they are bearing out actually a little bit less. But I
understand your point about up to $7.1 million just overall
cost of ownership per tail per year. And that, frankly, was an
underestimation we made a long time ago when we early on were
looking at the comparison. We thought we had a good reference
model--this is 10, 15 years ago--with the F-16. And the F-16
was single-engine, multirole, et cetera. And so we, frankly,
underestimated what the overall cost per tail per year was.
As the years went on, we continued to look at how we can
drive down sustainment and O&M [operation and maintenance]
costs. And that is again another story that has a lot of
details to it. We have not been able to bring down those costs
as we look at that. And so, as we try and come up with the new
estimate for the cost per tail per year, as we are finalizing
that, we are going to readjust that because that was just a
poor underestimation early on in the program. And that is
really one of reasons why, when we look at that, as we look at
the overall tactical air study and the future of the fighter
force, we are looking at what the real-world costs are and how
that is going to affect our overall fighter force of the
future. But it was an underestimation early on in the program,
ma'am.
Ms. Speier. General Martin.
General Martin. Congresswoman, I will start because I know
the time is short that I will offer the opportunity for myself
or my staff to come brief your staff or you on everything that
we are doing. But we took what happened at Fort Hood as a
wakeup call. I can tell you commanders across the board didn't
say: Whew, that wasn't me. They said: Hey, this could be us;
let's take a look at ourselves.
As you probably already know, OSD has launched a new
command climate survey, and there is that instrument and many
other instruments that we have in the Army that we have
combined into a data set that we are developing because we
believe that Big Data is going to allow us to be able to see
formations and potential problems in advance in terms of
harmful behaviors or counterproductive climates and cultures in
those organizations. I have got a lot to say on this and not
much time to do it. I would love to come talk to you about this
because I think we are making a lot of headway.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. Let's do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Before you leave, Ms. Speier, an issue that
came up at a joint hearing with you a month and a half ago was
the tragedy of the AAV. And I am going to turn to General
Thomas. I thought that--I was waiting to do this until you
came. There has been an additional decision made by the Marine
Corps concerning that accident. And, General Thomas, if you
could brief us on it. And that brings us not to a conclusion of
that earlier hearing but to one of the issues that was raised
at that hearing regarding command responsibility.
General Thomas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You are referring to senior leader accountability. I would
note that the investigation is still under review, but the
bottom line is that the Commandant has determined he has enough
information to hold Major General Castellvi accountable. Now
those actions are ongoing and will end up with final
adjudication with the Secretary of the Navy. The specifics of
that we will share with this committee once that process is
complete.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, can I just make a comment?
Mr. Garamendi. Yes. I am doing this out of order here.
Mr. Moore, you will be next, but this was the subject of a
major hearing, and this was one of the elements that was left
open, and we are moving towards a closure of this element.
Ms. Speier, please go ahead.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. I guess my only comment would be
what we need to get to the bottom of was why this senior leader
was elevated to an inspector general position after he did such
a horrific job in allowing those AAVs with sailors and I guess
a soldier that was ill-prepared to make it. So the real
question becomes, why was he elevated? I think we are all in
agreement that he shouldn't be serving in that capacity, and
that there was a real loss of leadership there, but I continue
to have that question.
I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. We will pick this issue up again
at a future hearing. And all of the committee will be notified
of the specific situation. I understand that there was a 3
p.m., I assume East Coast time, a release of information, which
I believe General Thomas summarized that an action is being
taken against General Castellvi. As to exactly what it is, it's
unknown. Is that correct, General?
General Thomas. That is correct. It is just from a due
process standpoint, Chairman, it still has to go up through the
Secretary of the Navy. I am happy to address either now or
later date Congresswoman Speier's concerns and be happy to come
talk with her or any form that you desire.
Mr. Garamendi. Please inform the entire committee, and
certainly Ms. Speier's committee on the personnel side of it
has a specific interest, as do we. Thank you.
Mr. Moore, we appreciate you standing by for a few minutes.
It is your turn.
Mr. Moore. No worries, Chairman. Chairman, I have a
particularly loud HVAC [heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning] unit behind me. Can you hear me okay?
Mr. Garamendi. Speak as loud as you can. Keep going.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. Let me continue on with the trend of
talking about our districts and making politics as local as
possible. I also welcome the depot work in doing something of
that nature. I am co-chairing the Depot Caucus. And so just a
quick non-shameless plug because it is a topic of utmost
importance and would welcome that.
I have spent a lot of time this district work period
actually visiting a lot of advanced manufacturing in our area
near Hill Air Force Base. And there is an amazing amount of
expertise and efficiencies that these individuals, these
companies are finding. So I welcome that.
And I also look to that as a productive way to talk about
the F-35 and what we need to do there. I have equally pushed on
as many different angles as possible to get into what we need
to do to reduce that cost per flight hour. I appreciated the
Air Force and every airman and every pilot I have spoken with
about this. And I know there is the right effort and awareness
that is going on. And I welcome that opportunity to continue to
dive into that. I have found it to be very productive
individuals that are willing to dig in. And my office is also
at the ready to help bolster that and be a part of the solution
instead of just talking about the problem.
So I open up to--I just again highlight that need for depot
work. There is a lot of solutions in that side of things. And
will continue to push that.
A few of my questions today will be mostly for General
Allvin. I want to talk just workforce briefly again. The
question is, do you feel or does the Air Force lack qualified
candidates for the ability to hire what they need? And let me
lead the witness a little bit, if you don't mind, that really
good, you know, we have had some success in the maintenance
community, but there does remain a gap in experience. And in
order to get to a journeyman role, it takes sometimes upwards
to 3 years. And I am concerned about some of the replacement
deficiency gap. Could you speak to that just as far as general
workforce and hiring what you need?
General Allvin. Thank you for the question, Congressman. It
certainly is a challenge in this particular environment. It is
a competitive environment. We are making headway on that. It
continues to be a challenge, as I said. But the idea that it is
not only just the skill set that we need, but we are working on
our outreach programs to find areas in which those for a
propensity to serve--and by serve, it doesn't necessarily mean
in uniform. It means to serve our Nation and serve our Air
Force in these capacities. So we are reaching out looking for
those maybe the nontraditional areas also on our path to
increase the diversity of our workforce. There may be talent
out there that we haven't accessed through the traditional sort
of pipelines through which we get a workforce. So I would
commend you to the fact that it is not only just our STEM
[science, technology, engineering, and math] outreach and that
sort of efforts that we are doing, to reach a nontraditional--
in community colleges and areas where we have direct access to
where they can see and be a part of the Air Force early on. And
then, once they can see what they are part of, they are hooked,
in many cases. And so we are reaching out through those sort of
apprenticeships as well, but also in many of the underserved
colleges, the historically Black colleges and universities, and
some of the other diverse parts of our Nation where we haven't
traditionally looked before.
It is a competitive environment because technology is doing
nothing but increase, and that is where this is more. It is not
your traditional engineer, as you know, sir. So we are reaching
out with a lot more outreach to be able to do that. We think it
is a challenge. We think the Air Force has a lot to offer. And
so we are being a little bit more creative about where we go.
Mr. Moore. Excellent. Thank you. Some of the statistics
that I will throw out quickly, and to the extent that the Air
Force is using these measures or these statistics to adequately
plan, I think it is very important. And I would love any
thoughts you had on that. But by 2023, 30 percent of the Air
Force sustainment center Federal wage grade employees will be
eligible to retire. And by 2028, that will be well over--that
will be over 50 percent. Is that all being taken into
consideration with regards to replacing that workforce?
General Allvin. It is. And those, as you mention them
there, those are sobering statistics because much like we have
had issues in areas such as aircraft maintenance in the past,
and we got a significant uplift in order to recruit new
maintainers. But how long does it take to train a 7-year
mechanic? Seven years. So the idea of being able to also look
at not just ingesting from the very youngest level but be able
to attract those in industry. As we see, industry is so much
more mobile these days, the opportunity to serve. And we are
looking at the permeability of our force, the opportunity to be
able to serve for periods of time. And that is a little bit
more accessible in the civilian communities. So we are looking
at those opportunities to take in midcareer-level folks and be
able to have that level of expertise so we don't just take out
the old and have a huge experience bathtub with brand-new young
and energetic but less-than-experienced technicians on that. So
we are looking at sort of midcareer and the permeability of
inviting them into the force as well.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, General.
My time is up. I will submit a question to General Thompson
to flag for you. Your thoughts on Space Force and a National
Guard Component, Reserve Component for that type of work. Great
topic. Would love to get into it. Maybe the next time we have
an opportunity, but we will submit it for the record.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Moore. One of our colleagues
raised that question early on. I think it was Mr. Lamborn. And
we will share that response with you in more detail.
We have now completed, as far as I know, looking at the
screen and from the staff, the first round of questions. I am
going to forgo another round of questions because I might have
to leave at any moment to go off and vote on the T&I
[Transportation and Infrastructure] surface transportation
bill. But I am going to be here for a while. So I am going to
forgo questions.
Mr. Lamborn, do you have another round of questions?
Mr. Lamborn. No, Mr. Chairman. I do not.
Mr. Garamendi. That is either a ``no'' or you are shaking
off a fly or mosquito.
Moving on here. Let's see. Mrs. Luria, you are still there.
Would you like to follow up.
Mrs. Luria. Mr. Chairman, I will pass.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, the way this is working out, let's
see, the only other person on the screen that I can see is Mr.
Courtney, who is not there at the moment. So I will go to Ms.
Speier.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, I think my questions can be
answered in private meetings with the various leaders.
Mr. Garamendi. All right, then.
Mr. Courtney is back.
Mr. Courtney. Sorry. Are you asking if I need to have any
other questions, John? A second round?
Mr. Garamendi. That is correct.
Mr. Courtney. Yeah, I am good. Thank you. I will pass.
Mr. Garamendi. That brings us back to Mr. Moore, where we
started this.
Mr. Moore. Knowing that the Reserve question was
highlighted in Lamborn's, I was in the middle of traffic at the
time, I can look for that and work with my team on it. I think
it is a great topic and appreciate that it has already been
asked. So I am good and will pass for any further questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, then, I am going to do two things.
First of all, I want to compliment Wendell White. I don't see
his face on the screen, but if he wants to pull up his face or
turn on his television, if he can. He is new to our
professional staff. This is the first full committee in which
he's taken the responsibility.
And, Wendell, you did a great job. I will applaud you, and
the rest of us will recognize the good work that you have done,
and we thank you so very, very much.
Also, there are ongoing questions, many of which were not
raised in this hearing. We will come back on those sets of
questions.
I want to thank the presenters: General Thompson, General
Thomas, General Martin, General Allvin, and Admiral Lescher. I
thank you very much not only for this but also for the
individual meetings that you have taken a great deal of time to
do with members of the committee. It is most helpful. We know
that we will be working together to deal with the national
security issues. We may or may not see things the same way you
do, but you have really an opportunity and in fact a
requirement to persuade us that the view of the world that you
have is the correct one, and I suppose we have the same
opportunity and responsibility. And so the discussions go on
and on.
I really appreciate working with all of you. I look forward
to a continuation of our work.
And, with that, this Readiness Subcommittee is adjourned.
Thank you all very much.
[Whereupon, at 4:58 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 9, 2021

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 9, 2021

=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 9, 2021

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI

Mr. Garamendi. General Gamble (Army G-4) recently testified before
this committee that the Army's Working Capital Fund has a projected
shortfall of $600M-900M this year. I understand that Army is curtailing
orders as a cash saving measure, and I see that you have a request in
this year's budget request for $323M to maintain Working Capital Fund
solvency. What additional actions are you taking, or do you plan to
take, to address Working Capital Fund solvency? What is the downstream
readiness impact from these actions? What is the impact to your
suppliers, especially sub-primes?
General Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral Lescher, what is the status of your Working
Capital Funds? What actions are you taking or do you plan to take to
address potential solvency issues? What is the downstream readiness
impact from these actions? What is the impact to your suppliers,
especially sub-primes?
Admiral Lescher. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Garamendi. General Allvin, what is the status of your Working
Capital Funds? What actions are you taking or do you plan to take to
address potential solvency issues? What is the downstream readiness
impact from these actions? What is the impact to your suppliers,
especially sub-primes?
General Allvin. Unless catastrophic unforeseen events occur, the
Air Force Working Capital Fund does not intend to request a
reprogramming action in FY 2021. The external assistance from Congress
coupled with the AF mitigating actions from FY 2019-FY 2021 which
include constraining contract authority, prior year upward adjustments,
and increased customer prices in the FY 2021 President's Budget
specifically to rebuild cash balances, have been successful. FY 2021
execution is currently slightly exceeding Department of the Air Force
expectations and may benefit future customer prices. To ensure the Air
Force Working Capital Fund sustains the required cash balance within
the established lower and upper limits for FY 2022, we will continue to
release the contract authority incrementally based on the revenue
earned.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. Which capability on your Unfunded Priority List would
have the most negative impact on your service's ability to execute the
National Defense Strategy if Congress fails to fund it?
General Thomas. Not funding the (35) Naval Strike Missiles (PMC
$57.8M) at the top of the Marine Corps Unfunded Priority List (UPL)
would have the greatest negative impact on the Marine Corps' ability to
compete, deter, and win in the future.
Naval Strike Missiles are the munition component of the Navy Marine
Corps Expeditionary Ship Interdiction System (NMESIS) which is the
Marine Corps' first iteration of the Ground Based Anti-Ship Missile
(GBASM) capability. NMESIS was successfully tested in the fall of 2020
against a ship target. This capability will enable the Marine Corps to
contribute to the Naval Expeditionary Force's anti-surface warfare
campaign, and these additional missiles in the UPL would provide
greater magazine depth for the units that will employ them in the Indo-
Pacific as early as fiscal year 2023.
Naval Strike Missiles, specifically, cost approximately $1.7
million each. Such a missile deployed in close proximity to adversary
sea lanes will threaten multi-billion dollar ships, creating cost
impositions for the adversary and changing the calculus of their
maritime campaigns. Moreover, it will support and reassure our allies
and partners.
Of note, our third priority is (48) Tactical Tomahawks (PMC $96M)
to support Long Range Fires. This capability was successfully tested
this year and will provide complementary GBASM capability to NMESIS.
As the pacing threat moves with us and technology develops at a
speed faster than the budget, funding the entirety of our UPL request
provides us the opportunity to capitalize on successful technological
developments. This will accelerate additional capability to the
Combatant Commanders, specifically in the Indo-Pacific, buying down
strategic risk for them and our forward deployed forces, and deterring
conflict sooner.
A Naval Strike Missile takes approximately 24 months to build, thus
failure to fund it now will have a very long-term negative impact.
Mr. Lamborn. Which capability on your Unfunded Priority List would
have the most negative impact on your service's ability to execute the
National Defense Strategy if Congress fails to fund it?
Admiral Lescher. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Lamborn. Which capability on your Unfunded Priority List would
have the most negative impact on your service's ability to execute the
National Defense Strategy if Congress fails to fund it?
General Allvin. As the achievement of Air Superiority is one of the
Air Force's most important tasks when contributing to the Joint Force,
the inability to procure additional F-15EXs would most negatively
impact our ability to execute the National Defense Strategy.
Mr. Lamborn. There are reports that renovating Space Command's
current location for long term use, rather than moving the command and
authorizing a MILCON, will save taxpayers $1.2 billion and achieve full
mission capability 7 years faster. Having spent $27 million to upgrade
command facilities at Peterson, Space Command is even more entrenched
there, yet the Department of the Air Force process did not even
consider keeping the headquarters in Building 1. How are the mission
and goals of Space Force enhanced by moving Space Command out of
Building 1, delaying full mission capability by several years, and
geographically separating the Command from critical components such as
JTF-Space Defense and Space Operations Command?
General Thompson. Since I am not assigned to U.S. Space Command I
cannot speak authoritatively about impacts of the Headquarters U.S.
Space Command relocation to its mission capability. I can say, however,
that the U.S. Space Force role of organizing, training, equipping and
presenting space forces to U.S. Space Command will not be impacted by
the relocation. I can also say that as part of the process to determine
a permanent location for USSPACECOM Headquarters, the Department of the
Air Force (DAF) assessed 21 criteria across four factors: mission,
infrastructure capacity, community support, and costs to the Department
of Defense (DOD). These criteria were developed in close coordination
with the stakeholders, including USSPACECOM leadership. Co-locating
USSPACECOM HQ with Joint Task Force-Space Defense (JTF-SD) or Space
Operations Command (SPoC) was not identified as a criteria during that
process.
Mr. Lamborn. For the first time, the Space Force is executing
weapons system sustainment separate from the Air Force. In your
testimony, you state that you anticipate sustainment requirements will
continue to increase due to costs associated with maintaining aging
weapon systems, while simultaneously fielding and sustaining new
systems. This committee has been focused on this balance of maintaining
our older systems while fielding new ones. In this year's budget, the
Weapons System Sustainment account is only funded to 79% of the
requirement.
Is this your maximum executable rate?
General Thompson. No. WSS was funded at 86 percent in Fiscal Year
(FY) 2020 and at 81 percent in FY21. Space WSS can execute at least at
90 percent depending upon appropriation timing, various contractual
actions, and ``fact-of-life'' circumstances. The Space Force FY22 WSS
request of 79% balances risk in the WSS account with other critical
needs. The FY22 Unfunded Priority List (UPL) ($122.2M) submission,
which, if approved, funds the portfolio to 83 percent and further
improves the sustainment of critical programs, such as missile warning/
missile defense; space domain awareness; military satellite
communications, counterspace operations; and Space Based Infrared
Systems.
Mr. Lamborn. If so, what barriers are in the way that prevent you
from executing to 100% of the requirement, especially considering costs
are only anticipated to grow?
General Thompson. The Space Force will continue to use Air Force
WSS processes until the Space Force Service standup is completed and
has similar barriers to execution as the Air Force. The Air Force does
not fund WSS to 100 percent due to the time required to posture the
sustainment enterprise to execute programmed WSS resources; fact-of-
life changes during the year of execution (contract or supply issues,
or real-world contingency events); re-programming limitations between
budget sub-activity groups (SAGs); and to balance risk across its
accounts and mission areas.
Mr. Lamborn. Will funding to 79% of the requirement translate into
decreased readiness?
General Thompson. The Space Force budget request increases WSS by
$68 Million which reflects a balance between readiness and requirements
to protect and defend space assets, field resilient architectures,
protect the joint force from adversary use of space, and build a combat
effective service.
Mr. Lamborn. Which capability on your Unfunded Priority List would
have the most negative impact on your service's ability to execute the
National Defense Strategy if Congress fails to fund it?
General Thompson. The Space Force's Unfunded Priorities List does
not resolve budget shortfalls, nor would the lack of any single option
prevent the Space Force from the achieving the National Defense
Strategy today.
The Chief of Space Operations prioritized options that would allow
the Space Force to sustain what we have today and accelerate new
capabilities. First, the Space Force must improve sustainment today
through the Weapons Systems Sustainment (WSS) and Facility Sustainment,
Restoration, and Modernization (FSRM) options until the Space Force can
field its next-generation capabilities to replace them. This includes:
(1) an additional $122M toward the Space Force WSS portfolio for depot
maintenance, contract logistics support, sustaining engineering, and
technical order costs to sustain over 40 weapon systems. (UPL requests
$122M); and (2) an additional $66M for FSRM investments in
infrastructure that will effectively deliver capability to support the
current and emerging contested space domain. (UPL requests $66M).
Second, Space Force test range and training options accelerate the
infrastructure necessary to ensure Space Force's newly fielded
capabilities are resilient and can operate in a realistic threat
environment (UPL requests $50M). Finally, the data-masked options
accelerate capabilities for achieving space superiority (UPL requests
$279M).
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GOLDEN
Mr. Golden. Admiral Lescher, you mentioned that the FY22 budget was
created by weighing current versus future readiness.
In an ongoing Navy-encouraged effort to recover schedule,
counteract historically high attrition rates due to retirements and
reach a two-ship per year build rate (which will be achieved in 2022),
both shipyards are in the process of hiring thousands of shipbuilders
to execute the Navy's previously reported shipbuilding plan.
However, the FY22 budget request unexpectedly cut one DDG-51,
breaking the current multi-year procurement contract (which runs
through FY22) at a cost of $33 million and sending a terrible message
to a shipbuilding industrial base that relies on predictable,
consistent funding for planning and executing work. One DDG-51 equals
roughly 500 jobs a year for 5 years--without restoration of at least
one DDG-51, one of the shipbuilders will be forced to reduce 500
employees before the end of 2022 and 500 per year after that. These
layoffs will affect the youngest shipbuilders in the workforce, thereby
depleting the same workforce the Navy hopes to use in the future to
build the DDG(X).
I have stated in the past that the Navy needs to recognize that the
shipbuilding workforce is not a tap that can be shut off or turned on
at will. Procurement of the Flight III DDG-51s is vital to ensuring a
stable shipyard workforce exists when the Navy begins to transition to
the DDG(X).
How does the Navy plan on sustaining a stable shipyard workforce
while cutting procurement of contracted ships?
Admiral Lescher. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. McCLAIN
Mrs. McClain. In FY21, the Air Force requested and Congress fully
authorized and appropriated $100M for the purchase of an additional 24
wing sets while simultaneously seeking a fleet reduction to 218
aircraft, which Congress prohibited. So far only purchased 2 wing sets
with this funding and may be seeking a reprogramming for the balance.
This is contrary to testimony from Air Force Chief of Staff General
C.Q. Brown on May 7 in which he committed to executing 55% of remaining
FY21 funding by the end of the fiscal year. When Congress authorized
and appropriated this funding, the expectation was that the Air Force
would quickly execute this funding, within the fiscal year, and place
another 24 wing sets on contract. General Brown also indicated in his
testimony that the FY22 budget request would include further funding
for new wings, which it effectively does not. I would note that the
FY21 request indicated a need for $100M in FY22 for an additional 24
wing sets. The FY22 request proposes a fleet reduction from 281
aircraft to 239. I understand that the Air Force is currently on
contract for enough wing sets to support a fleet of 218 aircraft.
How does the Air Force propose to support a fleet of 239 aircraft
into the 2030s without the purchase of additional replacement wings?
General Allvin. The Air Force fighter force structure plan
established a requirement for 218 A-10s into the 2030s. In order to
reach 218 in a timely and efficient manner, A-10 Total Aircraft
Inventory (TAI) will be reduced to 239 in FY22 and then to 218 in FY23.
Accordingly, the program office purchased 218 wing sets.
Mrs. McClain. Does the remaining FY21 funding provide for the
purchase of enough additional wing sets to keep a fleet of 239 aircraft
flying into the 2030s? If not, how much additional funding is required
to support 239 aircraft?
General Allvin. No, Air Force plan calls for 218 A-10s into the
2030s. If the AF is required to maintain a 239 TAI fleet into the
2030s, it would require an additional $129M in FY22 or FY23 APAF
funding to buy 21 wings no later than 2QFY23. It would also require an
additional $83M in FY25 APAF funding to transport and install these
wings.
Mrs. McClain. How much additional funding is required, in addition
to the remaining FY 21 wing replacement funding, to purchase the 63
additional wing sets required to support a fleet of 281 aircraft into
the 2030s?
General Allvin. If the AF is required to maintain a 281 TAI fleet
into the 2030s, it will require an additional $615.1M in FY23-26 APAF
funding. However, the modernization cost to the AF is $2.2B in the FYDP
and would exceed $3.7B into the early 2030s. This money spent on
keeping the oldest 63 A-10s could be better used to purchase roughly 2
new squadrons of F-35s. Furthermore, the manpower positions for those
additional 63 aircraft would cause the Air Force to revisit F-35 basing
decisions potentially impacting each base slated to receive new F-35s
in coming years. Additionally, no further modernization of the A-10
fleet will happen. Upgrades which will no longer be completed include:
Helmet Mounted Cueing System (HMCS), Small Diameter Bomb (SDB-I) Mod,
advanced radios, Onboard Oxygen Generation System (OBOGS), High
Resolution Display System (HRDS), and 2 Gigabit Ethernet Switch (2GES).
Mrs. McClain. When does the Air Force need to place additional wing
set replacement orders so that they can be bundled with the two wing
sets purchased in December 2020 and thus achieve a lower cost to the
taxpayer?
General Allvin. There will be a purchase in Aug 2021 of 4 spare
wing sets which will leverage FY21 (existing) funds. If the Air Force
does not divest to a fleet of 218 in FY23, then additional wing sets
would need to be purchased. Funding will be needed by early August 2021
in order to maintain the same unit cost as the 2 wings purchased in
December 2020. If the wing sets are not placed on contract in Aug 2021,
the unit cost will increase.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOORE
Mr. Moore. The National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence has criticized the practice of not allowing substitution
of experience for education credentials when determining compensation
for a new hire into the digital workforce competing with the private
sector. They have also acknowledged that the government's hiring
system's problems are well known. These challenges are not caused by a
lack of hiring authorities or an inherently slow process. The
Commission has been unable to identify a gap in hiring authorities for
the digital workforce. What is the Department doing to identify and
eliminate barriers to competition that it has created through its own
business practices and which some have argued do not require any
special authority from Congress to address?
General Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. The National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence has criticized the practice of not allowing substitution
of experience for education credentials when determining compensation
for a new hire into the digital workforce competing with the private
sector. They have also acknowledged that the government's hiring
system's problems are well known. These challenges are not caused by a
lack of hiring authorities or an inherently slow process. The
Commission has been unable to identify a gap in hiring authorities for
the digital workforce. What is the Department doing to identify and
eliminate barriers to competition that it has created through its own
business practices and which some have argued do not require any
special authority from Congress to address?
General Thomas. This is a policy matter under the cognizance of the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). The OPM Qualification Standards
are specific to a job series and Artificial Intelligence positions do
not fall within a specific job series nor is there an education
requirement to qualify for Artificial Intelligence positions. The
flexibility to hire a candidate who does not meet the requirements in
the OPM qualifications standards does not exist. The authority to
change this requirement is outside of Marine Corps' purview, but the
Marine Corps supports any efforts that may lead to a change in hiring
flexibilities.
Executive Order (EO) 13932 requires the Director of OPM, in
consultation with the Office of Management and Budget, to review and
revise all job classification and qualification standards for positions
in the competitive service as necessary to give agencies flexibility to
qualify candidates for employment with an adequate combination of
education and experience. The Department should continue to partner
with OPM on this effort.
Mr. Moore. The National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence has criticized the practice of not allowing substitution
of experience for education credentials when determining compensation
for a new hire into the digital workforce competing with the private
sector. They have also acknowledged that the government's hiring
system's problems are well known. These challenges are not caused by a
lack of hiring authorities or an inherently slow process. The
Commission has been unable to identify a gap in hiring authorities for
the digital workforce. What is the Department doing to identify and
eliminate barriers to competition that it has created through its own
business practices and which some have argued do not require any
special authority from Congress to address?
Admiral Lescher. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Moore. The National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence has criticized the practice of not allowing substitution
of experience for education credentials when determining compensation
for a new hire into the digital workforce competing with the private
sector. They have also acknowledged that the government's hiring
system's problems are well known. These challenges are not caused by a
lack of hiring authorities or an inherently slow process. The
Commission has been unable to identify a gap in hiring authorities for
the digital workforce. What is the Department doing to identify and
eliminate barriers to competition that it has created through its own
business practices and which some have argued do not require any
special authority from Congress to address?
General Allvin. Per OPM standards, because the 2210 series is not a
professional series, a college degree is not required. From a Cyber/
Communications and Information Career Field perspective, we average  1K
vacancies per month across all grades. We are continuously encouraging
the use of hiring authorities such as Direct Hire Authorities (DHAs) to
assist with attracting digital talent as well as reducing time-to-hire.
Additionally, the DAF is performing a thorough barrier analysis from a
development perspective and I expect to have those results toward
year's end. Further, we have established career field policy on the
makeup and execution of hiring panels. We're also taking a closer look
at diversity and inclusion to assist with the elimination of potential
barriers within the hiring process. The DAF acknowledges a digital
skillset gap that includes AI, machine learning, cloud, cyber,
programming, and some other related disciplines and the Cyber/C&I
Career Field is finalizing a talent management strategy to attract,
develop, and retain this critical talent.
Mr. Moore. I would like to better understand the Air Force's
sustainment and modernization plans for the A-10. I cannot be more
proud that the women and men at Hill Air Force Base have been selected
to fit new wings to the A-10. In FY21, the Air Force requested and
Congress fully authorized and appropriated $100M for the purchase of an
additional 24 wing sets. I understand the Air Force has so far only
purchased 2 wing sets with this funding and may be seeking a
reprogramming for the balance. My question is how much additional
funding is required, in addition to the remaining FY21 wing replacement
funding, to purchase the 66 additional wing sets required to support a
fleet of 281 aircraft into the 2030s? Furthermore, when does the Air
Force need to place additional wing set replacement orders so that they
can be bundled with the 2 wing sets purchased in December 2020 and thus
achieve a lower cost to the taxpayer?
General Allvin. As of 12 July 2021, 2 wing sets have been purchased
with the $100M of FY21 appropriated funds. With this purchase the Air
Force will have purchased enough wings sets to rewing the FY23 force
structure Total Aircraft Inventory of 218. An additional 4 wing sets
will be purchased in August 2021 with FY21 funds, which will be used
for spares. At this time there are no other wing set purchases planned
for the A-10 Rewinging program.
If we are unable to divest, an additional 63 wing sets will need to
be purchased, due to 3 of the 4 spares being used as operational
assets. In order to receive the same cost as those purchased in
December 2020, approximately $340M will be required to purchase the 63
wing sets by early August 2021. If funds are not placed on contract
until after August, the total costs for the 63 wing sets will increase
to $343M.
Additionally, the Air Force is not seeking to reprogram funds away
from the Rewing Program, as stated by the Chief of Staff of the Air
Force during his testimony from 17 June 2021 at the Armed Services
Committee SASC.
Mr. Moore. How does the Air Force propose to support a fleet of 239
aircraft into the 2030s without the purchase of additional replacement
wings?
General Allvin. The Air Force fighter force structure plan
established a requirement for 218 A-10s into the 2030s. In order to
reach 218 in a timely and efficient manner, A-10 Total Aircraft
Inventory (TAI) will be reduced to 239 in FY22 and then to 218 in FY23.
Accordingly, the program office purchased 218 wing sets.
Mr. Moore. Does the remaining FY21 funding provide for the purchase
of enough additional wing sets to keep a fleet of 239 aircraft flying
into the 2030s? If not, how much additional funding is required to
support 239 aircraft?
General Allvin. No, Air Force plan calls for 218 A-10s into the
2030s. If the AF is required to maintain a 239 TAI fleet into the
2030s, it would require an additional $129M in FY22 or FY23 APAF
funding to buy 21 wings no later than 2QFY23. It would also require an
additional $83M in FY25 APAF funding to transport and install these
wings.
Mr. Moore. How much additional funding is required, in addition to
the remaining FY21 wing replacement funding, to purchase the 63
additional wing sets required to support a fleet of 281 aircraft into
the 2030s?
General Allvin. If the AF is required to maintain a 281 TAI fleet
into the 2030s, it will require an additional $615.1M in FY23-26 APAF
funding. However, the modernization cost to the AF is $2.2B in the FYDP
and would exceed $3.7B into the early 2030s. This money spent on
keeping the oldest 63 A-10s could be better used to purchase roughly 2
new squadrons of F-35s. Furthermore, the manpower positions for those
additional 63 aircraft would cause the Air Force to revisit F-35 basing
decisions potentially impacting each base slated to receive new F-35s
in coming years. Additionally, no further modernization of the A-10
fleet will happen. Upgrades which will no longer be completed include:
Helmet Mounted Cueing System (HMCS), Small Diameter Bomb (SDB-I) Mod,
advanced radios, Onboard Oxygen Generation System (OBOGS), High
Resolution Display System (HRDS), and 2 Gigabit Ethernet Switch (2GES).
Mr. Moore. When does the Air Force need to place additional wing
set replacement orders so that they can be bundled with the 2 wing sets
purchased in December 2020 and thus achieve a lower cost to the
taxpayer?
General Allvin. There will be a purchase in Aug 2021 of 4 spare
wing sets which will leverage FY21 (existing) funds. If the Air Force
does not divest to a fleet of 218 in FY23, then additional wing sets
would need to be purchased. Funding will be needed by early August 2021
in order to maintain the same unit cost as the 2 wings purchased in
December 2020. If the wing sets are not placed on contract in Aug 2021,
the unit cost will increase.
Mr. Moore. The National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence has criticized the practice of not allowing substitution
of experience for education credentials when determining compensation
for a new hire into the digital workforce competing with the private
sector. They have also acknowledged that the government's hiring
system's problems are well known. These challenges are not caused by a
lack of hiring authorities or an inherently slow process. The
Commission has been unable to identify a gap in hiring authorities for
the digital workforce. What is the Department doing to identify and
eliminate barriers to competition that it has created through its own
business practices and which some have argued do not require any
special authority from Congress to address?
General Thompson. We agree that the ability to recruit a highly
qualified digital workforce is limited by the inability to meaningfully
account for an applicant's real world expertise and/or experience when
determining qualification and/or compensation for a position, even when
such expertise or experience maybe more desirable than the degree
requirement. Some of the hiring limitations are included both the
Office of Personnel Management policy and 5 USC Chapter 51.
The Space Force will work towards increasing hiring flexibility by
maximizing the use of existing authorities, evaluating the
effectiveness of those authorities in recruiting and retaining a high
caliber digital workforce, and exploring/proposing legislative and
policy changes that may be needed in the future.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Ms. Strickland. General Martin, the City of Lakewood and U.S. Army
Contracting Command, Mission and Installation Contracting Command
(MICC) entered into a cooperative agreement (CA) on September 26, 2019
to resolve encroachment issues at Joint Base Lewis-McChord's North
Clear Zone (NCZ). Resolving this issue is vitally important to reducing
risk not only to public safety but also operational flight risks. There
are over 20 transactions within the NCZ that need to be facilitated but
after 18 months no transactions have occurred due to Army Compatible
Use Buffer program (ACUB) limitations. All parties have acknowledged
that this is a very unique project. Resolving encroachment in the NCZ
is a multi-decade project requiring vigilance and ACUB flexibility.
Will the Army recommit to working with the City of Lakewood to resolve
this issue and ensure the safety of the public and service members?
General Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Ms. Strickland. General Martin, there are several ongoing
infrastructure concerns within and around Joint Base Lewis-McChord
including the gate access road on Washington Boulevard in Lakewood as
well as issues with the main gate exit off I-5. Additionally, the
planned high-speed rail crossing at the main gate will become public
safety concern for military personnel and civilians accessing the
installation. I know that the City of Lakewood and JBLM have begun
assessing the need to build an overpass between the two sides of JBLM.
Access to JBLM is a critical readiness issue. When assessing future
MILCON how does the Army consider the importance of readiness
priorities such as base access?
General Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]

[all]
