- AMERICAS WAY FORWARD IN THE INDO-PACIFIC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICAS WAY FORWARD IN THE INDO-PACIFIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC, CENTRAL
ASIA, AND NONPROLIFERATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 22, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-785PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California              MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia       CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida       STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California       SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island       ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California       LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas               ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada       BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California       BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania       KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota       TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota       MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan       GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia       DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey       PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey               NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California       RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina       YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California       MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California       JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas       RON WRIGHT, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia, and Nonproliferation

AMI BERA, California, Chairman,

BRAD SHERMAN, California             STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
DINA TITUS, Nevada      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
ANDY LEVIN. Michigan      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      KEN BUCK, Colorado
ANDY KIM, New Jersey      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia      MARK GREEN, Tennessee
TED LIEU, California      ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      YOUNG KIM, California
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

Jamie Morgan, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Rolland, Nadege, Senior Fellow for Political Affairs, National
Bureau of Asian Research.......................................     8
Haass, Honorable Richard N., President, Council on Foreign
Relations, Former Director of Policy Planning at the U.S.
Department of State............................................    12
Schriver, The Honorable Randall G., Chairman, Project 2049
Institute, Former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Indo-
Pacific Security Affairs.......................................    23

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    52
Hearing Minutes..................................................    53
Hearing Attendance...............................................    54

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Representative Connolly............    55

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    57

AMERICAS WAY FORWARD IN THE INDO-PACIFIC

Friday, March 22, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific,
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Ami Bera (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Mr. Bera. The Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, and
Nonproliferation will come to order. Without objection, the
chair is authorized to declare a recess of the committee at any
point. And all members will have 5 days to submit statements,
extraneous material, and questions for the record subject to
the length limitation in the rules. To insert something into
the record, please have your staff email the previously
mentioned address or contact full committee staff.
Please keep your video functions on at all times, even when
you are not recognized by the chair. Members are responsible
for muting and unmuting themselves. And please remember to mute
yourself after you finish speaking.
Consistent with remote committee proceedings of H.Res. 8,
staff will only mute members and witnesses as appropriate when
they are not under recognition to eliminate background noise.
In recognizing that we probably will have votes called shortly,
we will continue the hearing as members kind of cycle in and
out to report their votes on the floor.
I see that we have a quorum now, and I will now recognize
myself for opening remarks. I want to thank Ranking Member
Chabot, the members of this subcommittee, our witnesses,
members of the public for joining today's hearing.
Before we get started, I do want to take a moment to talk
about what we have seen in the hate-filled mass shooting in
Atlanta earlier this week and to recognize the pain and trauma
it has caused for many across the country, particularly, in the
Asian-American, Pacific Islander community. We have seen a
dramatic rise in hate crimes against Asian Americans over the
last year, crimes that tear at the very fabric of what makes
our country so strong. And on Tuesday, eight lives were cut
short because of this hate, including Daoyou Feng, Paul Andre
Michels, Hyeon Jeong Park, Julie Park, Xiaojie Tan, Delaina
Ashley Yaun, and others.
I know, on this committee, we will be taking a hard look at
the region and certainly, you know, the Chinese Communist Party
and what the Chinese Community Party and their government is up
to. But we also have to be careful about the language we use on
this committee and understand that the Chinese Communist Party
is not a reflection of the Chinese people and certainly is not
a reflection of the many patriotic Chinese Americans and Asian
Americans.
So, as we take a hard look and look at the challenges in
the Indo-Pacific, the challenges in this great strategic power
competition with China, let's be mindful of the language we use
and mindful that we do not conflate what the Chinese Communist
Party is doing with what patriotic Chinese and Asian Americans
do every day in representing the values of the United States of
America.
With that, you know, we do have many challenges. I applaud
the Biden Administration for their recognition that the Indo-
Pacific region may, in fact, be one of the most challenging
regions in the coming decades in the pivot and emphasis on
Indo-Pacific strategy. You know, I appreciate the leaders'
summit that happened with the Quad and our allies in Japan,
India, and Australia last week and the partnership and the
commitment that our friends and allies through the Quad have
focused on in terms of creating regional security.
I also applaud Secretary Blinken and Secretary Austin for
making an early visit to our allies in Japan and Korea to
strengthen that trilateral relationship as we deal with what is
still quite a bit of a challenge in North Korea. We need a
strengthened trilateral alliance to address those issues.
I also appreciate Secretary Blinken, you know,
specifically, calling out to China to say they have a
responsibility in helping us get to the ultimate goal of a
nuclear-free peninsula on the Korean Peninsula.
In addition, this subcommittee will spend quite a bit of
time looking at the increased Chinese aggression. Certainly, we
are seeing the antidemocratic moves that are taking place in
Hong Kong with real concern. We see that human rights abuses
that are taking place in Xinjiang province against the Uyghur
population, as well as what has happened for years in Tibet.
And, increasingly, we are seeing Chinese aggression in the
South China Sea and the East China Sea. And with increasing
concerns--I know the Ranking Member Chabot and I have talked
quite a bit about our concerns with Chinese aggression and
increased aggression toward Taiwan--an importance that we
understand that, you know, that the United States really does
stand with Taiwan with our allies. And, hence, we have
introduced the Taiwan Fellowship Act, which will be a first
step but not a last step. You know, this Chinese aggression,
while we are going to have a history of competition with China,
you know, we do not--our desire is not to have a direct
confrontation. But, again, we have to have the rule of law. And
this committee will be taking a long look at building up that
foundational strategy there.
So, with that, you know, we have got, you know--the
committee also has jurisdiction over Afghanistan. We will be
saying--you know, May 1 is right around the corner, real
challenges in how we approach Afghanistan. And we will be
working very closely with the rest of the full committee to
address that and what that way forward looks like.
So I expect us to have a very robust agenda on multiple
fronts, and I look forward to doing things in a very bipartisan
way. You know, Ranking Member Mr. Chabot and I have worked
pretty closely together over, you know, my 9 years on the
subcommittee. And, again, I look forward to having a great
partnership with Mr. Chabot.
And, with that, let me recognize my good friend from Ohio,
Ranking Member Representative Steve Chabot, for any opening
comments that you may have.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Chairman Bera.
I want to thank all the members from both sides of the
aisle as we convene the first hearing of the Asia, Pacific,
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation Subcommittee of the 117th
Congress. I also want to thank our distinguished witnesses for
their willingness to provide their insight and thoughts on how
the U.S. should continue engaging the Indo-Pacific region
during these challenging times.
I have served on the full Foreign Affairs Committee for my
entire Congress, a quarter of a century now, including having
chaired this very subcommittee back in 2013 and 2014. And I am
pleased to have the opportunity to serve as ranking member--of
course, I prefer to be chair--during what is arguably the most
important period for U.S. engagement in the Indo-Pacific region
in recent memory.
It is hard to overestimate the or overstate the
significance of this region, which includes over half the
world's population and more than a third of its global economy.
Geographically, that is everything between the Caspian Sea and
Hawaii, excluding Iran and Russia, who are, of course, in the
jurisdiction of another subcommittee.
While it would be impossible to discuss all U.S. interests
in such a vast and important region, the following are some of
the highlights this committee should be focusing on, in my
opinion. The Chinese Communist Party poses an existential
threat to the United States and to our allies. This is evident
from their massive military buildup, their large-scale
intellectual property theft, persistent cyber attacks, and
their mercantilist trade policies. It is also evident from
their territorial aggression, concealment of the COVID-19
outbreak, and blatant disregard for human rights, the
environment, and international treaties, and on and on.
The CCP wants regional and eventually global hegemony. They
want to return to a world that is dominated by and resolves
around the Middle Kingdom. The CCP is unwilling to operate by
international norms. Unfortunately, given China's size and
impact on the global economy, we cannot simply isolate them.
Instead, we must work with our allies and partners to hold
China to the same rules that everybody else follows and impose
penalties when they do not.
It is imperative that America rises to this challenge, and
our subcommittee has the mission to lead that effort. We must
sustain and build our alliances and partnerships. I have long
favored a robust U.S. engagement in the Indo-Pacific region,
which is demonstrated by the fact that I co-chair, along with
some of my Democratic colleagues, six caucuses in the region:
India, Taiwan, Philippines, Cambodia, Kazakhstan, and the
Pacific Islands.
While many of our allies and partners share our concerns
with regard to China, they may not willing to be--resist and
even sometimes confrontational as we might believe is the wise
course of action at that time. We should strengthen and
buildupon the relationship with our Quad partners: Japan,
India, and Australia. And with our ASEAN partners, especially
our allies in Singapore and the Philippines.
Our relationship and deep ties Taiwan, as you have
mentioned, Mr. Chairman, and Korea are also of paramount
importance. And I must say strategic ambiguity relative to
Taiwan and China is, in my opinion, absurd and dangerous. We
ought to be crystal clear that, if China attacks Taiwan, we
will be there with Taiwan. That is the best way to keep China
from miscalculating and starting a war.
By cooperating with our allies and partners, the U.S. seeks
to advance prosperity, human rights, and economic development,
and the rule of law. We believe our model offers the best
opportunity for the region. It is by working with those who
share our values that we can help the region take full
advantage of opportunities.
Finally, the United States must make trade and investment
throughout Asia a top priority. Countries throughout the region
are hungry for U.S. investment, while U.S. Businesses are eager
for new markets and investment opportunities. By cultivating
our economic ties, we will grow both our economies and
economies of our partners.
Economic engagement is also an excellent means of fostering
developing relationships in Central Asia where partners like
Kazakhstan are eager to engage. And improved economic
partnerships are avenues to diversify our supply chains away
from China and foster promising alternatives, like Vietnam.
I would like to close by introducing our vice ranking
member, Congresswoman Young Kim from California. As a long-time
staffer to former Chairman Ed Royce, she has worked on trade
negotiations. She has taken on leadership roles in the U.S.-
Korea interparliamentary exchange, and has a deep understanding
of the Indo-Pacific region. Her experience and expertise will
truly advance the work of this subcommittee.
Mr. Chairman, I believe we have a great group of members on
our side who bring experience, dedication, and commitment to
American values to this subcommittee. Your members are okay,
too. We look forward to working with you and our Democratic
colleagues on this committee in addressing our Nation's
challenges in a bipartisan manner.
And I, again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for reaching out to
me and discussing issues in advance of this hearing. And we
look forward to working with you. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you, Ranking Member Chabot.
I should point out my vice chair, the Congressman from
Michigan, Andy Levin, he has got a very important resolution on
the floor today, condemning the actions that we are seeing in
Burma and standing with the Burmese people against this group.
With that, let me take a moment to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Richard Haass, who is the president of
the Council on Foreign Relations. Dr. Haass comes to us with a
widely respected record of innovative thinking on many of our
biggest strategic challenges.
Dr. Haass, we are grateful for your presence today.
We are also joined by Ms. Nadege Rolland. She is the senior
fellow for Political and Security Affairs at the National
Bureau of Asian Research. Ms. Rolland is one of the foremost
experts on Chinese Government strategy and on some China's most
consequential initiatives, like the Belt and Road Initiative.
Ms. Rolland, thank you for joining us today as well.
And last and certainly not least is Mr. Randy Schriver, the
chairman of the Project 2049 Institute and former Secretary of
Defense for Indo-Pacific Security Affairs. Mr. Schriver brings
a long record of service in government on national security
challenges in the region, including civilian and military
service.
Mr. Schriver, we thank you for your service and for being
with us today.
I will now recognize each witness for 5 minutes.
Without objection, your prepared written statements will be
made part of the record. I will first call on Dr. Haass for
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD N. HAASS, PRESIDENT, COUNCIL
ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, FORMER DIRECTOR OF POLICY PLANNING AT THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Dr. Haass. Well, thank you, Chairman Bera, Ranking Member
Chabot, I just want to make clear that I am speaking here on my
personal capacity, not for the institution I am fortunate
enough to be the president of. You have chosen a subject that
is central, not just to this country but really to the
trajectory of this century. It covers an awful lot, geography
and otherwise. I will focus, though, on China in my opening
remarks, even though I cover a lot else in my rather lengthy
written statement.
Whatever it is we do in this part of the world,
multilateralism will prove essential. We simply cannot deal
adequately with China's power and China's reach unilaterally.
But we also cannot ask others in the region, our partners and
allies, to choose between us. We need to understand that they
will want to maintain a relationship with China at the same
time they maintain relations with us, even though the specifics
will obviously differ. We also need to understand the limits of
what some of our partners or allies are prepared to do with us
when it comes to China. And here I mention
[audio malfunction].
Mr. Bera. It looks like we may have lost Dr. Haass. Is that
correct from the tech side?
Voice. Yes, sir. It looks like Dr. Haass is having some
connectivity issues.
Mr. Bera. Let's do this, let's go ahead and move to Ms.
Rolland and then see if we can work on the technical issues
with Dr. Haass. When he gets back, we will let him do his full
testimony.
Ms. Rolland, let's go and recognize you for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. NADEGE ROLLAND, SENIOR FELLOW FOR POLITICAL
AFFAIRS, NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH

Ms. Rolland. Thank you, sir. Chairman Bera, Ranking Member
Chabot, I am deeply grateful and honored to be asked to share
my thoughts with the subcommittee members today. As an analyst
who devotes her days trying to understand the world through
Beijing's eyes, I will focus my statement on where the Indo-
Pacific region fits into the Chinese leadership's grand
strategy.
The Indo-Pacific region is where U.S. and Chinese tectonic
plates rub against each other. The term ``Indo-Pacific'' itself
is very telling about the U.S. perspective. It is primarily a
maritime geographic expanse that links the U.S. to an
economically vibrant region and a crucial strategic space where
many of its key military allies are located, an area the U.S.
Envisions as free, open, secure, and prosperous.
There is no Indo-Pacific in Beijing's conception. The
region is, in fact, included as part of China's periphery.
Here, too, the term itself is very telling about the Chinese
perspective. China is at the center and at the top of a 360-
degree peripheral zone that expands over both the continental
and maritime domains.
Dr. Haass. I do not know who is talking, but I have
somebody else who is talking over me. And I got cutoff, and I
still hear a woman's voice.
Mr. Bera. Hi, Dr. Haass. We lost you for a moment there
because of technical difficulties. So we moved on to Dr.
Rolland to do her testimony. And then, after she finishes, we
will come back to you, Dr. Haass, and let you do your full
testimony, if that works. We lost you for a moment.
Go ahead, Dr. Rolland.
Ms. Rolland. Thank you, sir. Left unclear are the exact
geographic extent of this periphery and the kind of future the
Chinese party-State hopes to see for it.
In order to get a better understanding of the Chinese
leadership's objectives for the region, one needs to look back
over a decade ago. In the immediate aftermath of the 2008
global financial crisis, Chinese political elites felt that the
American/Western decline had accelerated while China was on an
unremitting upward trajectory.
The 2011 Obama Administration's announcement of the
rebalance of its diplomatic and security focus to the Asia-
Pacific region was read in Beijing as a move meant to increase
the pressure on Chinese's immediate periphery, constrict its
strategic space, and ultimately thwart its rise. In order to
counter what was essentially perceived as an intensified phase
of American containment, Chinese planners devised their own
strategic rebalancing.
The strategy embraced both land and sea, trying to
stabilize China's eastern maritime flank, constricting as much
as possible U.S. access to the China Seas while pressuring its
allies, while at the same time consolidating China's power on
its western continental and maritime flanks.
To expand China's influence and bolster its position over
the region, Chinese planners decided to use economic power,
China's strong point, as the main sinews, supplemented by the
building of an increasingly dense network of both hard and soft
infrastructures, transportation, energy, information and
communication infrastructure-building, trade and financial
agreements, and people-to-people exchanges. The strategic plan
was announced at the end of 2013 under the name One Belt, One
Road, which is now better known globally as the Belt and Road
Initiative.
Viewed for what it is, namely, as a strategic plan, the BRI
gives some indications about the Chinese leadership's intent.
Geographically, BRI includes not only the Eurasian Continent,
Central, South and Southeast Asia, and the Middle East, Africa,
and portions of Central and Eastern Europe, also known as the
Silk Road Economic Belt, but also its adjacent waters, Arctic,
South Pacific, Indian Oceans, and Mediterranean Sea, also known
as the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, and its three blue
economic passages.
The vision for the region's future is better explained by
what it is not. It is not one where the widespread respect for
an application of liberal democratic principles, such as
freedom, individual rights, rule of law, transparency, and
accountability, lead to greater openness, prosperity, and
security. At the same time, it is not where all the countries
in China's greater periphery end up having muddled themselves
on the Chinese party-State's system or have become local
appendages of the Chinese Communist Party.
It is a vision where the multiplication of dependencies to
China have created enough positive incentives and coercive
leverage to ultimately compel regional countries to defer to
Beijing's wishes and constrict their ability and willingness to
defy and resist against China's power. This vision is not
compatible with that of the United States.
With this, I will yield. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rolland follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ms. Rolland.
Let's go back to Dr. Haass. And, Dr. Haass, if you want to
start from the top of your testimony, because we lost you in
there for a moment.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD N. HAAS, PRESIDENT, COUNCIL
ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, FORMER DIRECTOR OF POLICY PLANNING AT THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Dr. Haass. Okay. Thank you, sir. And apologies for the
technological differences. I am not at my normal base. But,
again, I want to thank you and the ranking member for asking me
here today. I just wanted to make clear I speak for myself and
not for the organization I lead. Your subject is obviously an
important one. How Asia goes will in many ways determine how
the 21st century goes. I will focus, though, on China, even
though there is a lot else to cover.
I begin by pointing out that multilateralism is essential
for all we do. We simply cannot deal adequately with China's
power and reach unilaterally. That said, we also cannot ask our
partners and allies to choose between us. Many of them will,
for example, want to have economic ties with China, even though
they will emphasize security ties with the United States.
That said, we also need to understand that there are limits
to what some of these partners and allies are prepared to do.
And I am happy to discuss, for example, limits that India might
face. Whatever it is we do in the region, we need to beef up
the economic dimension. To be blunt, we have sidelined
ourselves, we have limited our involvement, and our influence.
We should join the CPTPP. There is tremendous economic and
strategic arguments for doing so. And I am also prepared to
argue there could be climate reasons for doing so.
As for China, it is anything but a supporter of the status
quo. Xi Jinping's China is fundamentally different than the
China of his predecessors. It is stronger, wealthier, more
repressive, and more assertive. For all that, I do not think it
is useful to use a cold war framing for our relationship simply
because China is so different than the Soviet Union was, and,
as a result, our response will need to be different.
The priority for our foreign policy ought to be to shape
China's behavior, particularly its external behavior. We should
be imposing costs where we must and encouraging cooperation
where we can. Toward that end, I believe and despite what
happened in the last 24 hours, a private, sustained, strategic
dialog is in the interest of the United States, not as a favor
to China but as a tool of American national security.
Consistent with that, I believe that regime change is beyond
our ability to induce and, in any event, is not essential.
Democracy and human rights consideration can and should be
a part of our conversation with China, but we must accept and
approach them with the realization that, one, we have other
priorities; and, two, our ability to advance what we like to
see in the realm of democracy in human rights in China is
distinctly limited.
When it comes to economics and technology, the United
States should work with others on selective technological
restrictions with a scalpel rather than with a blunt
instrument. But here I would say decoupling from China is
neither necessary, nor is it possible.
What we should do, though, and something Congress can play
a large role in is increase our supply chain resilience. We can
do that through multiple sourcing, through stockpiling, and
through domestic and joint production arrangements with our
partners and allies of selective items.
We need to strengthen deterrence in the region that
obviously involves our military presence, cooperation with
grouping such as the Quad. More than anything else, we must
increase our ability to deter and prepare for and respond to
any Chinese coercion against Taiwan. The stakes are enormous.
Not to act would be, I believe, a strategic error of the first
order.
I do believe we should move from strategic ambiguity to
strategic clarity in terms of the means of our policy. But then
it is essential that we complement with this move to strategic
clarity with strategic capability. We cannot allow a gap to
persist between our commitments and our capabilities to act on
them.
Last, and for all of this, I would say China policy begins
not in the region, but it begins at home. We need to become
more competitive with China, and this involves everything from
increasing Federal support for research and development for
basic research, the kind of thing companies cannot be expected
to do on their own; for a wise immigration policy that attracts
the most talented in the world to come and stay here; to build
infrastructure; to improve our education. And, second of all,
we need to improve the reality, as well as the appearance of
our economic and political model.
When we fail, we essentially let China off the hook. We,
basically, lose the opportunity to show the advantages of a
robust democracy and a robust, market-oriented order;
therefore, their leaders feel no pressure from below.
So, if we want to succeed versus China, we need to become
more competitive, but again we need to pose a successful
alternative. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Haass follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you Dr. Haass.
Let me now recognize Mr. Schriver for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RANDALL G. SCHRIVER, CHAIRMAN,
PROJECT 2049 INSTITUTE, FORMER ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR INDO-PACIFIC SECURITY AFFAIRS

Mr. Schriver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Chabot, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate being included in this hearing and given the
opportunity to express some thoughts on these important
strategic matters.
The Indo-Pacific is indeed where our country's future
fortunes will largely be determined, and, of course, our most
significant strategic competitor, China, also resides in this
region. Our interest in the Indo-Pacific are enduring, but the
challenges are involving. The inheritance, I believe, from the
previous administration is a strong one. The previous
administration named the Indo-Pacific region as the priority
theater, recognized the necessity of adopting a more effective
competitive posture vis-a-vis China, provided stronger and more
visible direct support to Taiwan, nurtured and grew emerging
partnerships with countries like India and Vietnam, gave
unprecedented attention to the Pacific Islands, and began
implementing policies to sustain and promote a free and open
Indo-Pacific. All this despite the efforts of the Chinese
Communist Party to actively undermine that order.
The previous administration worked with Congress on a
number of important initiatives, on reforms to CFIUS, on the
creation of the Development Finance Corporation, and investing
in our joint force, making it more lethal and with PLA as a
pacing element in mind.
Of course, the previous administration benefited greatly
itself from the work of its predecessor administration. In many
ways, the last administration's policy of a free and open Indo-
Pacific was a natural successor to the Obama Administration's
pivot to Asia.
And so I think we will likely see continuity, which in my
opinion is a good thing. I am encouraged by many of the
statements and actions coming out of the Biden Administration
through its earlier days. Like you, Mr. Chairman, I applaud the
meeting of the Quad at the Presidential level. I welcome the
two-plus-two meetings with Japan and Korea, and Secretary
Austin's follow-on trip to India. And the continued recognition
of China as its strategic competitor and the need to partner
with like-minded countries preserve a free and open order is
the appropriate vision.
So, given this good start, rather than criticize the new
administration, I would like to forward some thoughts and
recommendations, as there are still policies under review and
positions yet to be revealed.
First, I believe the Biden Administration should continue
to make competition with China its true priority in both word
indeed, and it should be sufficiently resourced across all
domains. Our alliances with Japan, South Korea, and Australia
should be understood to be our greatest asymmetric advantage in
this competition.
Two, it should be the goal of the United States to maintain
a military edge and to achieve a high degree of confidence that
the U.S. would prevail in a range of known contingencies with
China. This will necessitate wise implementation of the Pacific
Deterrence Initiative. And it will also necessitate thoughtful
approaches to how we might deploy ground-based precision fire
capabilities that are now allowed after the withdrawal from the
INF Treaty.
Three, human rights and democracy promotion should be major
pillars in our foreign policy, including in the Indo-Pacific,
where we should also consider the geopolitical environment, and
we must be deft enough to avoid pushing allies and partners
further into China's camp. We should also be willing to raise
the cost to the CCP for China's historic human rights abuses
and not shy away from articulating a vision for a future of the
Chinese people beyond authoritarian control and abuse.
Four, the technology competition with China is very real
and critical to the overall strategic competition. We should
continue to develop tools to protect our technology, ensure the
integrity of our critical supply chains and reduce
vulnerabilities, and work with partners and allies to achieve
the same. But prevailing in a tech competition is most
dependent on out-innovating the other side. So we need our
government to support entrepreneurship and innovation. And we
should think creatively about where we are willing to bear
risk.
Five, the Quad should be made more meaningful on the
defense and security side. This can be done through more
complex exercises and more real-world cooperation. But we
should also consider a flagship initiative, perhaps, in the
area of maritime domain awareness and maritime security across
the region to make it meaningful.
Six, I very much agree with Dr. Haass, we should pursue
some type of flagship trade agreement. We need to be in the
game as economic and trade and commerce are really the
lifeblood of this region.
Seven, I believe engagement with Taiwan should be enhanced,
and U.S. support should be made more visible to further
strengthen our deterrence against the PLA invasion. And I agree
we should move away from strategic ambiguity and toward
strategic clarity and tactical ambiguity.
And, finally, related to DPRK, I believe the Biden
Administration should recreate the maximum pressure campaign
directed at the DPRK but resist providing the early and quick
diplomatic off-ramps before the sanctions come into full
effect. I think this would also mean dealing with the DPRK as a
de facto nuclear state and all that that entails with
deterrence and counter nonproliferation while still pursuing
denuclearization.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schriver follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Schriver, for your testimony.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each. And,
pursuant to House rules, all time yielded is for the purposes
of questioning our witnesses.
Because of the virtual format of this hearing, I will
recognize members by committee seniority, alternating between
Democrats and Republicans. If you miss your turn, please let
our staff know, and we will circle back to you. If you seek
recognition, you must unmute your microphone and address the
chair verbally.
I will start by his recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
You know, each of you touched on a number of consistent
themes. And maybe I will ask three questions, one to each much
of you. Dr. Haass, you talked a bit about--or each of you
talked about the importance of multilateral partnerships with
likeminded friends and allies in the region. You know, let's
talk about the Quad for a second. I would love to get your
perspective on, one, do we more formalize the Quad into a more
formal organization and your thought there? And how should we
use the Quad to then engage the ASEAN nations, you know, that
obviously also have a critical stake? So your thoughts there.
Ms. Rolland, I would ask you a question. You know,
obviously, Taiwan and Chinese aggression to Taiwan looms large
on our committee's mind, and, you know, we want to make sure
they do not make a misstep. I am glad in my conversations with
our friends in Japan or our allies in Japan, I am glad the
Japanese raised it with Secretaries Blinken and Austin. Your
thoughts--as we formulate a more strategic approach working
closely with our allies in Japan, I think it is the right
strategy. But how are the Chinese going to view that closer
alliance in their perspective and counter?
And then, Mr. Schriver, you touched on the importance of
maritime security and the like, and that is something we are
clearly going to focus on in this committee. We have seen, you
know, the Chinese Coast Guard becoming much more aggressive
both in the South China Sea and the East China Sea with some of
the smaller ASEAN nations. So, as we are thinking through that
strategy, how should we as well as the Biden Administration
adjust our U.S. Strategy in both the South China Sea and the
East China Sea.
So, Dr. Haass, let's start with you.
Dr. Haass. Well, thank you, sir. Let me just say two
things. I think the Quad is important, but to try to formalize
it, I would like to argue, you would actually risk it. India,
in particular, has a long tradition of strategic independence,
and I believe will shy away from anything that smacks of an
anti-Chinese alliance.
I think, more broadly, given the many types of challenges
we face in the region from North Korea to various China-related
challenges to others, we have flexibility to order the hallmark
of our approach to multilateralism. For different challenges,
we put together different groupings of partners and allies. And
we, again, ought to mostly eschew having anything that is so
formal.
I think, with the ASEAN countries, something I would
recommend is--and it gets at Ms. Rolland's comments--which is
as part of a response to BRI. I would think that a U.S.-
coordinated and--led infrastructure initiative could be
something that was very attractive, an infrastructure broadly
defined. And just like now we are getting more active in the
region through the Quad in things like vaccines. I think a
provision of public goods to the region and specific goods and
specific goods and services to various countries ought to be
increasingly an example or a priority for what it is we usually
do in the region.
Mr. Bera. Great. Ms. Rolland.
Ms. Rolland. Thank you, sir.
Regarding Taiwan, I think, obviously, the military
deterrence is extremely important, and strengthening the
alliance system in Asia is one part of this response the U.S.
can have.
In addition to that, I would submit that Taiwan is under
enormous pressure, also, in the influence of operations realm.
And there are things that I think the U.S. and its allies could
do to better defend and protect the cyberspace.
And, finally, I think the strengthening Taiwan's
international diplomatic space as well within international
institutions is something that the U.S. can do not just with
its allies in Asia but also in Europe and in other places. I
think these are three points that could help with deterring
further aggression of Taiwan. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Bera. And Mr. Schriver.
Mr. Schriver. Thank you. Maritime security begins with
maritime domain awareness. And in that regard, many of our
partners need to develop more capabilities. So capacity-
building is a big part of this. We need countries to be able to
see and sense, but also share. So networking is a part of this.
So targets of interest can be held and passed between countries
who share that overall vision for a free and open order.
And then response, having the platforms that can operate in
ways that challenge vessels that are operating in illegal
expansive ways. Of course, the United States can operate across
the full spectrum of seeing, sensing, sharing, and responding.
We need other countries to be able to move further on that
spectrum through capacity-building and partnerships.
Mr. Bera. Thank you. And I appreciate all of those
perspectives and look forward to working with the three of you.
Let me go ahead and raise my good friend from Ohio, the
Ranking Member Mr. Chabot, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Schriver, I will go with you first, if I
can. I am one of the co-chairs of the congressional Taiwan
Caucus. In fact, I was one of the original founders about two
decades ago. And over the past 2 years, China has been
increasingly provocative in trying to intimidate Taiwan. That
is nothing new, as I think we know, but they have been
particularly outspoken recently. An INDOPACOM Commander Admiral
Phil Davidson testified recently before the Senate Armed
Services Committee, and he stated that he thought that China
could invade Taiwan within the next 6 years. What is your
opinion with respect to both Taiwan's and the U.S. military's
current state of preparedness in such an event? And you
mentioned in your statement, strategic ambiguity, as Dr. Haass
did, and I agree with both of you that that is dangerous. And
could you elaborate on what would be a better policy with
respect to strategic ambiguity?
Mr. Schriver. Thank you. The risks of Taiwan are growing
because of Chinese investment in their capability to
operationalize a Taiwan contingency. But this situation is
dynamic. Taiwan can do things to respond. The United States can
do things to respond as well. So I certainly noted Admiral
Davidson's comments. But I do not know that we can be that
precise in the timeline because, again, it is dynamic, and it
depends upon how we respond to the growing PLA threat.
I do believe Taiwan is on the right track with its overall
defense concept, and the acquisition of some of the systems
they are now investing in. ISR capabilities, for example,
through unmanned systems. The coastal missile defenses. And I
think our planners at INDOPACOM and the Joint Staff are
thinking about a scenario in much more realistic ways and
thinking about how we might have to fight in ways that are
putting us on the right track.
Of course, the comedian Will Rogers said, ``Even if you are
on the right track, you can get run over if you are not running
fast enough.'' We do need a sense of urgency and a sense of
purpose in these matters, and so we need to work on this very
diligently.
On strategic ambiguity, the formula that I like--and I
applaud Dr. Haass' contribution to this conversation--the
formula I like is strategic clarity and tactical ambiguity. I
think with respect to strategic clarity, we should say it is in
our interest for Taiwan to continue to survive and exist in its
current form or better. As a fellow democracy and a likeminded
partner on so many regional and global issues, we should be
able to say is it not in our interest for Taiwan to be
controlled by the CCP and Beijing and brought under its
authoritarian rule.
We will always have tactical ambiguity when it comes to
response because response would be highly scenario-dependent.
And there are certainly a range of things we can do in a
contingency, and there are a range of things the PLA might do.
A blockade is different than an all-out attack.
So I think that formula of clarity on the strategic side
and ambiguity on the tactical side would strengthen our
position.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Let me just followup with you, Mr.
Schriver, at this point. Along with my colleague, Brad Sherman,
we together are co-chair of the India Caucus. And the Indians
have historically had different threat perceptions with respect
to China. But in light of the Galwan Valley Incident, those
perceptions are likely changing somewhat. With that in mind,
how should we expect India to contribute in the future to our
efforts to maintain regional stability and counter Chinese
aggression?
Mr. Schriver. Well, thank you. I am optimistic that our
partnership with India will grow. This is the work over several
administrations. The Obama Administration did a terrific job
building the defense relationship. I would like to think the
Trump administration contributed as well. But a lot of this
isn't just being driven by the strategic landscape and the
understanding that China has ambitions on Indian territory.
China is a partner of Pakistan and sees that as a counter way
to India to try to divert their attention to their other
border.
So we have been able to leverage that shared understanding
of the threat to really enhance our cooperation. I agree that
we will probably not formalize anything in a bilateral alliance
or even a multilateral grouping in a formal way. But in terms
of real cooperation, we are seeing very positive developments.
And I think, for us, if the Indians are able to secure their
territorial interest with enough capability to deter China and
to be able to operate in the Indian Ocean more effectively so
that that critical part of the Indo-Pacific remains free and
open, and smaller South Asian States are secure in their own
sovereignty and with their interest, India can be a great
partner to us in that record.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My time has expired, but let me commend you and committee
staff on both sides for really putting together a tremendous
panel of witnesses here this morning, and I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Let me recognize my colleague from California, Mr. Sherman,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Bera, congratulations on your first
hearing of the new Congress.
Of course, your first hearing of the subcommittee, I always
remind people, was the first hearing of Congress to focus on
COVID.
And I want to associate myself with your comments about the
AAPI community and understanding that, while we may criticize
the Communist Party of China, we embrace the AAPI community in
our country.
We have spent over the last several years half a billion
dollars in aid to the government of Myanmar, Burma. That was
clearly wrong given their treatment of the Rohingya. It is even
more wrong to continue that, given the recent coup. I would
hope that we would feel--get ways to turn down the temperature,
the naval temperature in the South China Sea.
Dr. Haass and Mr. Schriver both pointed out that a critical
part of this is our research on new technologies in the future.
I need to point out that, due to an accounting convenience rule
that was established over 20 years ago, all American
corporations are punished in their earnings per share, the most
important thing to those corporations, when they spend money on
research. And this pernicious accounting quirk is probably
depressing the amount of research we are doing by 10, 20, maybe
even 30 percent. Reversing it would not cost us a penny.
As we see today, witnesses that come before us tend to do
it virtually. And this means that we can have witnesses to our
full committee or our subcommittee, wherever they happen to be,
even if they had come to the United States, for convenience
reasons or because our State Department will not give them an
appropriate visa.
Dr. Haass, would it be a good idea for us to have as a
witness at a briefing or hearing the Foreign Minister of
Taiwan? What message would that send?
Dr. Haass. Well, again, what it would send is another sign
you of normalization, if you will, between the United States
and Taiwan. And I have not thought about that specific thing,
but let me just make a larger point here.
Mr. Sherman. Dr. Haass, I have got limited time, and we
have got to move on. Dr. Haass, I have got limited time, and I
have to move on.
All of us on this committee and our witnesses live in a
world where we get to think of--the geopolitics and how the
world is going to look decades from now. Our constituents live
in the real world. They are not worried about the end of the
world, but they are worried about getting to the end of the
month.
Every dollar of trade deficit we run with China probably
costs us on the order of 10,000 good jobs. So you can see how a
trade deficit of hundreds of billions of dollars affects our
people every day. Does any witness have a particular step or
two we could take to reduce our trade deficit with China? I am
looking for--I do not--Dr. Haass, do you have----
Dr. Haass. Well, again, I do not think that reducing our
trade deficit with China per se ought to be a goal of American
foreign policy. The order----
Mr. Sherman. Dr. Haass, that isn't responsive to the
question. Thank you. I will go back to my constituents and tell
them it should not matter to them----
Dr. Haass. Well, Congressman, if you are going to have to
ask these questions----
Mr. Sherman. Dr. Haass----
Mr. Haass [continuing]. I would think you would want to let
me answer them.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. This is the third time you have
interrupted me. Dr. Haass, please.
China has made an enormous investment in American debt.
And, yet, the things that cause the currency to go down are
running a trade deficit with the world and running a budget
deficit fiscally.
Mr. Schriver, from the Chinese perspective, do they think
that they need to reduce the trade deficit or take any other
steps to protect them from a precipitous decline in the value
of a dollar?
Mr. Schriver. The Chinese understand that trade deficit and
the amount of debt they hold gives them a certain amount of
leverage. Of course, it also binds them to us.
Mr. Sherman. Oh, I disagree with you. If you owe the bank
money, they have got leverage over you because they can
foreclose. If you owe the people money in international
affairs, there is no foreclosure. If my bank could not
foreclose on my house, my banker would be very nice to me. Do
you see them moving out of U.S. debt?
Mr. Schriver. Well, I do not because I think it is the best
place for them to put the surplus money that they have. They
are not investing solely to gain leverage over us; they are
they investing because they have got to do something with all
of that currency.
Mr. Sherman. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Let me go and recognize my colleague from the
great state of Pennsylvania, Mr. Perry, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Dr. Bera. Congratulations on the
hearing. Thank you very much.
Dr. Haass, I am going to come to you in a minute and let
you respond to my good friend from California, but I do have a
question in the meantime for Secretary Schriver. Let me lead up
to that for a moment. As the administration embarks on
establishing the Indo-Pacific strategy, I hope to discuss
perhaps one of the more pressing issues relating to the region,
at least in my opinion, and that is the security of Taiwan.
Very shortly, I will be introducing the Taiwan Plus Act.
The bill would raise the value threshold for arms sales to
Taiwan before the President would have to notify Congress. So I
want to give the President some flexibility to do that. It will
also cut down on the notification time the President would need
to provide Congress for defense articles that exceed the values
of the threshold from 30 to 15 days.
Other than NATO, there are five other countries, the so-
called NATO-plus group that enjoy these privileges. They are
Australia, South Korea, Japan, New Zealand, and, of course,
Israel. We do have a time limit on it. And there is history
regarding the U.S.-Jordan Defense Cooperation Act where we can
rescind that if the situation changes.
Assistant Secretary, I want to just ask you, I know I am
hitting you with this cold, but your general thoughts regarding
what I characterize as the Taiwan Plus Act and whether or not
you believe the legislation could work in tandem with already
existing efforts to ensure deterrence against China, and my
interest is in deterrence. What are your thoughts?
Mr. Schriver. Well, thank you. And as I said in my
statement, we do need a sense of urgency. And so anything that
gives greater flexibility to the U.S. administration to provide
security assistance to shorten timelines, I am all for it. So I
appreciate your initiative and would very much support the
legislation and hope it is successful.
Mr. Perry. All right. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Haass, I just feel like you have been kind of maligned
there in your treatment a little bit. I want to yield you a
little time to answer the question that was kind of posed for
you and you were not allowed to answer. If you do not mind.
Dr. Haass. Thank you, sir.
Let me say two points. On Taiwan, like, for example,
meetings with their Foreign Minister, I would think that I
would not emphasize such symbolic upgradings of ties with
Taiwan. What I would focus on is the real meat of our
relationship. What do we do to increase our ability to deter,
prepare for, or defend against Chinese coercion or aggression?
That to me ought to be what Congress focuses on, rather than
things that simply take a stick and poke China in the eye.
There are ways you can functionally do things with Taiwan, but
symbolic things that provoke ought not to be fundamentally what
we are about.
With trade, is the other question I was asked. Again,
balances do not matter. What I care about is China doing
anything to unfairly advantage their export stock, that stock
[inaudible] And our American firms having the access they
need to China's market. And the only thing that should hold us
back there is our need to be selective on what technologies we
are allowed to go there.
Mr. Perry. All right. I appreciate your response. And I
understand your opinion regarding the symbolic gesture, so to
speak. And I am not saying it is not one to a certain extent.
Look, I would like to get much tougher on China, completely. I
would like it, if you know anything about me, I mean, think we
ought to just recognize full relations with Taiwan and consider
them the true China. But, so, maybe that is a little too
provocative for some people, but I think that sooner or later
we are going to have to fish or cut bait with the Chinese
Communist Party, and all we are doing is fiddling around the
edges.
So I understand your perspective, but I do want to move
forward on kind of both avenues. And I think that this is at
least something in a bipartisan way that signals that we want
to pull China--or, correction, Taiwan a little closer.
I mean, going back to the Secretary, what do you think if--
and you know, and, look, I know this is a hard question, but
how do you think the Taiwan Plus Act would be received by the
Chinese Communist Party and, specifically, the General
Secretary? I mean, is it going to be seen as a kind of a hollow
gesture? Because they seem to blow everything out of
proportion, but they seem to have some effect at doing that and
chill every effort on our part to stand with our allies.
Mr. Schriver. Well, that is certainly one of the problems.
They object to virtually everything, which then makes it hard
to sort of disaggregate it and determine which things they
really care about and which they care less about. But I would
think, you know, for the more sophisticated analysts on the
Chinese side and the PLA side, they would see your initiative
for what it is: a way to strengthen security cooperation,
defense and military ties, and enhance Taiwan's deterrence
capabilities and posture. So I think this would be received
negatively, but certainly that is not the metric for whether or
not we do something: if China does not like it. In fact, in
some cases, it is the metric for why we should. And in this
case, I think we should very much follow the course you are
suggesting.
Mr. Perry. Yes, and I appreciate your input. And I would
agree with much of your sentiments, especially when it comes to
the Communist Chinese Party. The fact that they oppose it is a
signal to me that we are on the right track.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back any balance of the
time. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me go on and recognize my colleague from Nevada, Ms.
Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for being here today.
I would like to ask Dr. Haass more about Burma.
The situation in Burma is just continuing to escalate every
day. Even after rebukes from the global community, the violent
reaction by the military does not seem to show any signs of
stopping.
ASEAN has been kind of lukewarm at best in this whole
process, and we have seen some member countries actually begin
diplomatic relations with the new military government.
I wonder what you think is our best course of action,
working with some of our allies to try to end the conflict, and
if you think it is realistic to believe that the NLD and Aung
San Suu Kyi will come back, or is this push for democracy
bigger than just the cult of her personality.
Dr. Haass. Well, Congresswoman, the push is bigger than the
cult of any individual. The problem is the ability of those in
power now to resist the kinds of pressures you are talking
about. And they are gradually beginning to expand their ties
with the outside world, some of the ASEAN countries and China.
To me, it is a frustrating classic textbook case of the
difficulty of translating our principles into policy and into
outcomes that we want. So I think we continue to advocate for
what we want.
Look, whether it is China, Russia, Turkey, Myanmar,
whatever, I think what we are seeing in some ways is the limits
to America's ability to influence the internal trajectories of
other countries.
So, yes, we should still advocate for it, yes, we should
introduce sanctions where we think it should do some good, but
I think we also have to be realistic about the limits to our
influence.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you.
Isn't that, then, conceding to China's point that we should
stay out of the issues of Taiwan or Tibet or other human rights
abuses, Hong Kong?
Dr. Haass. No, none whatsoever. Hong Kong, China violated
its international undertakings. We ought to be clear
rhetorically. But, also, we ought to look, working with the
British and others, look for financial penalties.
With Taiwan, we have all sorts of obligations under the
Taiwan Relations Act. We do not have to accept the Chinese
position on Taiwan or on the Uyghurs or anything else.
All I am saying is we have to calibrate our response
against two things. We have got other priorities in American
foreign policy, not just these. And I think, at times, we have
to understand there are limits to how far we can succeed when
we try to pressure other countries to change their internal
workings.
This is not new. This is a recurring challenge, for
example, vis--vis the Soviet Union during the cold war. And I
think this will always be part of our foreign policy
experience.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Ms. Rolland, I would ask you to comment on our relations
with China. What are some of the things where we can come
together, even though we see them as our most serious
competitor? And certainly the talks did not start off too well
with Secretary Blinken over this past week.
Ms. Rolland. Thank you, ma'am.
I think the possibilities for cooperations are really very
small nowadays, unfortunately. Even if many people are still
hoping that we can work on global issues and problems like
pandemic and climate change, I think, fundamentally, the
interests of both countries are not converging.
It is important to continue to maintain communication
channels, obviously, but I think we should lower our
expectations about the positive outcomes that we could get from
Beijing.
Ms. Titus. Do you think strengthening our ties with Japan
and Korea will help in any way, or is that just----
Ms. Rolland. I would also broaden the scope and not just
focus on East Asia, per se. I know that this is where American
allies are strong and very much in close contact with China.
But I would also urge the U.S. to think about a broader
coalition of like-minded countries that extend beyond East
Asia. Because the challenges that China poses are not just to
the U.S., and they are not just to Taiwan. It is a broader
challenge that expands to many different domains--economic,
technological, human rights, but also in terms of norms.
So it is a very complex task, because it is so
multidimensional. And, therefore, the U.S. should--it is
impossible, I think, to focus on just one segment of it. It has
to be much broader in terms of domains and in terms of allies
and partners that you can find to reduce that challenge.
Ms. Titus. We certainly see Chinese economic influence with
the Belt and Road, building a port in Peru, for example. It is
everywhere.
Ms. Rolland. That is exactly right. That is one good
example.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
Let me recognize my colleague from Tennessee, Mr. Burchett,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a pretty simple question, because I think words are
cheap on a lot of this stuff. It does not seem to really do a
whole lot a lot of times. And it is not a partisan thing, that
is just my assumption of all this.
How should the U.S. respond to China's Belt and Road
Initiative? It seems that is one of the most egregious things
they do outside of human rights violations. They get their
claws into these little countries, and then they own them. But
what can we do to respond to it?
And that is for the whole panel.
Dr. Haass. Well, I can say one thing. And, by the way, the
Council on Foreign Relations has a task force coming out on
what should be the response next week, an entire comprehensive
study of it.
But it involves everything from working with locals, I
think, on an infrastructure fund. It means new trade
initiatives, joining CPTPP. It means looking at our foreign
aid, who gets it, how we use it. It means looking at our
immigration policy in some cases, our exchanges.
Bottom line is we have got to compete. And, Congressman, I
think, if we compete with China, I am not worried so much about
the reach of Belt and Road. I think, historically, we have got
a lot more to offer, when it comes to technology, when it comes
to investment, when it comes to trade. We have just got to get
out on the dance floor.
Mr. Burchett. Okay. And we are not doing that right now?
Dr. Haass. Not nearly enough, sir.
Mr. Burchett. Okay. Do you all have, does the Council on
Foreign Relations have any parameters on how much money we
should be putting into these countries?
Dr. Haass. I will get you the report presently. How is
that?
Mr. Burchett. All right. Will Strother in my office needs
to get that, if you can.
Dr. Haass. Yes, sir.
Mr. Burchett. Any of the others?
Ms. Rolland. If I may, sir, I have been looking at the Belt
and Road for the past 7 years myself, and I think really what
we need to understand, it is like Belt and Road is not just
about infrastructure building. It is the focus of it, and it is
where the attention went because of the trillion-dollar number
attached to it, and because of some of the examples, like in
Sri Lanka, where Chinese entities have seized assets in the
Port of Hambantota, for example.
I think, beyond infrastructure, there are also a lot of
soft infrastructures that are being built by China, including
through currency swap agreements, financial integration
agreements, agreements in higher education and technology,
industry standards.
You need to think about BRI as China's response to American
strategy, not the other way around. And, yes, we need to
provide alternatives, because the way China is doing business
through Belt and Road is antinomic to the way international
standards are promoted. There is no transparency. There is no
respect for labor rights. There is no respect for the local
populations or environmental sustainability.
So, yes, it is important to provide alternatives to these
countries, but also to go beyond the kind of narrow view that
this is about infrastructure building. This is about creating a
world where China is the predominant power in the region
through a wide array of networks and knitting together the
region around China.
So, in that way, I think this is why we need to be more
multidimensional in the way we address it.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Thank you.
Recently, Kazakhstan has pushed back against Russia and
even against Chinese Belt and Road diplomacy. What are some of
the ways the U.S. can build a strong relationship with Nur-
Sultan, the capital, and muscle out Moscow and Beijing?
Ms. Rolland. If I may, I think many of these countries want
to actually have it both ways. And having China coming in is a
good leverage for many of them to say, ``Look, we would like to
engage with other countries,'' so that they can then choose
what is best for themselves.
This is where I think it is not just true for Kazakhstan,
it is true for many of the other regions, in the South Pacific,
for example, in Southeast Asia as well, and the South Caucasus.
These countries want to develop themselves, first and
foremost. And so having different great powers that are paying
attention to them, it is a good way to leverage one against the
other and then choose what is the best option for themselves in
the end.
Mr. Burchett. Okay. Anybody else on that?
One final thing. Is there going to be a way that we can
drive a wedge between the Kazakhs and the Chinese due to the
Chinese persecution of the Uyghurs?
Mr. Schriver. I spent a lot of----
Ms. Rolland. If I may--sorry. Go ahead, Randy.
Mr. Schriver. I was going to say, I spent a lot of time in
the region talking about this very issue when I was in
government. And it will be a slog. I mean, the governments
themselves are very deferential for reasons that we can
probably figure out--the proximity to China, the importance of
the economic relationship, and so on and so forth.
But in many cases, civil society, to the extent it exists
in these places, that is where the concern is really growing.
It is interesting. They will--the governments will complain
to the U.S. about moving our embassy to Jerusalem, but not a
peep about the Uyghurs or the Rohingya, which is much more
closer to home. But if you talk to civil society in these
countries, they do have concern about how their fellow Muslims
are being treated.
Mr. Bera. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bera. You are welcome.
Let me go ahead and recognize my colleague, the vice chair
of the subcommittee, Mr. Levin from Michigan.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to pick up right on your important opening
remarks. We are having this hearing 3 days after shootings in
Atlanta that killed eight people, six of whom were Asian women.
Hate crimes against Asian Americans in major cities
skyrocketed last year by almost 150 percent, and that is just
the ones that were reported.
Obviously, this is a hearing about foreign policy, not hate
crimes in the U.S., but I do not think we can separate the two
completely.
We talk a lot here about foreign policy challenges as they
relate to China, and we should. I, myself, often talk about the
Chinese Government's human rights abuses in Tibet, Xinjiang,
and elsewhere. I witnessed the government's crackdown on
dissent in Chengdu during the Tiananmen massacre in June 1989
firsthand.
I have no illusions about the CCP.
As we hold the government accountable, though, I think we
need to keep in mind the impact our words can have on people.
Donald Trump's racist references to the coronavirus
absolutely deserve blame for the spikes in attacks. Stop AAPI
Hate's national report included examples of verbal attacks that
parroted his words specifically.
But discrimination against Asians did not start with him.
In fact, one of our country's first immigration laws was the
Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882.
I say all this not to suggest that we should not tackle
issues related to China or any Asian government. We should and,
indeed, we must. But I think we need to take care when we talk
about this to avoid language that stigmatizes people. I know I
will be challenging myself to do more to stop AAPI hate.
So let me get to my first question on this topic. I want to
ask Dr. Haass, how might we do a better job of separating our
criticisms of CCP policies from the Chinese people and their
aspirations? And how does racist language from American
political leaders hurt America's standing in the region?
Dr. Haass. Congressman, let me just say I think what you
have raised is--it is troubling and important. Our Founders set
out to form a more perfect Union, and, clearly, two and a half
centuries later, we are not quite there. And you are pointing
to some of the most recent egregious examples.
Look, I think it is important, in part, to calm down some
of the public language. I was not a big fan, shall we say, to
say the least, I thought it was just dead wrong to talk of
things about the China virus. Yes, it almost certainly began in
China. The origins are unknown.
But when it came to the United States, how we responded to
it was on us. And scapegoating, it seems to me, is never a wise
public policy. And the scale of the cost in the United States,
that was not on China. That was on us and what we failed to do.
So I would just say more broadly, though, as I said, we
should be pointing out the flaws in China. We should be putting
forward a more positive image of ourselves. But we have got to
have a private dialog with them.
This is the most important bilateral relationship of this
era. It will have enormous impact on history and on ourselves.
Mr. Levin. Exactly.
With my limited time, let me get to one more question.
I want to sort of pull together some of this dialog we have
been having about China, Belt and Road, and U.S., how to deal
with it.
I think we need to--and some of you referred to this--I
think we need to not just be reactive, but deal with the world
as it is in a bold, American, innovative, creative way that
provides leadership.
So, for example, might it be an effective thing--and we
also need, in dealing with China, to have an industrial policy
in this country.
So might it be an effective thing to deal with China for
the United States to lead a hemispheric climate change
initiative to help all the countries, especially the poorer
countries in the region, develop wind, offshore wind, solar,
energy storage on a large scale, where we could have a lot of
U.S. industrial participation, but also work with them to
develop their own capacity, in a way that is truly generous,
but truly multilateral and regional, and that is not defensive?
Because it deals with the greatest problem of our time.
So, Dr. Haass, I will start with you. And, if others, if we
have time, others can jump in.
Dr. Haass. We are in violent agreement. We ought to be
offering technology. Sustainable development ought to be
something that we take the lead in. A lot of BRI is still very
heavily oriented toward coal.
So we ought to be looking at, just like we do in the sphere
of pharmaceuticals, where can we license or make available
technologies that would help other people grow, and grow in a
sustainable way? That is exactly the sort of response we ought
to have to BRI.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chair, I think my time has expired. I do not see
you.
Mr. Bera. It does look like your time has expired, Mr.
Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much.
Mr. Bera. Let me go ahead and recognize my colleague from
Kentucky, Mr. Barr, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Barr. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
doing such a great job.
Again, compliments to these terrific witnesses for
discussing this very significant national security challenge
and the rise of China and how we respond to it.
And let me pick up where my friend and colleague from
Michigan left off. And I appreciate his comments about being
careful and making distinctions between the CCP and the people
of China. I think it was an excellent point, and I appreciate
the sentiments, the very decent sentiments of my friend.
I do want to just, though, point out that moral clarity is
required in this discussion, and sharp criticism of the CCP is
not racist. It is about policy, and it is about foreign policy.
And I think clarity is really important.
And so, Mr. Schriver, yesterday, during the meeting in
Alaska, the Chinese delegation attempted to paint the United
States as hypocritical for our directly raising a number of
international concerns regarding the CCP. And while I know the
United States has gone through a very rough year and we have
our own issues, I did want to ask a series of questions, and
they highlight the differences, the moral differences between
the United States and China.
Is the United States currently participating in an ethnic
cleansing of its own population in State-run internment camps,
yes or no?
Mr. Schriver. No.
Mr. Barr. Is the United States currently stealing
intellectual property from companies doing business here and
then giving that technology to our military, yes or no?
Mr. Schriver. Certainly not government--Federal Government
sponsored.
Mr. Barr. Is the United States jailing those speaking out
in favor of democracy and human rights, yes or no?
Mr. Schriver. No.
Mr. Barr. No. And thank you.
And I want to highlight these differences, for when we are
talking about our way forward in the Indo-Pacific we must be
clear to our partners and allies--and this must be a moral
clarity--of who China is and what behavior they engage in, and
the moral superiority, frankly, of the Western approach and the
approach of an open, free, and democratic society versus a
closed Communist police State that is the CCP.
And I do not believe that that is racist rhetoric. That is
rhetoric about the challenges that we confront, and it is about
being clear eyed.
Let me ask Dr. Haass a question about emerging
technologies, 5G, 6G, and protecting American technology.
The U.S.-China Economic Security Review Commission is a
great resource for the Congress and for policymakers. And, in
speaking to some of these just outstanding experts on our
complicated relationship with China, it has been said that we
need to be putting higher walls around fewer things, and
especially when it comes to protecting American technology in
the face of decoupling.
How can Congress partner with industry in the United States
and in allied and partner countries to protect necessary
critical technologies?
Dr. Haass. That is exactly right, by the way, Congressman.
We need higher walls around fewer things--scalpel, not
sledgehammer.
I think we ought to--the first thing is to identify what
those technologies are. What are the things most likely to be
drivers and make a difference in the commercial economy, in the
intelligence business, in the military.
And those are the ones we have to think about funding. Not
just domestically, but one of the things Congress could do also
is to facilitate joint projects with the partners and allies
that we spent so much time talking about in the course of this
hearing.
Mr. Barr. Let me quickly talk about Belt and Road, and
countering Belt and Road, followup on Mr. Burchett's line of
questioning.
To any of our witnesses, how can we more effectively use
the Development Finance Corporation and the Export-Import Bank
in countering Belt and Road?
Ms. Rolland. Sir, I think this is a very important tool
that is available to the U.S. I would not believe necessarily
that what the Americans have to offer is necessarily what the
developing world wants, because those loans and grants come
with political conditionalities that many of those countries do
not want to accept in terms of transparency, rule of law, et
cetera.
And this is where the Chinese way of doing things--the
Chinese Government's way of doing things--is a challenge,
because they do not offer any political conditionality to those
countries in terms of democratization or anything else.
So this is really the crux of the matter, because there are
two offers there that are very different, and providing an
alternative is very important.
At the same time, I think there are other ways, in addition
to money and funding, that can be helpful, like skills and some
sort of expertise in demonstrating that perhaps Chinese
projects are not going to be sustainable in the long run. I
think this is also an efficient way of coping with BRI.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Dr. Rolland.
Well, obviously, my time has expired. I hope someone on the
panel will ask about Taiwan accession to the United Nations as
a deterrent to PRC aggression. And I, obviously, cannot ask
that question now, but I invite someone else to.
And I yield back.
Mr. Bera. All right. Thanks, Mr. Barr.
Let me now recognize my colleague from Pennsylvania, Ms.
Houlahan, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I did not expect to be called. I
very much appreciate the opportunity to talk.
My first question is for Dr. Haass, which has to do with
the Council on Foreign Relations and their recent report on the
role of women in terrorism. And it said that the U.S. pretty
traditionally neglects the roles that women play in violent
extremism.
And so I was brought personally to include an amendment or
a provision in the NDAA that asks the DoD to assess this issue
and how to better incorporate women into our efforts to counter
violent extremism.
I was wondering if you have any ideas on how we might be
doing that more effectively in the Indo-Pacific specifically.
Dr. Haass. The short answer, Congresswoman, I do not--I do
not--I know we published it. I am not an expert on it. But I
will make sure we followup with you.
Ms. Houlahan. I would very much appreciate that, because I
think that this is--you know, obviously, we are 51 percent of
the population, and I think that this is something that needs
the attention of all of us when we are talking about security
around the world.
My next question is for you and for everyone.
In 2020, the Global Terrorism Index ranked Pakistan, India,
the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Myanmar as the top 25
countries impacted by terrorism. The Asia-Pacific area was one
of only three regions that experienced a rise in terrorism in
2019.
I was wondering what you attribute that rise in terrorism
to specifically in the Asia-Pacific region, and can you
describe the U.S. counterterrorism efforts that the U.S. has in
that region to try to combat that trend?
Dr. Haass, if we could maybe start with you.
Dr. Haass. I was going to defer to Mr. Randy Schriver, who
is more of an expert.
Ms. Houlahan. Of course.
Dr. Haass. I will just say in 30 seconds, and I will defer
to him, he is a real expert, is that in many of these cases the
problem is not strong governments, but weak governments, who
are either unable or unwilling to make the commitments to
police what goes on within their own territory, Pakistan being
the poster child of that.
And, for us, what we have to think about is not necessarily
fighting the problem for them, but how we can help build
capacity in these countries so they can do a better job to meet
their domestic and international obligations.
Mr. Schriver. Yes, I agree with that. I think you really
have to disaggregate and look at each country and the
challenges they face.
In the Philippines, in the case of recapturing Marawi City,
it was not only capacity building for the Air Force of
Philippines, but it was direct enabling support. We were in the
fight in a way that became enabling for the AFP to retake the
city.
In other cases, it is assistance with reintegration of
foreign fighters. So you really have to understand the
specifics of the challenges a particular country may face.
But it is certainly a focus for our Special Operations
Command, and it is a focus of Indo-Pacific Command as well, to
be able to get to that level of granularity and assist the
countries with the particular challenges they have.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
And my next question is actually for you, Mr. Schriver, as
well.
Secretary Austin has embarked on a global force posture
review while also launching a China Task Force to better align
our military resources and to better address China's evolving
military capabilities.
If you were conducting those reviews now, what realignment
would you consider of basing agreements as well as diplomatic
and economic resources?
Mr. Schriver. Well, I wish them success in these efforts.
It is very important.
I think, if you look at the potential China fight--and not
that we want to have that fight, but that, in order to deter
them, we need to be able to have a high confidence that we
would prevail--it is about dealing with their ballistic and
cruise missiles and the fact that they can hold our forward-
deployed forces at risk, so their so-called A2/AD strategy.
So I think, thinking about dispersal, dispersification,
survivability, and a protracted ability to continue to operate
in the environment are the keys.
I think the Pacific Deterrence Initiative is a great start.
It gives some new tools to be able to forward deploy
ammunition, logistic support.
But ultimately dispersal and access, that means having
partner countries willing to participate in particular ways,
give us the access when we need it. So that is really on our
diplomats, too, to help develop those relationships.
So I am encouraged with the direction that the Biden
Administration is taking. There are quite a bit of details to
be worked through, though.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
And I only have 10 more seconds left, and I will submit the
rest of my questions for the record. But, for Dr. Haass, I very
much would like to have a continuing conversation on the role
of women and security in the region.
Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ms. Houlahan.
Let me go ahead and recognize my colleague from Tennessee,
Dr. Green, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member, for your
holding of this committee today.
I want to thank our witnesses for testifying before us
today.
Dr. Haass, let me say your book, ``A World in Disarray,''
is one of my favorites, and I suggest every member of this
committee should read that book.
While I am ranking member on Western Hemisphere, the
Chinese Communist Party makes this subcommittee the most
important one in Congress. The United States and the Chinese
leadership--note I did not say Chinese people--the U.S. and the
Chinese leadership have contrasting values and incompatible
goals.
We certainly do not share the same vision for the Indo-
Pacific. The United States seeks to advance the fairness-for-
all values of the rules-based international order--in a word,
freedom. The CCP seeks political power and regional dependence
on Beijing, not unlike previous Chinese emperors--in a word,
they want authoritarian control and subservience to their
concept of world order.
According to a report by the RAND Corporation, nations in
the Indo-Pacific believe the United States has more diplomatic
and military influence than China. However, they believe China
has more economic influence, and China uses this leverage to
undermine the United States diplomatically and militarily.
Many analysts suggest the world is at risk of losing the
freedom to navigate the region. This is preventable. President
Biden should continue efforts to negotiate free trade
agreements with our allies. The President should also continue
the previous administration's efforts to counter the Belt and
Road Initiative, such as the Trilateral Partnership for
Infrastructure Investment.
Additionally, we need to encourage American companies to
move their supply chains out of China. That is why I introduced
the Bring American Companies Home Act, to offset the moving
costs for American companies that reshore their supply chains
from China.
We must not neglect the economic sphere when it comes to
our allies in the Indo-Pacific. We must show them that the
international rules-based order is a better alternative to the
Chinese Communist Party's Middle Kingdom tributary system.
China's strategy has two critical components. First, to
advance its technologies and, hence, their sharp power through
China 2025. And, second, to disrupt our allies and partnerships
through their Belt and Road Initiative.
Our strategy should, as the Atlantic Council suggests,
focus on three long-term objectives.
First, strengthen. We must strengthen relationships with
our allies and partners in the rules-based international order
by, (A) prohibiting Chinese engagement in economic sectors
vital to our national security; (B) developing new military
capabilities to maintain a favorable balance of power; and, (C)
reasserting influence on multilateral institutions and even
creating new ones when necessary.
Second, we have to defend, defend against Chinese
aggressive behavior and impose costs for those violations. That
means establishing offsetting measures, to use the Council's
word, collectively, resisting coercion by decreasing dependence
for ourselves and our allies and partners. And, in order to
defend, we must counter Chinese IP theft and their influence
operations.
Third and final, we need to engage China. Now, that may
sound odd coming from someone who most would call a China hawk,
but our ultimate goal here should be to cooperate with China
where we can--only where we can. Things like public health and
the environment are two great areas where we can work together
and communicate and advance our relationship so that we can
incorporate China into the rules-based order.
Dr. Haass, do you mind elaborating on the differences
between Xi Jinping and his predecessors and how that may impact
or provide enlightenment, so to speak, to our strategy?
Dr. Haass. Yes, sir.
The predecessors to Xi Jinping, most importantly Deng
Xiaoping, were much more cautious in their external behavior
and their foreign policy, basically said China needs a stable
periphery in order to do the social, political, and economic
development at home. And it is not surprising that the best
period of U.S.-Chinese relations in the modern era was during
that period.
What we now have with Xi Jinping is someone who is very
different, basically is acting as if China's time has arrived,
sees the United States as weak and divided, and essentially is
pressing on every front.
We see it with India. We see it in the South China Sea. We
see it with Taiwan. We see it with Japan. We see China not
meeting its international obligations on trade. We see it not
meeting its international obligations on Hong Kong. We see what
they are doing vis--vis the Uyghurs.
This is a very different China that basically is no longer,
to use the Chinese expression, hiding and biding its time. But
China is basically saying: We are arrived, and we are going to
act differently now.
Mr. Green. Would you say they are in the phase three of an
insurgency, so to speak, a direct confrontation phase?
Dr. Haass. No, but I think they are acting in ways, say,
vis--vis Taiwan, that we have to be extraordinarily mindful of.
And what we have to do is basically say: How do we now push
back selectively to make sure that, whatever their goals are,
where you begin your intervention, whatever their goals are,
they decide they cannot pursue them successfully? That is what
we need to get to.
Mr. Green. Agreed. Thank you.
My time has expired. I appreciate you all being here today.
Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me go ahead and recognize my colleague from North
Carolina, Ms. Manning, and welcome to the subcommittee.
Ms. Manning. Thank you very much, and thank you, Mr. Chair,
for putting together this excellent panel.
Dr. Haass, I was particularly interested in your statement
that the U.S. needs to focus on certain areas where we need to
enhance our own ability to be competitive. You mentioned, for
example, that we need to reform our immigration policies to
attract the best and the brightest.
We are currently considering immigration reform that would
increase the number of H-1B visa holders that are exempt from
caps, people with Ph.D.s in the STEM fields.
Is this the kind of reform you believe we need? Would we be
better off if we extended that exemption to people with
master's degrees or even bachelor's degrees in the STEM areas?
Dr. Haass. Directionally, it is 100 percent right. If you
look at the Fortune 200, 500, a shocking percentage of the
people are either immigrants or the first generation after
immigrants. This is real talent.
China does not have an immigration policy of people coming
in. This is one of our structural advantages, if we will only
allow it to be.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
You also referenced the importance of ensuring that we have
supply chain resilience, diversification of sources, and the
stockpiling of domestic production.
We saw during this pandemic that we had a dramatic shortage
of PPEs when our supplies from China were cutoff. In my own
district, we had manufacturing companies that were told by the
prior administration to ramp up and produce those PPEs, and
then they were left with warehouses full of PPEs when they were
undercut by lower-cost PPEs from China when the supply chains
opened back up.
Do we need to maintain domestic supplies in our own country
in anticipation of future disruptions?
Dr. Haass. Well, you raise a good question, and there is a
risk we will be asking companies to take if we go ahead with
stockpiling.
I would say, in certain areas, that is a price worth
paying. We would say, as part of long-term public security, we
are going to make certain investments in certain areas.
What we will probably want to do is, given the expiration
dates of certain things, is come up also with a way of getting
those things out of stockpiles while they are still valid.
And, again, it is something that does not just have to be
domestic. We could use the USMCA with Canada and Mexico. We
could do certain things with some of the countries that fall
under the purview of this committee.
They are much more likely to work with us if there is also
an upside for them in the process.
Ms. Manning. I also have a high-tech manufacturer of
microchips in my district who has said that we will see the
loss of our microchip industry to China if we do not protect
domestic supply chains in that area as well.
What are your thoughts on ensuring the domestic microchip
industry?
Dr. Haass. Well, again, I would defer to the other two to
some extent.
But I would say, look, so much of it is in Taiwan. One, it
is a powerful argument for why Taiwan is so important, that its
security is so important.
But, also, I think this is a legitimate subject for debate.
What do we in the United States need going forward in order to
not eliminate, but reduce our vulnerability? And there is,
again, diversification of foreign sources, stockpiling, and
domestic or joint production arrangements. And the areas of
chips is one of the things absolutely we ought to be looking
at.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
I am going to ask this last question and open it to anyone,
any of our wonderful presenters.
Throughout history, when a rising power has challenged the
presiding world power, more often than not the result been war,
and in many cases the wars have devastated all involved.
How do we avoid what we have seen so often in history as we
see increasing clashes between China, in its quest for
dominance, and the U.S.?
Dr. Haass. That is in many ways the great strategic
question of our time.
I would simply say the Chinese are rational. What we
constantly want to be is sufficiently strong ourselves and
organize with our partners and allies so any Chinese leader who
is tempted to do certain aggressive things that could lead to
conflict will think twice, because they will realize the game
is not worth the candle. And that is why exactly what we are
talking about here today is so essential.
And, in the immediate future, I would think making sure
that China is not tempted to move against Taiwan coercively
ought to be a priority for American foreign policy, not just
what we declare, but what we do. We have got to close the gap
between our declaratory policy and our ability to implement it.
Ms. Manning. Mr. Schriver, would you like to add anything
to that?
Mr. Schriver. Sure. Thucydides was a very smart person and
put forward some very compelling arguments, but that was
largely a world before nuclear weapons and largely a world
before we built our system of alliances and partnerships.
So this isn't really about the U.S. and China per se. It is
about China's revisionist aspirations and growing power against
a coalition of like-minded partners who want to preserve the
free and open order.
So I think the combination of deterrence through the
strategic weapons we have and the coalition that we have that
will ultimately push back against China will be our best
protection against a conflict that nobody wants.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
Ms. Rolland, I am sorry I did not get to you, but my time
has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me go ahead and recognize my colleague from California
and welcome her to the subcommittee.
Mrs. Kim, you are recognized for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman Bera and
Ranking Member Chabot. I appreciate your leadership. It is a
pleasure to join you today for the first hearing of the Asia
Subcommittee and welcome this distinguished panel of witnesses.
And I am really excited to be able to serve as a vice
ranking member of this subcommittee, and I look forward to
working with all of you in this position moving forward.
I would like to start my remarks today by recognizing the
horrific events that have taken place in Myanmar over the past
month. The actions taken by the Tatmadaw in overthrowing the
democratically elected government and cracking down on peaceful
protesters and killing dozens, if not hundreds, of its own
people in the streets is deplorable, it is horrific, and it is
wrong.
The leaders of Myanmar made a commitment to uphold
democratic principles over a decade ago, and the United States
will not tolerate the oppression and killing of the freedom-
loving people of Myanmar.
And I call on our administration to immediately work with
our partners in Asia to form a united multilateral front to
pressure the Tatmadaw to step aside and accept the results of
this election from last year.
So, for my first question, I would like to turn to the
Philippines and the hardships facing land owners and farmers
there as the government allows or participates in stealing land
from its own citizens for large corporations or government use.
Many of my own constituents with ties to the Philippines
have watched as their family lost their lands and livelihoods
against their will at the hands of the government and big
businesses.
So I would like to pose this question to Mr. Schriver.
Given your experience dealing with the Philippines, could
you explain why this issue continues to persist and what the
United States is doing to resolve it?
Mr. Schriver. Well, our alliance has always been somewhat
hindered by the fact that the Filipino people have not had the
good governance and quality governments that they deserve.
There is certainly a history of corruption. There is certainly
a history of elitism that results in unfavorable government
policies to the people. There is now the issue of extrajudicial
killings related to the drug war.
So we have an important relationship with the Philippines.
It is an important ally. And I do not think we should curb our
engagement, particularly on the military and security side,
because there are important things happening in that region.
But certainly, as a friend of the Philippines, and the
history that we have there and what we have done side by side,
we have to be encouraging the Philippines for a more
representative government and a more enlightened approach to
these various issues. Otherwise, our partner will be diminished
and left behind.
Mrs. Kim of California. Well, thank you.
Next, I would like to turn your attention to Cambodia.
As you know, Prime Minister Hun Sen has ruled Cambodia for
decades as the sole source of centralized power.
In 2017, he further cemented that power by outlawing
opposition parties from participating in the Nation's
Parliament and ensuring one-party rule.
Kem Sokha, who I had the pleasure of meeting, the leader
of--he is the opposition--the Cambodia National Ruling Party
leader. He was then arrested on attempts of seeking to
overthrow the government and charged further with conspiracy
with foreign powers last year as he awaits a trial for treason.
So, Mr. Schriver, could you comment on the current safety
of Mr. Sokha and what options are available to Congress and the
administration to have him released from the prison and
democratic representation reinstated in Cambodia?
Mr. Schriver. Well, thank you for the question.
Kem Sokha is an important figure in Cambodia, and certainly
his efforts to promote a democratic future by participating in
the elections, despite the flaws in the electoral system and
the fact that Hun Sen was never going to cede power no matter
the outcomes. So it is important that he be given the
opportunity not only for his freedom, but to continue to be
active in the political space.
I do check in on his condition every once in a while. You
probably know he has family members in Washington, DC, who are
active on Capitol Hill and with the administration. His
conditions have gone from house arrest to prison and
different--a variety of ways of holding him.
And I think the important thing is we continue to pressure
the government in Phnom Penh to not only release him, but allow
him to participate in the politics of Cambodia, because it is
so important for the future of the people there.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
I do have further questions, but I would like to submit
them for the record if I may. And my time is up, so I yield
back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
I think all the members have had a chance to ask questions,
but I am going to take the chair's prerogative, just because we
have this wealth of expertise in front of us, and certainly we
will extend the same to the ranking member in his closing
remarks, to just ask a couple followup questions on issues that
we have touched on, but also that we may further want to
explore.
And, Dr. Haass, I will also reach out to the Council.
One area that the ranking member and I talked about was,
obviously, our failure to get the Trans-Pacific Partnership
across the finish line and the strategic loss of not having
that rules-based agreement in place.
So we will reach out to the Council and others to think
about understanding our own domestic politics and challenges,
how we might consider pushing, whether it is joining CPTPP or
some other multilateral agreement. But certainly not having a
multilateral agreement in place leaves us vulnerable to Chinese
influence.
The two questions that I have, if the witnesses are willing
to indulge, we have alluded to the multilateral coalition and
over the past 12 months with the pandemic have had multiple
conversations with our European allies and parliamentarians in
how we approach the region.
And if any of the witnesses could comment on how we marry
an Indo-Pacific strategy with our transatlantic strategy. I
think that is something we did not do well in the post-World
War II environment, but certainly in this new world, talking to
our allies in Germany and elsewhere, I think it is in our
interest to create that partnership.
And then a second piece that perhaps Ms. Rolland, but
certainly would open up to any of the panelists, my last travel
to the region prepandemic included visiting both Sri Lanka and
Nepal. And part of the intent in those two countries was we had
MCC compacts that were approved that were there to help build
the infrastructure, to help the hydroelectric projects in Nepal
that would be to the benefit of this young democracy.
They both got enmeshed in domestic politics, political
issues there, and I think it is my understanding that neither
one got across the finish line.
And, as we think about aid and development, countering Belt
and Road, it does occur to me that we also--my intuition was
that, domestically, there probably was Chinese influence in
turning the public against some of these what, again, I thought
were incredibly good projects that would help both Sri Lanka
and Nepal. So how we might think about the influence battle as
well and how we counter that.
So I will turn it over maybe to Dr. Haass, and then Ms.
Rolland, and then Mr. Schriver.
Dr. Haass. Thank you, sir.
By the way, 10 seconds on CPTPP. One way to expand, I
think, domestic support in this country for entry could be if
we introduced a serious climate component, so it did not just
make economic and strategic sense, but, for example, if you try
to modify the agreement so certain types of goods either had
advantages or disadvantages in trying to enter based upon their
use, how much carbon and so forth they were associated with,
that might be something to change the debate in this country.
Just saying.
In terms of transatlantic, it is important. We saw with the
separate EU-China investment agreement, if we do not coordinate
with the Europeans, we could pay a price for it. We could lose
leverage vis--vis China. So your meetings with parliamentarians
are actually a really good idea.
We should talk about things like coordinating sanctions and
responses to Taiwan contingencies. There is more we could and
should be doing on Hong Kong and on other human rights
violations, like the Uyghurs, agreement on technology transfer
restrictions, and on something like 5G.
One of the lessons we should have learned, as Will Rogers
might have said if you had invited him here today, you cannot
beat something with nothing. So the United States and Europe
are natural technology partners. Maybe it is in 6G or other
things. And that ought to be part of the conversation I would
think you and your colleagues would have.
Mr. Bera. Great.
Ms. Rolland.
Ms. Rolland. Thank you, sir.
On the European side, being a European myself, I have to
say something about that. I think the time is really right.
And, again, I think European powers are more and more willing
to look into the Indo-Pacific region.
Many of them have their own Indo-Pacific strategy set in
place. That includes not just the military and security
component, but also other dimensions that I think align very
well with the American interests.
Of course, Europeans being Europeans, they will always want
to retain a degree of strategic autonomy and not necessarily be
always aligned with Washington, DC. However, I think
convergence of interests, the convergence of values, are really
important and are going to lead to greater cooperation in all
of these domains confronting the China challenge.
Regarding your experience with Nepal and Sri Lanka, I thank
you for sharing this experience. And I think this is a great
example of where actually BRI is, again, more of a grand
strategy that looks into various domains. Influence operation
is an extremely important component of them, including the
cooperation of local elites, which in the long-term influenced
political decisions.
And so, if the U.S. wants to provide alternatives to some
of these projects, it cannot just be in terms of contracts and
sustainable projects that we can offer, that the U.S. can
offer, but also working more broadly with different
constituencies in those countries, improving good governance,
making sure that, again, the governments of countries where
China wants to expand its influence are very much aware of the
consequences it might have for their national interests in the
long-term as well.
So it is a comprehensive objective, I believe.
Mr. Bera. Great.
Mr. Schriver.
Mr. Schriver. Well, I endorse those answers.
I would just add on the EU point, since I came from the
Defense Department, when it comes to actual hard power, there
is really--some countries are more important than others.
And I think we need to look at enhancing our cooperation
with the French, for example, who have forward-deployed forces
in the Pacific region given their Pacific holdings. They have
frigates in New Caledonia and personnel stationed there.
So working with them, working with the Brits on the
sanctions enforcement directed at North Korea. People who can
bring hard power are part of this equation as well, but it is a
little bit more limited than you will find in the other areas
of cooperation.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And, again, I want to thank the witnesses.
Let me offer the same courtesy to the ranking member, if
there are any closing questions or clarifications and any
closing comments that you would like to make.
Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This panel did such a great job in their presentations and
answering the questions that I am not going to toss them any
more questions.
Also, we have our last vote of the day, the week, and this
session coming up here any minute now, so I do not want to drag
it out.
But, really, all three were excellent. So I, again, commend
you, Mr. Chairman, and staffs on both sides for working this
out with these witnesses.
I hope that we can see them on future panels, which I am
quite sure we probably will, because they really have been
great.
So thank you very much. I hope you all have a great
weekend. And you are always welcome to come to Cincinnati, the
greatest city in the United States, at any time. I just happen
to represent it.
So, anyway, you all take care.
Back to you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bera. Great.
I want to thank the ranking member, Mr. Chabot.
I want to thank our witnesses who participated in this very
important virtual hearing.
Without objection, all members will have 5 days to submit
statements, extraneous materials, and questions for the record
subject to the length limitation in the rules.
And, again, look forward to working with each of the
witnesses, as well as the members of the subcommittee, to
address these major issues.
And, with that, a virtual bang of the gavel, and the
subcommittee is adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTAIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
