- U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN THE WESTERN BALKANS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN THE WESTERN BALKANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE, ENERGY, THE ENVIRONMENT AND CYBER

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

October 28, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-87

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
DFCs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-903PDF          WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California               SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts    DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California                 LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                  ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California                MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Europe, Energy,the Environment and Cyber

WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts, Chairman

SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             BRIAN FITZPATRICK,
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia             Pennsylvania,Ranking Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  ANN WAGNER, Missouri
THEODORE DEUTCH, Florida                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois,
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island            BRIAN MAST, Florida
DINA TITUS, Nevada                       DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota                 AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
JIM COSTA, California                    NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas                  PETER MEIJER, Michigan
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Leah Nodvin, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Escobar, Gabriel. Assistant Deputy Secretary, Department of State     7

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    24
Hearing Minutes..................................................    25
Hearing Attendance...............................................    26

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    27

U.S. ENGAGEMENT IN THE WESTERN BALKANS

Thursday, October 28, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Europe, Energy, the
Environment and Cyber,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:31 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. William R. Keating (chairman of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Keating. The House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee will
come to order without objection. The Chair is authorized to
declare a recess of the Committee at any point, and all members
will have 5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitation in
the rules. To insert something into the record, please have
your staff email the previously mentioned address or contact
full committee staff.
Please keep your video function on at all times, even when
you're not recognized by the Chair. Members are responsible for
muting and unmuting themselves, and please remember to mute
yourself after you finish speaking. Consistent with House
Resolution 965 and the accompanied regulations, staff will only
mute members and witnesses, as appropriate, when they're not
under recognition to eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum. And before I begin my opening
statement, I will just thank everyone, first thank our witness,
Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, for arranging the change in
your schedule. I want to thank the members that are present for
their ability to change their schedule around to accommodate
this. It's an unusual day here at Capitol Hill. It's a day that
the President has addressed the Democratic Caucus on
legislation. It's a day that we all are scrambling and changing
our schedules, and it's a day, I think, that is appropriate for
today's subject matter because we're talking about democracy,
often messy, often unscripted, often a case where, at least in
our country, there's no rule by decree. A president just cannot
come down and tell the country and all the people what's going
to be done. He has to come to a representative House in this
democracy to do that, and each of us have the ability to
represent our districts in dealing with those decisions. So I
think it's an appropriate day for this because our very
democracy is something that the stakes are very high in in the
Western Balkans.
So I'll now begin my opening remarks. The Western Balkans
are a complex, dynamic, geostrategic region in Europe. As a
result of the changing boundaries from historic empires, the
Western Balkans remains incredibly multiethnic, as well as
religiously, geographically, linguistically, and culturally
diverse. This region has also experienced a horrific amount of
violence in its modern history.
At the same time, the Western Balkans have worked hard to
establish democracy and foster the political process necessary
to speed integration into the European Union. Due to these
efforts, three of the Western Balkan nations, Albania,
Montenegro, and North Macedonia, have successfully joined NATO.
U.S. leadership and engagement, often in coordination with the
efforts undertaken by the European Union and NATO, has been
essential to the region's peace and stability. The U.S. has
facilitated in support of the Western Balkans moving down a
pro-Western path based on market liberalization, promotion of
human rights, anti-corruption, and freedom of speech. The U.S.
and this Congress continues to remain staunch advocates of
progress through our mediation and democratic development
initiatives in the region.
So today we're holding this hearing, a day in the midst of
months of profound change and uncertainty in the Western
Balkans. It's now more clear than ever that there's still more
work to be done. To that end, I echo Secretary of State Blinken
and EU High Representative Borrell's recent joint statement, a
statement supporting the accension of Western Balkan countries
to the European Union and consider this issue a top priority of
the region.
North Macedonia made significant concessions during the
Prespa Agreement; and Albania, whose accension is paired with
North Macedonia, says some of the highest pro-EU sentiment
amongst its population in the entire region. Delayed accension
to the process for these countries and the rest of the region
has allowed malign actors to increase their influence and sow
discord and distrust amongst Western Balkan populations.
I call on the EU to expedite the accession process for
countries who meet the appropriate conditions and to work with
Bulgaria to ensure North Macedonia and Albania's accension
talks can begin by the end of the year.
At the same time, Freedom House, in 2021, ranked all six
Western Balkan countries as partly free, citing flawed
electrical processes, a narrowing space for press freedoms, as
well as a lack of consistent rule of law throughout the region.
Further, non-normalization relations between nations continue
to spur instability throughout the entire region. To meet these
challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I believe further reform,
the accession of destabilizing rhetoric, the productive dialog
between populations and ethnic groups to ultimately maintain
peace, foster reconciliation and respect for democratic norms
are all imperative. Separatist rhetoric and illegal legislation
in the Republika Srpska only further destabilizes a country
with deep societal divisions.
In addition, while a temporary EU-mediated deal was struck
to ease a recent escalation in tensions between Kosovo and
Serbia, the lack of normalized relations between the two
countries continue to hinder the stability of the entire
region. A permanent solution through the EU-led dialog must be
achieved, and I look forward to hearing from our witness about
how the U.S. is helping to facilitate such an agreement.
Yet, despite those ongoing conflicts and delayed
negotiation processes, there are promising issues in the
region. I continue to support interregional economic
cooperation and believe that expanded trade throughout the
Western Balkans will only support peace and democratic
development.
Furthermore, renewed U.S.-European cooperation needs
greater cooperation from the NATO point. Finally, the use of
sanctions by this Administration, including recent changes to
the Western Balkans sanction program in June
21 is a
necessary move to stifle the influence of corrupt local actors
who seek personal gain over democratic processes and to those
who seek to destabilize regional peace agreements. I call upon
the Administration to consider the use of sanctions, when
appropriate.
To elaborate on the U.S. policy and engagement in Western
Balkans, we have invited Deputy Assistant Secretary Gabriel
Escobar from the Department of State to provide testimony
before the subcommittee today. This is the first House Foreign
Affairs Committee hearing on the Western Balkans in this
congress, and Mr. Escobar's testimony is essential to better
understand the Biden Administration's approach to the region as
a whole.
Ultimately, the Western Balkans remain a region with
significant potential. Despite changing American leadership,
Congress's commitment to finding long-term solutions in the
region and maintaining our engagements and partnerships from
Skopje to Podgorica, from Pristina to Sarajevo. We must
continue to be engaged, and this region must remain strong. The
coming weeks and months will be telling, and I look forward to
hearing from Mr. Escobar as to how we, in Congress, can be
helpful in achieving those long-term solutions that have, up
until now, remained too elusive.
I now turn to Ranking Member Mr. Fitzpatrick for his
opening remarks.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Morning. Thank you, Chairman Keating and
thank you to our guest, Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, for
being here with us today to discuss U.S. engagement in the
Western Balkans.
Over the last three decades, the United States has actively
engaged in promoting peace, democracy, and the rule of law
across the region. The U.S. and NATO air campaigns altered the
violence against the Kosovo-Albanian population by Milosevic's
regime, and NATO has since maintained security presence in the
country to ease tensions. The U.S. also led a NATO mission to
help end the Bosnian War and brokered the Dayton Peace
Agreement that stands to this day.
Building on this legacy, the U.S. commitment to supporting
regional cooperation, peace processes, resistance to
polarization, bring corruption to light, and building trust in
democratic institutions in the Western Balkans must remain
steadfast. I am particularly concerned about governance
challenges in Bosnia that have the potential to undermine the
Dayton Agreement, and I am glad to see this Administration
directs focus on this issue, including efforts from our witness
today and Matt Palmer, who has been appointed special envoy for
election reforms in Bosnia.
I look forward to hearing about this Administration's plans
on how its proposed electoral reforms will bring Bosnia's
political system in line with European court rulings and the
requirements of European integration. The promise of EU
membership remains the key to unlocking long-sought reforms
across the region.
Opening accession talks with North Macedonia and Albania
will provide much needed hope to people in the region and
demonstrate that the West is fully supportive of their Euro-
Atlantic trajectory, and failure to push forward with Euro-
Atlantic integration will leave the Western Balkans more
vulnerable to the autocrats in Moscow and Beijing.
Russia's campaign against the Western Balkans follows a
familiar playbook of sowing chaos, exploiting corruption and
patronage networks, and weaponizing energy. Montenegro provides
a stark example. In 2016, Russia supported two attempts against
pro-Western government for seeking to join the NATO alliance.
Likewise, China has exploited the vacuum left in the Western
Balkans by the stalled progress toward Euro-Atlantic
integration through massive investments in infrastructure. The
Belt and Road Initiative is China's Trojan Horse, and the
Western Balkans has burdened nations with unimaginable debt and
deep in the corruption and patronage networks that have plagued
the region for years.
It is my hope today that Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar
can discuss how the United States can continue to support
peace, stability, democracy, and the rule of law in the Western
Balkans. Moreover, I hope we can learn more about how the U.S.
and Europe are working to build the region's resilience against
Russian and PRC malign influence. We must remain vigilant in
our efforts to deter authoritarian nations from destabilizing
the region's Euro-Atlantic integration, and it is in the
interest of both the United States and Europe and what the
people of the Balkans really want.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Keating. I thank the ranking member for his comments.
And I'll now introduce our witness. I want to thank you for
being here today, Deputy Assistant Escobar. Mr. Gabriel Escobar
is the Deputy Assistant Secretary responsible for the Western
Balkans at the U.S. Department of State. He also oversees the
Office of Press and Public Diplomacy. Mr. Escobar has held a
variety of leadership positions at the State Department,
including Deputy Chief of Mission at the U.S. Embassy-Belgrade
and Economic Minister Counselor at the U.S. Embassy-Baghdad. He
is also the brother of one of our colleagues, Representative
Escobar, and we welcome you here today. I now will recognize
you for 5 minutes, giving you great flexibility if you'd like
to exceed that without objection, to read your prepared
statement and to be made part of the record. Mr. Escobar,
you're now recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GABRIEL ESCOBAR, ASSISTANT DEPUTY SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Escobar. Chairman Keating, Ranking Member Fitzpatrick,
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to discuss U.S. engagement in the Western Balkans.
For over three decades, the region has been the focus of
sustained U.S. attention and investment, and the Biden
Administration shares this commitment to a region that is
historically, politically, culturally, and geographically part
of Europe. Our goal for all six countries of the region is to
support their successful integration into European institutions
and eventual accession to the EU. We are working with our EU
partners to reinforce the message that accession remains a real
possibility within a realistic timeframe, an incentive critical
to the aspirants' continued political will to implement
difficult reforms and bolster resistance to harmful Russian and
Chinese influence and activities on Europe's doorstep.
The strongest message the EU could give now is to schedule
the start of North Macedonia and Albania's EU accession
negotiations before the end of this calendar year. Both
countries did the difficult work required. Delays since the
European Council's March 2020 decision to begin that process
are sowing doubt throughout the region and risk dashing the
hopes of a new generation that wants a European future. That is
why Secretary Blinken and EU High Representative Josep Borrell
on October 14 released a public statement jointly reinforcing
that EU accession is the only way forward for the region.
Peace, stability, and prosperity through EU integration is
our shared goal, and we are working together toward that
objective, including by supporting the EU-facilitated Dialogue
as the best path to normalizing relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. And that is why I traveled to Brussels last month to
back EU Special Representative Miroslav Lajcak in efforts to
press both sides to de-escalate tensions over vehicle
registration and to secure agreement on a solution that created
space for them to focus on more complicated issues. Together we
made clear that the Dialogue is the forum in which both sides,
as equals, must work to resolve their differences and normalize
relations, ideally through mutual recognition.
A vibrant political process yielded significant change in
Montenegro in August 2020. We have made clear that our
partnership with Montenegro is a partnership with the country,
its people, and their democratic institutions, rather than any
one political party. We are prepared to work with all
Montenegrin partners that share the vision of a sovereign,
inclusive, democratic country that is advancing necessary
reforms as an EU aspirant while upholding its solemn pledges as
a stalwart NATO Ally. This can be furthered through inclusive
dialog, including with civil society, focused on goals that
unite Montenegrins: peace, democratic progress, economic
development, rather than on identity politics and nationalist
rhetoric that divides them.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the U.S. remains critical to
preserving the country's sovereignty, territorial integrity,
and the gains of the last 26 years under the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We are now working with the EU and others to press
for reforms to secure Bosnia's place in the Euro-Atlantic
community. Bosnia's clear path from Dayton to Brussels leads
through continued reform, including step-by-step electoral,
rule of law, and economic reforms that will benefit all its
citizens. We and the EU are pressing for these changes; the
Office of the High Representative and EUFOR's Operation ALTHEA
are indispensable in these efforts. Recent threats to State-
level institutions by Milorad Dodik are dangerous and threaten
to undermine Dayton and the European choice and perspective of
all Bosnian and Herzegovina citizens. We are vigorously
engaging with local actors and our partners to push back on any
moves that threaten a return to Bosnia's troubled past, rather
than securing its brighter future.
Thanks to generous bipartisan support from Congress, U.S.
assistance reflects our standing commitment to the Western
Balkans. The United States has provided over $2.4 billion in
assistance to the region in the past decade. In Fiscal Year
alone, over $145 million is helping advance the region on its
European path and building resilience to negative external
influences. Moscow and Beijing are actively opposed to the
region's Western integration, deploying disinformation and
exploiting vulnerabilities to divert the countries of the
Western Balkans from their democratically chosen paths while
gaining an economic and political foothold in Europe. Russia
weaponizes its energy supply to coerce politicians, foster
corruption, and stunt growth potential. The People's Republic
of China is also working to expand its influence in critical
infrastructure and through economic coercion. We cannot let
them succeed.
The Western Balkans is economically dynamic and full of
promise, with its eyes firmly set on joining Europe's single
market. Working together, these countries can resolve political
challenges and accelerate changes to raise living standards,
stem brain drain, and secure the foundation for long-term
prosperity. We are committed to helping them secure this
integration and to prioritize sustainable investments in
quality infrastructure and clean energy, transitioning away
from coal and driving regional energy connections. Initiatives
like the Common Regional Market, Open Balkans initiatives, and
Green Agenda show regional economic integration and cooperation
are possible, beneficial, and indispensable for sustained
growth.
In closing, allow me to underscore that the Biden
Administration has redoubled the U.S. commitment to work with
Allies and partners to help the Western Balkans advance the
European paths. I look forward to working with Congress and
welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Escobar follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Keating. Thank you for your testimony. I'll now
recognize members for 5 minutes each, pursuant to House rules.
All time yielded is for the purposes of questioning our
witness. Because of the virtual format of this hearing, I'll
recognize members by Committee seniority, alternating between
Democratic and Republican members. If you miss your turn,
please let our staff know and we will circle back to you. If
you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone and
address the Chair verbally.
I will now start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes. I
just want to begin with a very pointed question that I think is
practical and essentially, at least as a starting point,
because accession of the Western Balkans countries to the
European Union is essential. It's essential for U.S. foreign
policy and for European Union policy at large. This was, as you
mentioned, reaffirmed by the recent joint statement by
Secretary Blinken and EU High Representative Borrell. Yet, at a
recent EU summit on the Western Balkans, the EU was unable to
set a concrete time line for the accession of any Western
Balkans countries, and there continues to be sticking points on
the part of both of the expiring members in the European Union
itself.
Now, despite significant concessions by North Macedonia in
their prior dispute with Greece that was resolved with the
Prespa Agreement, the initiative of North Macedonia's accension
talks remains stalled, and it remains stalled over a language
dispute with Bulgaria. As a result of Albania's accession talks
being tied to this, neither of the two countries can proceed
forward. Albania not only has strong public support for EU
membership but also has been a staunch NATO ally.
So my question is what steps specifically can the Biden
Administration take and how can they work with the Bulgarians
after their upcoming election in November to facilitate and end
this agreement, and can Congress at all be helpful in this
effort?
Mr. Escobar. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question. The answer is that we're working with all parties.
We're working with the governments of North Macedonia and the
governments of Bulgaria to find a positive win-win solution.
We're also working with our EU partners who agree with us that
this dispute has to be resolved in a relatively short period of
time.
We are all in agreement that it is in our strategic
interest, in America's strategic interest and Europe's
strategic interest, to bring both North Macedonia and Albania
into the European Union, and we hope to have this resolved in
time for both Albania and North Macedonia to begin negotiations
this calendar year.
Mr. Keating. You mentioned, too, in your testimony about,
quote-unquote, the sowing of doubt in the region. So what would
be the effects of continued delay in this area? What are you
most concerned with?
Mr. Escobar. I'm most concerned about the next generation
of the Western Balkans being disillusioned that their country
is well into the European Union within a reasonable time
period. I'm also concerned that this inability to resolve it
could open the door for malign external influences, like China
and Russia.
Mr. Keating. You mentioned China, and I suspect we'll have
questions that will be asked in more detail coming forward. But
we also look to Russia in this region, but China is indeed very
active. Can you describe some of their activities and the
concerns the Administration has about China's activities in the
region?
Mr. Escobar. Our main concern with China initially is their
economic influence in the region. So China has been one of the
leaders in the region advancing non-transparent energy deals,
non-transparent infrastructure deals, and there's a level of
political influence that comes with that and eventually
political coercion. So it's our hope that we can empower our
private sector partners to be able to counter China effectively
by working with governments, including with our EU partners, to
create the opportunities for transparency and a fair playing
field for all of our companies. And if we have a fair playing
field, we're confident that we can compete, we can out-compete
China in the region.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you. These will be issues that I
think we'll have members that are going to pursue with their
questioning. If not, they'll also get a second chance in the
second round through writing.
With that, I'm going to yield to Representative Wagner of
Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Chairman Keating, for organizing
this important hearing, and I want to thank Deputy Assistant
Secretary Escobar for his expertise and certainly for his
service.
Among the most urgent priorities the United States must
pursue in Europe is the promotion of peace, prosperity, and
Western integration in the Balkans. Today, deepening divisions
in Bosnia, fueled by the reckless succession threats of Bosnian
Serb politicians, like Milorad Dodik, pose perhaps the greatest
threat to Balkan stability. It worries me tremendously to see
Bosnian Serb nationalists, in coordination with the ruthless
Putin regime, working to roll back the progress Bosnia has made
in the last several years.
I represent the largest Bosnian community outside of
Bosnia, and many of my constituents fled to St. Louis during
1992--1995 Bosnian War in which more than 100,000 lost their
lives. A majority of those killed were Muslim-majority
Bosniaks. I cannot imagine the heartache my constituents must
feel when Dodik denies the horrifying genocide committed by
Serb troops against Bosniak Muslims at Srebrenica or when he
threatens to leave the dissolution of Bosnia. These actions are
offensive to those who lost loved ones in the Bosnian War, and
they are profoundly dangerous to Bosnia's future as a unified
multiethnic State. It is imperative that the United States
protect Bosnian sovereignty and territorial integrity as the
country navigates these challenges.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, a leaked cable written
by special envoy for the Western Balkans, Matthew Palmer, has
been criticized by some Bosniak analysts as outlining a
dangerous policy in respect to electoral reform in Bosnia. They
suggest Mr. Palmer is working too closely with the nationalist
forces who are aiming to further ethnicize the electoral law.
What is the Biden Administration's plans to address these
concerns, sir?
Mr. Escobar. Well, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman. And I want to say to begin with that I know many
of the communities that have resettled in your district, they
are very, very loyal and patriotic Americans and I welcome
their support in everything that we do in the Balkans.
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton Peace
Agreement is the basis of our policy there. That agreement has
managed to keep the peace for over 25 years, and that agreement
reinforces the independence, sovereignty, and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And we see Bosnia and
Herzegovina as succeeding only as a multiethnic-inclusive and
democratic country.
I agree with you that efforts to unilaterally withdraw by
any entity, to unilaterally withdraw from central institutions
is dangerous and reckless. We're working with our European
partners, with NATO, with the EUFOR, and with the Office of the
High Representative to ensure that none of this comes to pass.
I personally will be traveling to the region in November to
reinforce that message. The counselor to the Secretary of State
will follow shortly afterwards. But in the meantime, we have
several people who are engaged on this on a day-to-day basis,
including four full-time senior foreign service officers in-
country at any given time.
And I do want to emphasize that Matthew Palmer, who is
staying on to be the representative, the person who is being
sent by the Secretary to explore electoral reforms, the leaked
cable actually was a briefing paper that we gave widely to the
international community to consider some points about important
reforms that could be made, not to further ethnicize the
country but to create greater inclusion for the country and to
allow the country to move the electoral process from one that
creates obstacles and obstruction to one that allows Bosnia and
Herzegovina to achieve greater political consensus and move
forward in its European aspirations.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, Dodik and his Serb and Russian allies
are seeking the end of the Office of the High Representative,
an independent body caste with ensuring implementation of the
peace agreement. They have called for the succession of the
Serb majority, Srpska I should say, and boycotted by
institutions and set up governing bodies to support those of
the central government.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, Dodik is under U.S.
sanctions for obstructing the Dayton Agreement. Why has the EU
not sanctioned him, as well; and is the United States pushing
the EU to hold Dodik accountable? And I'm out of time, so I'd
ask you for an expedited answer, please.
Mr. Escobar. Yes. Yes, we are working with Europeans to
make sure that there are consequences to any illegal or any
destabilizing action, and I look forward to briefing you again
after my return from Bosnia.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I appreciate that very, very much, and
I'm sure the Committee and the Chairman and certainly our staff
would welcome a briefing. And certainly my Bosnian community in
St. Louis would be grateful, and I'm glad that you're going.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence, and I yield
back.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Representative. And we will indeed
look forward to hearing from you on your return. Thank you for
taking the time to be on the ground and your personal
involvement in this. That's so important. And as a result of
those experiences, we would ask you to join the Committee in a
briefing going forward when you return on what you've seen on
the ground.
With that, I'm going to recognize for questions for 5
minutes Representative Wild from Pennsylvania.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr.
Escobar. I'm happy to meet you. Your sister is one of my
favorite colleagues, I have to say. I do not mean to pander,
but she is. So I'm happy to meet you.
To the point, around 400,000 Bosnians or about 12 percent
of the population cannot run for parliament or the presidency
because of their religion, ethnicity, or where they live. This
includes Jews, Roma, and other minority groups not considered
among the three constituent peoples identified in the
constitution. And because of these provisions, the European
Court of Human Rights ruled in 2009 that the Bosnian
constitution violated the European Convention on Human Rights.
Despite this ruling, the constitution has not changed. In its
opinion on Bosnia's and Herzegovina's application for
membership to the EU, the European Commission specifically
cited this case and stated significant incremental reforms are,
therefore, needed to ensure that all systems can effectively
exercise their political rights in order to accept the country
into the EU.
How can the Administration work more effectively with our
European counterparts to encourage these reforms?
Mr. Escobar. Thank you for that question. In fact, you are
correct, and that is the goal of the limited electoral reform
that Matt Palmer is working on is to make the electoral law
compliant with that ruling. We agree with the ruling, and we do
agree that Bosnia and Herzegovina have to make all the reforms,
including the limited constitutional reforms necessary to make
it compliant with the European Union's requirements.
Additionally, this is not the only obstacle to Bosnia's and
Herzegovina's EU aspirations. There are significant questions
on rule of law and other issues, and we are working very
closely with our European partners in making sure that they can
meet those requirements. That is the basis of the Office of the
High Representative's 5+2 Agenda, and, as we work through them,
hopefully with a sense of urgency, we expect Bosnia will accept
those recommendations for reform.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. And switching gears, in October 2020,
Albania hosted the first ever Balkans Forum Against Anti-
Semitism to combat anti-Jewish prejudice in the region. The
Albanian prime minister called anti-Semitism a threat against
our own civilization. How can we in the United States
incentivize more allies and partners in the region to take
concrete steps against the rising threats of anti-Semitism,
racism, and ethnonationalist violence?
Mr. Escobar. Well, thank you. I agree with you. We need to
take important steps to address this. The Department has a
Special Envoy for Holocaust Issues and anti-Semitism, and that
envoy makes regular visits to the region, to all of Europe, to
encourage countries to appoint people to similar positions. But
at the same time we make it a regular part of our engagement
with governments in the region, including with Serbia, Bosnia,
Herzegovina, and Croatia and Albania, among others. So we hope
that we have at least raised the awareness and raised our
concerns to the government, and I would say that those
discussions have yielded significant progress in the cases
where I have personally been involved.
Ms. Wild. So let me ask you, I know that the region may be
susceptible to anti-Semitism precisely because of its history
of interethnic prejudice and violence, but do you see
opportunities to display this tragic history and the progress
that has been made as a case study for why we need to combat
these trends, not just in the Balkans but also in Europe more
broadly and around the world?
Mr. Escobar. I do. I definitely do think there's
opportunities for that. And based on my interactions with
regional leaders, I would say that that dialog would be a
welcome one.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Keating. Important questions. And I now recognize
Representative Mast from Florida for 5 minutes. I see that
Representative Mast isn't on the screen at the moment, so I'll
recognize Representative Meuser from Pennsylvania for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
ranking member. I appreciate you putting all this together.
Secretary Escobar, thank you very much.
There are concerning reports about the Serbian Co-President
Dodik's activities undermine and dismantle Bosnia's central
government. After calling for the succession of the Republika
Srpska for many years, Dodik is now setting up separate Serb
governing bodies and vowing to create his own Bosnian Serb
army. He most recently created a separate drug enforcement
agency, which many say is a preview to separate law enforcement
and other key governmental agencies. He's doing all this with
the apparent support of the Russian government that seeks to
destabilize Bosnia's central government.
So, Secretary Escobar, how is the U.S. countering Dodik's
efforts to undermine the Bosnian central government?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I agree with you that these moves to
withdraw from the central institutions are both illegal and
destabilizing. So we have called on leaders across the spectrum
in Bosnia and Herzegovina not to match him in his rhetoric and
not to escalate the situation.
So I personally have made a series of phone calls to
leaders. I will be traveling to the region later this month.
We've worked with our European partners to do the same. We have
made joint statements in support of Bosnia's territorial
integrity, and we will continue to support the continued
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
support for the Office of the High Representative and support
for EUFOR's ALTHEA mission. But beyond that, we have other
tools, including sanctions, that we are prepared to use in
order to limit any further challenges to Bosnia's territorial
integrity.
Mr. Meuser. Thanks for that answer. Yes, I did have the
occasion to speak with a foreign minister recently, very, very
concerned about matters. And certainly your long history there,
knowing the ground, knowing the field, I'm sure will be
enormously helpful because it seems like a very, very
precarious situation.
Mr. Escobar. Congressman, with very, very few exceptions,
Dodik has very little support for what he's doing, including
very little public support, and I want to capitalize on that.
Mr. Meuser. Yes. All right. That's excellent to hear. OK.
So Russia has cultivated dependence and exerting their type of
influence, which is usually malign. It's exacerbating discord
in Bosnia, derailing Balkans countries, NATO bids--that's
something that, of course, is of great interest to many--and be
using Serbia as a regional intelligence hub; and, yet, the
region depends very much on Russian natural gas.
So what are you and the Biden Administration working to
counter Russia's malign influence in the region and perhaps
decrease their dependence on Russian energy?
Mr. Escobar. Well, we have been working with governments in
the region to create regional energy connections that will
involve LNG terminals throughout the region. We're working very
closely with various governments to increase their capacity for
renewable energy. And from a political perspective, we work
very closely with them to help them identify this malign
influence and counter it. So I am pleased to report that
several countries in the region have already entered into
legally binding contractual obligations to diversify from
Russian natural gas in the near future.
Mr. Meuser. Well, that sounds encouraging. Terrific. Now,
just on to China. Various conversations I've had with citizens
of Bosnia real concerned about the investments being made from
China and the leverage being used. The State Department, I'm
sure, recognize this and working to provide an alternative to
China's very often coercive form of diplomacy in the Balkans?
Mr. Escobar. Yes. So I'll start with the very beginning.
You know, the economic seduction of China in the region is
illusory. China does not care about environmental concerns,
labor rights, or transparency. But more and more, as these
countries close chapters to join the European Union, they have
to care about those issues. And as they care about those
issues, they see more and more that Western companies are the
answer to their infrastructure development, not China.
So we'll continue that pressure. But as we do so, we're
working very closely with our private sector partners to
identify the advantages of American and European investment in
the region.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you for your strong answers, and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Representative. The Chair now
recognizes Representative Titus from Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a followup of the
previous question. You mentioned some of the countries are
joining in agreements on natural gas. I know there's one that's
set to start in July 2022 that involves Greece and Azerbaijan
and Bulgaria, IGB I think. That seems to be on track, but it
could supply natural gas to other countries, as well. Do you
see any movement in that direction, or what could we do to help
to expand that?
Mr. Escobar. Well, thank you for that question. And, yes,
your engagement is always welcome. I would say that that is not
the only initiative underway to diversify the energy supply in
the Western Balkans. The liquid natural gas terminal in Krk,
Croatia, is already supplying half of Croatia's gas needs and
could be set to expand to other countries soon.
There are other initiatives, including an LNG terminal in
Greece that is looking to expand northward and could be and
will effectively challenge Russia's stranglehold on the region
in the southern part of the Western Balkans on gas. And beyond
that, we are looking with our private sector partners to
develop wind farms, hydropower, and solar fields to help reduce
their dependence on Russian natural gas.
Ms. Titus. That's good, that's good news. You know,
speaking of Russia, talk about their influence, we also know
that they are meddling in elections there, not just in the U.S.
against Hillary Clinton. But we saw Russian interference in the
election with North Macedonia's name change to try to slow down
that process of Macedonia joining the EU. They weren't
successful, but they are certainly there. Do you see evidence
of that sort of thing anywhere else?
Mr. Escobar. We do. Russia has a very substantial
disinformation and propaganda network, and it operates very,
very actively in the Western Balkans. We are working very
closely with our EU partners, with NATO, to help them identify
those threats to their electoral space, to their media space.
And there is a significant Department of State effort to
provide them with greater resiliency to their nets and to their
media space through anti-corruption drives, through our Bureau
of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, through USAID,
and, again, through our partnership with NATO.
Ms. Titus. You know, the President expanded or continued
the sanctions that had been opposed earlier there in the
Balkans. I think they were put in place as far back as 2001.
Has there been any assessment if these sanctions are really
working? That always seems to be our go-to position, impose
sanctions. We know they really haven't worked in Russia. Are
they working in the Balkans? Have you looked at that? Should we
try something else?
Mr. Escobar. Well, I would say the sanctions are an
important tool to have. They're not the sole answer to the
democratic challenges that the region faces, but they are
important for us. And I would say that, yes, that sanctions do
have an important effect because they are almost always
targeted at individuals and not at governments.
So we've had tremendous success in altering the behavior of
certain people, and I can attest to the fact that in the late
90's the sanctions and the threat of sanctions were an
effective tool in helping us get rid of Milosevic.
Ms. Titus. You know, speaking of individuals and bad
behavior, some of the atrocity crimes from the previous war are
still being discussed. They're still very tender areas,
especially those who used rape as a tool of war. Where are we
in terms of trying to settle those issues so we can be more
effective in moving the countries forward?
Mr. Escobar. Well, we were very effective in arresting
nearly everybody who was on the list of indicted war criminals
put out by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Yugoslavia. I think all of them ended up at some point facing
justice.
We also have a residual mechanism that all of the countries
of the region have signed on to that requires them to prosecute
domestically anybody who has been accused of war crimes, and we
continue to work with that residual mechanism in Bosnia, in
Serbia, and Kosovo to make sure that those people do not evade
justice.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Keating. The Chair now recognizes Representative Tenney
from New York for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairman Keating and Ranking Member.
And thank you to our witness today. Really interested in this
region of the world since I served as the only American
employed by the former Yugoslav Consulate during the 80's and
also during the Olympics in Sarajevo. So I spent a lot of time
and a lot of years traveling to this region of the world, and
this is a really timely meeting. So, again, I thank the
Chairman for doing this, and we're seeing, you know, real
strategic competition dramatically in the Western Balkans
becoming a place with renewed geopolitical focus for Russia, as
well as China. And right now I think we need to continue our
efforts in the Western Balkans in order to counter this Russian
influence and bring greater stability to the region in the
Balkans, especially the scale and depth of the U.S.-European
cooperation demonstrates the ways in which the Transatlantic
relationship helps address real issues and build stronger and
long-term bulwarks against this Chinese and Russian influence,
which I hear about all the time from my friends formerly of the
Consulate and in other parts of the former Yugoslavia.
My first question, in dealing with Serbia, Albania, and
North Macedonia, they are engaged in a regional economic
process called the Open Balkans. I believe greater regional
economic integration could make the Western Balkans more
interconnected and prosperous. Does the State Department
support the Open Balkans initiative?
Mr. Escobar. We support all initiatives that bring the
countries closer together economically. We believe that closer
economic cooperation is not only happening, but it will
continue to happen.
The leaders of the three countries that have explored the
Open Balkans initiative have assured us that it is open to all
six countries of the Western Balkans, and we believe them. In
fact, it cannot succeed without the other three. This Open
Balkans initiative also mirrors something under the Berlin
process called the common regional market.
So we think that they are complementary. We think that
anything that brings the countries closer together will create
confidence among the people, will create opportunities for
political movement on some of the issues. So, yes, we support
all efforts to bring the countries closer together
economically.
And by the way, should this happen, should we get a
regional market, a free market among six countries of 20
million people and a $125 billion economy with growth rates
upwards of 6 or 7 percent, it would be a very, very attractive
market for American companies. So we want to encourage all of
that, and we want to encourage American investment in the
region, as well.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. Yes, especially countering anything
that the Russians are doing. Let me ask you is the
Administration doing anything to ensure that Montenegro sticks
to its Euro-Atlantic path and upholds its obligations to NATO?
And what would be the consequences for these efforts since the
pro-Russian Democratic Front directly participates in
government? Is that something that you guys are tracking?
Mr. Escobar. Yes, we are tracking that very, very closely.
In fact, last week, we had a series of Montenegro delegations
visit Washington where we pressed them on maintaining not only
their European orientation but upholding their NATO
commitments. At every meeting with every interlocutor we got
the commitments that their government will abide by that
arrangement.
Additionally, we raised with them our concerns about the
Democratic Front, and they have recognized that every member of
the coalition will sign on to continued NATO membership,
continued recognition of Kosovo, and a continued path to
Europe, and we have gotten assurances that that will not
change. So we're watching very closely. And as I travel to the
region, immediately after my visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
am traveling to Montenegro by road to have more discussions
with the government to ensure that this continues to be the
case.
Ms. Tenney. OK. That sounds like a lot of progress is at
least being made. In terms of Montenegro's security and
intelligence services, are we actively monitoring that and are
we able to scrutinize some of these key appointments and
keeping track of what's happening with the DF and their
participation in the government?
Mr. Escobar. Yes, the government has given us full
transparency about their moves within the government. They have
previewed their appointments, and they continue to meet their
obligations. I would say that Montenegro is still a very, very
close ally and a very good friend.
Ms. Tenney. I have got so many questions for you. I do not
know how much time I have; I do not see it on my screen there.
But just a quick question on Serbia. They have been seeking to
procure U.S. original military equipment for peacekeeping
operations. They are obviously a leading European contributor
on a per capita basis to peacekeeping around the world. But
while Serbia isn't a member of NATO, Serbia's use of U.S.
origin military equipment would increase in interoperability
between the Serbian military and the United States and our
allies. Do we support procurement of U.S. military equipment
between Serbia and the United States, and what are the concerns
you may have on that, obviously with Russian influence in the
region?
Mr. Escobar. I would say that our relationship with Russia,
sorry, with Serbia is improving at the expense of Russia. We
currently have a very strong partnership between the Serbian
military and the Ohio National Guard, and every time they do an
exercise it displaces a Russian exercise.
So with regard to Serbia's peacekeeping participation, they
have worked very closely with us to improve their peacekeeping
capacity, and they have most recently signed an agreement to be
part of the Multinational Force Observers in Sinai, helping
keep the peace between Egypt and Israel. So we welcome that
kind of engagement by Serbia, and we welcome their efforts to
procure American-made equipment in limited cases.
Ms. Tenney. Great. Thank you. Can I just grab one quick
question. On Bulgaria, they have 16 European Court of Human
Rights judgments against them for violating human rights and
freedom of assembly of the Macedonian minority in Bulgaria.
What is the Administration doing to make sure Bulgaria is
fulfilling its operations as a NATO member in regard to these
human rights violations?
Mr. Escobar. Our Ambassador in Sofia is working very
closely with her European partners on the ground to make sure
that these issues get addressed. The basis of our relationship
with our European partners is about values and not just common
interests but shared values, and anything that violates that
bond is of great concern to us.
Ms. Tenney. Great. Thank you. I appreciate the questions. I
think I'm running out of time but would love to submit
questions on Bosnia when we get there, too, because I have
large Bosnian refugee population, as Representative Wagner
does.
But thank you so much. I really appreciate the answers and
direct answers to our questions. Thank you.
Mr. Keating. Thank you for sharing your experience with us.
And the Chair recognizes Representative Brad Schneider for 5
minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And first let me
thank the Chairman for your leadership on our resolution we are
introducing later today reaffirming the U.S. commitment to
global climate cooperation ahead of the COP26 meetings.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Escobar, several things. One,
thank you for your time today and sharing your background. I'll
echo my colleagues' enthusiastic appreciation of your sister
and her role in our thing, so thank you, thank you for that.
I also want to associate myself with my colleague,
Representative Wild, as well as her concerns about anti-
Semitism in the region. I very much appreciate your response to
that.
What I want to focus on is really the issues of poor
influence in the region, in particular, as you have already
talked about to some extent, Russia and China, relative to the
European Union and the United States. Influence can take many
different forms, including political, military, economic,
cultural. So I know you touched on some of these things, but
can you expand a bit on how Russia and China are trying to
exert broader influence in the Western Balkans and really are
succeeding, areas of concern or perhaps they're less
successful? But then, most importantly, I'd love your thoughts
on how the U.S. with our European allies is pushing back, where
we are successful, where we need to perhaps change our
approach.
Mr. Escobar. That's a very good question. Thank you,
Representative. We are very concerned about Chinese and Russian
malign influence in the region, and they are not, they do not
manifest themselves in the same way.
So I'll start with Russia. Russia has very little to offer
the region. They provide almost no investment. They provide no
humanitarian assistance, no development assistance. And so what
they have to offer is division and ethnic tension, and they
work that as hard as they possibly can as a way of undermining
the multiethnic and democratic nature of tendencies of some of
these countries. So we work politically in ways to make those
countries continue on their path, to make them aware of the
dangers of not countering this kind of rhetoric and allowing it
to operate in their media space, in their virtual space, and in
their political space.
The answer to this one, and it will be the same answer to
the question of China, as well, is to anchor these countries in
the community of Western democratic nations through European
Union membership. That's why accession is so important.
With regard to China, China operates most effectively in
the economic sphere. They provide non-transparent loans, often
with conditions that surprise the countries later. They operate
in ways that over-promise and under-fulfill their commercial
commitments. And they frequently do so by pressing these
contracts become State secrets, so even the taxpayers and the
voters and citizens of these countries do not understand the
nature of Chinese investment. So, again, anchoring these
countries in the European Union where they have legally binding
obligations to transparency, open tenders, freedom of
information to their citizens, is absolutely crucial.
In the meantime, I do believe that American companies are
the best in the world and they can out-compete China anywhere
anytime on the basis of quality, customer support, and
technology. So it is our hope that we can help find ways to
foster American investment in the region, which is one of the
reasons why this common regional market would make it an
attractive target for American companies.
So, ultimately, it is this joining this broad open market
of Europe with its standards, its legislative framework, and
its regulatory structure that will help us combat Chinese
economic influence.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you. And with my last few
seconds here, just building on that, much of it depends on the
European Union and other countries taking action. Are there
things we can do in Congress to help promote and support
American companies doing business in the region, strengthening
economic ties and, at the same time, working to strengthen the
economic ties between the countries that make up the Balkans?
Mr. Escobar. Yes. I would say that high-level attention is
always welcome. Support for our assistance programs to make
these countries more capable of handling transparency, legal
reforms, regulatory reforms is important, and engagement with
your European counterparts expressing how important it is that
they get engaged in the Balkans, as well, is crucial to this
process.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you. I'm over time, Chairman. I
appreciate the extra time, and I yield back. Mr. Chairman,
you're on mute.
Mr. Keating. Thank you for bringing up the economic
questions that we have. The Chair recognizes Representative
Pfluger from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
your leadership on this important topic here. And, Mr.
Secretary, thank you for joining us today. I think a lot of my
questions are going to be focused around kind of a similar
trend that you've seen here, and really it gets to the heart of
our influence versus Russian influence, and I want to focus on
energy specifically. I mean, there's a massive energy crisis
going on right now in Europe, you know. To put this in context,
I see prices in Western Europe at $25 an Mcf for natural gas,
which is five times that of the United States. I think we're in
for a rough winter. I think we'll see some challenges there.
And the most concerning piece of this is that we see Putin very
willing to weaponize energy as a tool of diplomacy, if you want
to call it diplomacy, I'll put some air quotes over that, but
as a tool because it's very concerning with the Nord Stream
pipeline. You know, you can go through the Baltic countries all
the way down into the Balkans, and everyone is very concerned
about this.
So I just kind of wanted to get your, you know, have you
seen examples of the Putin regime attempting to weaponize
dependence in the Western Balkans area on Russian energy so
far?
Mr. Escobar. Absolutely. Every energy deal that Putin
enters into comes with political requirements. In some cases,
it is pressure for countries not to enter into required
sanctions against Russia and Russian entities, Russian
individuals. In other cases, it is to try to garner support for
their moves in the United Nations to counter our agenda. And in
many cases, it is to isolate our efforts in moving these
countries closer to Europe.
So, yes, there's a tremendous amount of coercion that goes
on, and one of the main reasons why we are seeking these
countries to look for ways to diversify their energy, and it
will happen. And the question is how fast we can make it
happen.
So we've been working very, very closely with our partners
in the region to get liquid natural gas and renewables online
as quickly as possible. And I'm hopeful that in the next 5
years a lot of those investigations and a lot of those deals
will bear fruit.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, we are hopeful, as well. And I think,
you know, yesterday we had a hearing with Development Finance
Corp and some others, and one of the things that strikes me
right now is that that's a great tool for us to use with the
Western business values and whether it is in Greece or whether
it is in Serbia or whether it is in any of these countries, we
want to make sure that the DFC continues with their commitment,
for instance to open an office in Belgrade or to do the things
that Congress has specifically instructed them to do.
So can you kind of talk to the benefits, if they were, you
know, when this happens because it is something that I believe
will help diversify, talk to the benefits of what the DFC can
be doing and what they should be doing with regard to energy
specifically in this region?
Mr. Escobar. I share your enthusiasm for the opportunities
that DFC offers the region, and I can say that DFC has offered
some tools, including in Serbia, that were incredibly important
in entrepreneurial development and women's issues. So I welcome
their continued engagement. But to be honest, our biggest
challenge in facing China is financing of major infrastructure.
And if there are ways that DFC can find to legally support some
of these infrastructure deals, it will go a long way because
some of these multibillion dollar investments are a big deal to
small countries, so they need to have the financing in place
before they can agree to deals, and that is where China has an
advantage over our companies in that China can come in and
offer the deal and the financing at the same time.
Now, as I said before, the financing often is not
transparent and not open to scrutiny by the public. But we, I
am hopeful that we can work with DFC to find opportunities to
counter that.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, and, Secretary Escobar, thank you so
much for that. I think it is so important that we look for
these, whether it is the DFC or other mechanisms, these
countries are going to fill their energy needs in one way or
another. And if they can diversify, that's great; but the No. 1
thing is they are going to make sure that they have energy and
we do not want that to be at the expense of a bad deal
politically or with strings attached or something that leads to
an even more desperate situation. And so we want to be a part
of the solution. We welcome the inputs and the avenues that we
can explore, but I am very passionate about making sure,
especially knowing that Nord Stream does have a lot of
political implications with it, negative connotations, that we
provide these countries with another alternative and that we
can move in the direction of, you know, pro-Western value
business models that allow them to have energy and also that
create good partners and, in some cases, allies for us.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. And thank you,
Secretary, for being here today.
Mr. Escobar. Thank you.
Mr. Keating. Thank you very much, Representative. Both the
Representative Tenney and myself, we'd like to take a few
minutes for a second round of questions limited to 3 minutes a
piece. I thank Mr. Escobar for his flexibility in doing this.
I will just recognize myself quickly for an area that I
just wanted to emphasize. The Biden Administration and your
office, how are you working with Serbia and Kosovo, as well as
our EU partners, to help facilitate the EU-led dialog? And have
the recent flare-ups impacted these negotiations or broadened
negotiations?
Mr. Escobar. Well, the most important thing is, from our
perspective, the dialog is the forum in which a solution is
going to be found. So we strongly support Special Rep Lajcak's
efforts to move this dialog forward.
So from our perspective and the perspective of our major
allies, our hope is that we can help the countries implement
the agreements that they've already made, abide by the
agreements that they've already committed to, and help them
create the institutions or implement the political resolutions
effectively. And in the meantime, while we are not part of the
dialog and we are not part of the negotiating process, we still
work very closely with Mr. Lajcak in encouraging the parties to
be flexible, pragmatic, and solution-oriented.
And the most recent flare-up, I think, showed the
opportunities that we have in working together because what it
ended up doing is proving that the dialog does work as a forum
for resolving problems. And I look forward to Mr. Lajcak's
continued aggressive work in moving to more challenging issues.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you. You know, I think that your
personal involvement, the attention of the Secretary, is
important to reinforce our beliefs and our interests in the
area. And I think today's hearing also, besides the discussion
of sanctions, it also went into the importance of our economic
involvement out of the EU and the U.S. in the area in energy
and other economic activities. I think that will strengthen our
hand diplomatically in shaping resolution to so many of these
conflicts.
I will now recognize Representative Tenney for 3 minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to just
clarify something, Mr. Escobar. On the DFC presence in Belgrade
and supporting the private investments in the Western Balkans
and Aegean, is that something, are we committed to that still
and will we be putting a person in place there? I didn't catch
the precise answer to that. Is the reason we do not have
someone because we're deciding whether to do it, to put someone
there, or because we just do not have the right person to go
there?
Mr. Escobar. Congresswoman, I do not know what the internal
deliberations of DFC are. I can only say that the Department of
State welcomes DFC's presence in the Western Balkans. We think
DFC has a lot of tools that will make an enormous difference,
and we are engaging with DFC and looking for ways that they can
employ the entire array of their tools to address some of the
issues that we're facing.
Ms. Tenney. Oh, great. Thank you. I just want to get to
another question because you said that expanded U.S. sanctions
regime for the Western Balkans could be used very aggressively
to tackle the widespread corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Can you explain in more detail how the Biden Administration
plans to use these expanded authorities, and has the threat of
sanctions been used to bring Bosnia's and Herzegovina's
different parties to the table on election reform? And I know
this comes down to a lot of people not understanding some of
the regional issues where Bosnia and Croatia are so close to
each other. Can you answer that? And then if there is a way
that we can have Croatia get their representation somehow. I
know that there's naturalization of a lot of Bosnians, and
Bosniaks are Croatian nationals and there are also Croatians
who are Bosnians, so, obviously, this is probably a remnant of
the old Yugoslavia. But can you just, what is the sanction
regime and how are we going to resolve this sort of election
issue that's sort of a----
Mr. Escobar. Well, I'll start with the easy answer first.
Croatia is a signatory to Dayton, and they have a legitimate
interest in what happens in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And for
that reason, Matt Palmer sought consultations before he
traveled down to Sarajevo, so we are working with our Croatian
partners in making sure that they can support and implement
their end of their requirements.
With regard to sanctions, the new expanded authorities have
not been used yet, but we intend to use them very aggressively.
And they can be used both against entities and individuals, but
they're more effective when they're used against individuals.
So in my personal experience in Balkans, sanctions have been
very, very useful in getting either unhelpful actors to get out
of the political space or to isolate them or to change their
behavior. So it is our intent to use them.
Ms. Tenney. Quick question. Would you support a Dayton 2,
to reconsider a new version, as Representative Turner
introduces each year? Would that be something you'd support?
Mr. Escobar. I do not. I mean, the Dayton Peace Agreement
has been successful in keeping the peace for over 25 years, and
I believe that with limited constitutional reform, with step-
by-step electoral and judicial reforms, we can get to a more
functional place in Bosnia.
Ms. Tenney. Great. Well, thank you so much. I really
appreciate the extra questions and your time. Thanks so much,
Mr. Chairman. I'm grateful.
Mr. Keating. Thank you very much. As you can see, Mr.
Escobar, there's been great bipartisan interest in the region.
I think that's very important to underscore from Congress. We
will very much appreciate a followup when you're back in terms
of what our greater role could be. There are many instances--I
think one of the things on the ground if you could come back to
would be the issue of, you know, some of our developmental
funding is limited to areas where the per capita income, it is
geared to lower per capita income. And I think that inhibits,
you know, when it is fairly modernized in this region, some of
those moneys from being directed there, as important as they
are for democratic initiatives. So I think that is important.
And another thing coming back, I'm just intrigued that, as
China becomes more and more active in that area, Russia
obviously will look at this as some type of intrusion on an
area they consider to have greater influence on. So I also, as
a followup, would be very curious as to what you are finding
out with that.
So I want to thank you for your time. I want to thank all
the members on a very difficult day where we had to do some
shifting, but we did not want to delay this hearing. The timing
of this is important, the issue is important. This is an issue
when our subcommittee was forming early in this congress, we
wanted to make sure we had a hearing on the Western Balkans and
emphasize this. I think it is very important, so I appreciate
your participation and look forward to a successful trip and to
come back and further brief this Committee on what you see on
the ground.
Mr. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Keating. So with that, members of the Committee will
have 5 days to submit statements, extraneous materials and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation that
are there in the rules.
I want to thank the members again for adjusting around a
busy day and for their participation in clearly what was a very
timely and important hearing. With that, I will call this
hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record
at 12:45 p.m.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
