- THE BURMA CRISIS, ONE YEAR AFTER THE COUP

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE BURMA CRISIS, ONE YEAR AFTER THE COUP

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC, CENTRAL ASIA, AND NONPROLIFERATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 17, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-105

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-709 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California               SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California                 LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                  ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California                MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia, and Nonproliferation

AMI BERA, California, Chairman,

BRAD SHERMAN, California             STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Ranking Member
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
ANDY LEVIN. Michigan                 ANN WAGNER, Missouri
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       KEN BUCK, Colorado
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia            MARK GREEN, Tennessee
TED LIEU, California                 ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         YOUNG KIM, California
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina

Jamie Morgan, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Moy, Kin, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State............     7
Hart, Craig, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for East Asia
and the Pacific, U.S. Agency for International Development.....    12

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Information submitted for the record.............................    25

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    43
Hearing Minutes..................................................    44
Hearing Attendance...............................................    45

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    46

THE BURMA CRISIS, ONE YEAR AFTER THE COUP

Thursday, February 17, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific,
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Ami Bera (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Mr. Bera. The virtual gavel is banged. The Subcommittee on
Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia, and Nonproliferation will come
to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point. And all members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous materials, and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitations in
the rules. To insert something into the record, please have
your staff email the previously mentioned address or contact
full committee staff.
Please keep your video function on at all times, even when
you are not recognized by the chair. Members are responsible
for muting and unmuting themselves. And please remember to mute
yourself after you finish speaking. Consistent with remote
committee proceedings on H.Res. 8, staff will only mute members
and witnesses as appropriate when they are not under
recognition to eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum and will now recognize myself
for opening remarks.
You know, prior to making my remarks, let me recognize
Ranking Member Chabot who was not able to join us today due to
a family obligation. He has long been a leader on Burma. And I
look forward to continue to work with him on the challenges
facing this country as we look for a path forward. I also want
to appreciate the vice ranking member, Ms. Wagner, who has long
been a champion on issues in Southeast Asia, and particularly
Burma, who will be serving in Rep Chabot's stead as the ranking
member. Thank you, Ms. Wagner, for doing that.
Let's talk about why this hearing is so important. When we
think about the coup that the Tatmadaw executed almost a year
ago on February 1st. We are now marking the first anniversary.
The military junta known as the Tatmadaw flagrantly disregarded
the Democratic process that was taking place. It was a young
democracy, but the Democratic process that the Burmese people
had put in place.
The Burmese security forces the Tatmadaw had detained,
jailed, and tortured countless selected representatives,
journalists, and human rights defenders in this effort to
stifle defense. They have killed thousands of innocent
civilians, and uprooted and displaced hundreds of thousands
more, destabilizing the region.
What the Tatmadaw did not recognize is that the Burmese
people have changed. They have experienced some beginnings of
freedom and they rose up and this feels very different than
other uprisings. You have seen several ethnic armed
organizations that have used the ongoing crisis to expand their
territorial and administrative control to certain regions. And
as we have entered the dry season, you have seen the increased
fighting that has worsened the already deteriorating
humanitarian situation.
Having traveled to the region last fall to--I went on to
talk to individuals there, to talk to our embassy staff there,
as well as NGO's that are operating on Thai-Burmese order to
try to provide aid. You know, there is a real concern that the
Tatmadaw will use this crises and extending into May to really
try to stifle the resistance movement. With that said, we have
seen the resistance movement fight back, join together with
other ethnic minority groups. And there is a real concern that
we are losing a window of opportunity to find a diplomatic
solution here to avert this humanitarian crisis.
I do want to commend our ASEAN colleagues. I had a chance
to visit Jakarta and talk to the Indonesians who I do want to
single out as really, you know, taking a leadership role,
trying to push ASEAN to find a solution forward. As Indonesia
passes the--or as the baton passes on to Cambodia, I really
urge my Cambodian colleagues to continue to work within the
ASEAN context to push Myanmar to at a minimum adhere to the
five-point plan that was put in place. And again, work with
countries in the region, including the United States, China,
India and others to find a path forward here.
Today, I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses as
they give us an assessment of what they are seeing on the
ground, their conversations with the countries in the region,
including ASEAN, but also potentially there is an opportunity
to find common ground with China where our interests may align.
Also, with the Indians who were, you know, experiencing a
border crisis as well as Thailand.
I also do want to commend the Biden Administration for very
early on implementing aggressive sanctions, taking aggressive
policy positions and, working with Congress to speak with one
voice, Democrats, Republicans, and the Administration to
condemn this coup.
So with that, I really do look forward to our witnesses
giving us an update on what is happening on the ground.
And let me recognize Representative Ann Wagner, the acting
ranking member from Missouri. Thank you. Ms. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, certainly for
holding this very important hearing that is near and dear to my
heart. And I am pleased to be filling in in Congressman
Chabot's stead here. And I want to thank our witnesses
certainly for their service.
What is happening in Burma is devastating. My heart breaks,
continues to break for the Rohingya who continue to suffer
unimaginable atrocities at the hands of the genocidal Burmese
military are Tatmadaw. And for the courageous protesters
braving a brutal crackdown as they fight for democracy.
I have been proud to work with my colleagues on this
committee, to demonstrate Congress' unequivocal support for the
Burmese people seeking a return to democracy, as well as our
strong condemnation of the military coup.
I am happy to say that the Foreign Affairs Committee
unanimously advanced H.Res. 896 just last week which condemns
the Burmese military for perpetrating gross violations of human
rights. And I am hopeful that this legislation will soon be
considered by the House.
I am also urging the House to immediately take up Chairman
Meeks' H.R. 5497, which is the Burma act, which I am a proud
cosponsor. This critical legislation imposes tough sanctions on
the perpetrators of the coup, requires action to cutoff the
regime sources of financial support and calls on the State
Department to formally designate the persecution of Rohingya as
in fact genocide. The United States must continue to support
the people of Burma as they stand up to the military junta and
to bring to justice those responsible for egregious human
rights violations and crimes against humanity.
The global norms that safeguard international peace and
security require active defense and enforcement by the
international community. And in the last few years, we have
seen China, Russia, Iran, and other autocracies align against
Democratic norms, universal human rights, and even rights to
freedom and self determination.
Our adversaries are watching to see how we will respond
when peace and Democratic freedoms are challenged. The Biden
Administration's failure to respond swiftly and decisively to
Russian aggression against Ukraine using a deterrent factor
before a Russian invasion and uphold the responsibilities to
our Afghan allies has further emboldened some of the dictators
and bullies around the world. It is difficult to believe that
any responsible member of the international community would
hesitate to take action against Burma's military junta which
has committed genocide against the Rohingya Muslims, illegally
seized control of the Burmese government, and visited
extraordinary violence and suffering on its own people.
And yet, China and Russia continue to stand in the way of
efforts to build a coordinated and meaningful international
response to the cries in Burma. This is unacceptable. And I
urge the Administration to demand stronger action in the United
Nations to hold the Tatmadaw accountable.
We must do more to isolate and punish the Burmese military.
And it is imperative that the United States show strong and
consistent leadership through this crisis to secure a future in
which rule of law and democracy underpin relations among
States.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back the remainder
of my time.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Wagner.
Let me now introduce our witnesses. Our first witness is
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Kin Moy. Mr. Moy was
appointed the principal deputy assistant secretary for the
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs on June 15, 2021.
Immediately prior to this appointment, Mr. Moy was the Acting
Assistant Secretary of State in the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research. He has been a Foreign Service officer for 29 years.
Mr. Moy, thank you for your service.
Our second witness is USAID Deputy Assistant Administrator
Craig Hart. Craig Hart is a career member of the USAID Senior
Foreign Service and has served as the Deputy Assistant
Administrator for East Asia and the Pacific since August 2020.
Prior to this, Craig served as deputy mission director in
Vietnam from 2016 to 2020. Since joining USAID in 2005 he has
served as a program officer in Tanzania, Afghanistan, the
Republic of Georgia, and Washington, DC. Mr. Hart, thank you
for your service.
Let me go ahead and recognize Mr. Moy for 5 minutes his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF KIN MOY, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Mr. Moy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and madam vice ranking
member, and all of the subcommittee members here today. I want
to thank you for inviting me to speak with you about this very
grave situation in Burma.
The opening remarks that you made, Mr. Chairman, and as
well as you madam vice ranking member were very thoughtful,
very insightful. I think Secretary Blinken would want me to say
that we will continue to work with you. We will continue to
share as much information about the situation there as we can
in order to really unite in order to, you know, protect as many
Burmese citizens as we possibly can.
In the year following the coup, the total damage the
Burmese military has inflicted on innocent people in the
country is impossible to calculate. But I would like to share a
few data points with you to demonstrate the devastation it has
wrought. Credible sources indicate the military has killed more
than 1,500 people in Burma, including at least 117 children.
And those are only the deaths that have been verified. The
number is likely much larger.
The regime has arrested at least 12,000 people and more
than 9,000 of them remain in detention. More than 400,000 have
been forced to flee their homes and are internally displaced,
while others are seeking refuge in neighboring countries.
The numbers paint a bleak picture. And the Burmese
military's determination to employ horrific violence shows no
sign of letting up. This is the same force that committed
ethnic cleansing other atrocities against Rohingya in 2017.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to spend a few minutes detailing
how the Administration is grappling with this situation
including our efforts to pressure the regime to immediately
cease the violence, allow unhindered humanitarian access,
release those unjustly detained by the military, including
wrongfully detained U.S. citizen Kyaw Htay Oo. Ensure those
responsible for atrocities and other human rights abuses are
held to account and swiftly return Burma toward a path to
inclusive democracy.
Immediately after the military detained Burma's elected
leaders the State Department acted quickly to assess that the
military carried out a coup d'etat. President Biden issued an
executive order shortly thereafter. The executive order
authorizes sanctions in connection with the coup, including on
individuals and entities responsible for undermining Democratic
institutions in Burma and on their family members. We have used
this authority to apply targeted sanctions on 65 individuals
and sanctioned or placed export controls on 26 entities to
date. These includes top military commanders, senior officials
of the regime and their family members, as well as entities
that generate revenue for the military and its leaders, and
cronies that are involved in the military's procuring of the
weapons.
The State Department continues to work with the Department
of the Treasury and other interagency partners to identify and
assess additional sanctions, as well as other actions to
restrict revenue to the regime. A top consideration when
carrying out targeted sanctions is to ensure we are not
exacerbating humanitarian crisis on the ground or increasing
poverty for the people of Burma.
We have closely coordinated all of our actions, including
sanctions with our allies and partners to present a united
front in the international community. We regularly consult with
our partners in capitals across the world and the United States
remains a leading voice in driving international policy on
Burma. This coordination has severely limited the regime's
international space. The U.N. General Assembly has also called
on States to prevent the flow of arms into Burma. And our
colleagues at the U.S. Mission to the U.N. similarly pushed for
action there. The U.N. has established and the Administration
is supporting the independent investigative mechanism for
Myanmar otherwise known as IIMM to lay a robust foundation for
criminal accountability efforts that may become available.
Since the coup, the U.N. Security Council has met seven
times to discuss the situation in Burma. Outside of the United
Nations senior State Department officials are in regular
contact with the ASEAN counterparts. And we value the role of
ASEAN's neutrality as well as efforts by individual member
States in promoting a peaceful resolution to the crisis and
providing much needed support to the people of Burma.
We are also in regular contact with the National Unity
Government and other representatives from the pro-democracy
movement. Burma faces both a political crisis and a
humanitarian crisis on top of a myriad of economic and other
challenges. And I will defer to my good friend, USAID Deputy
Assistant Administrator Craig Hart, on those details of our
efforts to mitigate the humanitarian crisis.
But I would like to highlight the ongoing work to support
vulnerable populations with Congress' support. In Fiscal Year
2021, the U.S. Government provided more than $434 million to
the humanitarian assistance for those affected by ongoing
violence, including those internally displaced in Burma.
Refugees from Burma in the region and communities hosting from
Burma.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for your time
and all of the members of the subcommittee. And I look forward
to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Moy.
And I should have said without objection both witnesses'
prepared written statements will be made part of the record.
Now let me go and recognize Mr. Hart for his opening
statement for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CRAIG HART, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU
FOR EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Hart. Chairman Bera, Vice Ranking Member Wagner,
distinguished members of the subcommittee thank you very much
for the opportunity to testify today regarding the important
role that the United States Agency for International
Development is playing to address the ongoing crisis in Burma.
It was just 1 year ago that the start of the military coup
d'etat slammed the door shut on Burma's recent Democratic
opening. The coup is worsening the humanitarian plight of the
people of Burma and has rolled back years of development gains,
threatening what prosperity and freedom the country had
achieved.
So in 2021 poverty doubled, the country's GDP plummeted by
18 percent. Government services are crippled, including health.
The coup and pandemic have stolen more than a 1-1/2 years of
education from over 12 million children. TB treatment and case
notifications plunged by half, elevating the risk of multi drug
resistant variants that could spread beyond Burma's borders.
Some 6 million people in Burma are now requiring humanitarian
assistance.
So on the ground, USAID partners face harassment,
detention, raids, intimidation, and deadly violence. Despite
these challenges, our USAID office that was reopened almost 10
years ago in Burma and our great implementing partners are
continue to support health, livelihoods in education, and the
drive for peace, democracy and human rights.
USAID's comparative advantage is our field presence and our
programmatic flexibility. Just days after the start of the
coup, we shifted more than $42 million in assistance in
activities that would have benefited the government to expand
work supporting local civil societies, NGO's, and private
sector partners to benefit the people of Burma, not the regime.
Our immediate concern has been deliver humanitarian
assistance. In 2021, we reached over 430,000 people with
lifesaving aid through internal access. USAID's partners,
including the U.N. World Food Programme continue to deliver
food and other critical assistance to hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons.
For Rohingya IDPs and other vulnerable people in the
Rakhine States. USAID provides shelter, water, and COVID-19
prevention among other services.
In health, USAID has expended health service delivery
through NGO's, ethnic health organizations and the private
sector. Burma currently has the lowest proportion of people who
are fully vaccinated against COVID-19 in Southeast Asia. The
regime secured about 60 million doses from the People's
Republic of China, India, and Russia as of February 13th and
has administered two doses to about 36 percent of the
population.
The COVID-19 vaccine facility COVAX allocated, but has yet
to deliver about 10.7 million doses to Burma, since this is
pending agreement regarding vaccine distribution. USAID and
like minded donors agree that COVAX can play a unique role in
vaccinating people who cannot or will not seek vaccinations
through a regime controlled rollout. USAID supports site
readiness for COVID-19 in terms of the vaccine doses that are
coming, and also promotes COVID-19 prevention, testing, and
treatment in community clinics.
Since the coup began, we have launched four new activities,
the first of these supports human rights defenders and pro-
democracy groups. Equipping civil society with the tools that
they actually need to respond to human rights violations and
atrocities. This is strengthening the foundations of resilience
that the people will rely on to achieve their Democratic
aspirations.
The second will strengthen the quality of basic education
through nongovernments, ethnic and Monastic providers helping
them meet community needs and this includes out of school youth
as well.
Finally, two health activities will ensure that people in
conflict affected and hard to reach areas can still access
malaria, HIV, and TB services that benefit the people of Burma
and help prevent global threats. USAID will continue to look
for new opportunities to support the people of Burma as we work
to regain what has been lost in the face of this derailed
Democratic trajectory.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent USAID. And I am
looking forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hart follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you for your testimony.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each. And
pursuant to House Rules, all time yielded is for the purpose of
questioning our witnesses. Because of the virtual format of
this hearing, I will recognize members by committee seniority,
alternating between Democrats and Republicans. If you miss your
turn, please let our staff know and we will circle back to you.
If you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone and
address the chair verbally.
I will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes. To both
witnesses, thank you for your testimony. A few weeks ago,
Chairman Meeks, myself, Ranking Member Chabot had a chance to
virtually have a conversation with our Ambassador to Burma, Tom
Vajda. And I should recognize and thank the folks on or mission
that still operates in Rangoon for their service obviously
operating in a difficult circumstance.
He did give us an assessment of what we were seeing on the
ground. And maybe PDAS Moy I direct that first question to you.
This feels very different right now but, you know, but the
Tatmadaw has made statements that they have been sanctioned
before, that they can survive the sanctions and, you know,
continue to operate.
And that may necessarily be true, but what seems different
this time is the rising up of the Burma people and the
resiliency of this resistance movement. And the increase in
violence, how the Burma people are coming together with some of
the ethnic minorities, whether it is under the National Unity
Government. And my big fear is that this may be a long
protracted conflict that may spill into an all out civil war.
And the diplomatic opportunity to find a solution may be
closing fairly rapidly. And while it is not synonymous with
what we saw in the Middle East and Syria, I mean there are some
similarities that you may have a full on staled State that does
put tremendous on the region and the other countries in the
region.
I ask the question PDAS Moy, is the window to find a
diplomatic solution closing? Is there a diplomatic solution
that does not include bringing the Tatmadaw to the table in
some way to deescalate violence? And then what are the
opportunities--I touched in my opening statement on the
importance of ASEAN here.
And again, I think the Indonesians and others have done a
wonderful job trying to push ASEAN to lead a solution, but are
there--you know, India clearly has some concerns here, China
clearly has some concerns. And is there a place where our
interests may align?
So I will recognize PDAS Moy first.
Mr. Moy. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for recognizing Ambassador Vajda's incredible work out in the
field and his mission out there who continue to work in some
very unfavorable conditions to say the least.
You really raise a very good point about the difference
between 2022 and the 1990's. I think a year ago you would hear
many sort of grizzled veterans of the region say, well, we can
expect the junta will consolidate power and prevail as it has
in the past. Well, that did not happen as you noted. And one of
the reasons for that and I think that all of us agree that over
the last few years because of the influence of Democratic
governance, the people of Burma, especially those younger
generations continue to thirst for governance that represents
the people's interest and the rule of law.
And so, the situation is much different today where if you
ask people on the ground, people in the region, they would say,
well, they had thought that the junta would have consolidated
power by now. But in fact, that is not the case at all. If you
are on the ground, and Ambassador Vajda's noted this to us,
they are not in control. And one of the reasons is there is so
much opposition, especially among those who continue to thirst
for that democracy.
I do agree with you completely that we still, even though
we have tapped into multilateral groups and we have talked to
like minded countries, we can still urge more coordination in
terms of showing the junta that they are not likely to avail in
the near future and their options are limited. And we are
hopeful that that creates an environment that is conducive for
all parties, especially those who are promoting nonviolence and
a return to democracy.
An environment where they can get together. Ambassador
Vajda has said this often to us, and I think it is absolutely
true, and that is the change in Burma must come within. And I
am hopeful, we are all hopeful that with U.S. support and other
countries, like minded countries and also you mentioned
partners like India.
And also maybe reaching out, I know that Secretary Blinken
has spoken to China about Burma issues as well, but other
parties, especially those on the border can play a role in
encouraging the kind of dialog and maybe disabusing the notion
that this is going to be the junta of the 1990's prevailing
once again.
Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And since we are a smaller group today, we will probably do
a second round of questions, because members have a number of
other questions.
Let me go and recognize Representative Ann Wagner from
Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Russia has undermined the international response to the
coup by selling the junta lower than $2.3 billion in weapons
over the last year, while it prepares the most significant
threat to peace in Europe since World War II.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Moy, what consequences will the
United States impose on Russia for being complicit in the
Tatmadaw's staggering human rights abuses?
Mr. Moy. Well, thank you very much for that question,
Congresswoman.
While we continue to press the regime to cease the violence
release all those who are unjustly detained and return Burma
back to democracy. And you have noted with regard to
international arms sales and flows into Burma, I am not going
to personally name and shame myself. But I think we all know
what you are talking about, because you cited the name of the
country.
You know, we lead efforts last June at the U.N. General
Assembly to call on the suspension of arms flows into Burma.
And the Secretary himself has pledged to seek ways to cutoff
the regime's access to weapons.
Just earlier this month we cosigned with 35 other country's
a statement commemorating the 1 year anniversary of the coup.
And there was a prominent mention of a call for an arms embargo
and the end to transfers to the regime.
I think we all know that arms trafficking is one of the
kind of shadowy or even shady types of transactions we see out
there. There are times when our government learns about
potential arms flows or different packages that could go into
Burma. And when we learned of this information, we can work
bilaterally to try to dissuade countries----
Mrs. Wagner. Now, I appreciate that. $2.3 billion in
weapons over the last year alone from Russia is unconscionable.
I am certainly proud, let me just say that Congress has never
hesitated to call the violence against the Rohingya what it is
in fact, which is genocide. But the United States has now at
last recognized the Uyghur and the Armenian genocide, but has
not yet recognized a Rohingya genocide. And Deputy Assistant
Secretary Moy, why has the Administration neglected to make a
formal determination on the Rohingya genocide?
Mr. Hart. Thank you very much for the question. As you
know, the Secretary did commit to a review last year of the
atrocities committed against Rohingya. And the review would
make a determination whether it fit the criteria for genocide
determination. The review is ongoing. I do not have a timetable
for you in terms of when that will conclude, but I think what
makes this determination so impactful is that we review factual
information, we review all the evidence, we review, you know,
the interviews of people. And then we make an objective
determination.
And so, I think at the end of this process, we will give a
recommendation to the Secretary. Again, this is ongoing, but we
are going to be meticulous in how we approach that review.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, let me just jump in, because I have so
many other questions. But I have to say, I hope that you will
take into account Congress' lead in calling this in fact what
it is, genocide, because it has been very bipartisan.
I also, let me just say, I am outraged that China and
Russia are impeding efforts to craft a robust response to the
coup in the United Nations. Deputy Assistant Secretary Moy, how
is the United States working to break this deadlock over an
international arms embargo on the Burmese military?
Mr. Moy. Well, as I noted, we led and effort last June at
the General Assembly in New York to call out countries and to
call on an arms embargo. I think that with regard to Russia in
particular, because we see that country as being the sort of
the main perpetrator in this case. There are other countries as
well. But I think that to find ways to apply pressure,
international pressure, using other like minded countries where
we come together, we call on all countries to refrain from arms
flowing in.
I think that when arms do flow into Burma, it necessarily
means that there will be more destablization there, there will
be more violence. And I hardly think, especially with border
countries that is in the interest of Burma's neighbors. And so,
we are going to rely on like mindedness to help persuade or
dissuade Russia from those kinds of transactions.
Mrs. Wagner. The time is urgent. My time has run out.
I appreciate your indulgence, Mr. Chairman. And I yield
back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Wagner.
Let me now recognize the gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms.
Houlahan for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Mr. Hart
and Mr. Moy for joining us today.
Last May, this committee held a hearing on at the time the
recent coup in Burma and how the United States was responding.
And I asked at that time about the potential positive impact
that American businesses could have if they stayed in Burma by
continuing to provide jobs and economic support to local
communities.
So as a followup to that question, I was wondering if you
could tell me if the State Department or USAID is indeed
tracking American commercial involvement in Burma still? And if
a significant number of companies chose to leave or to stay?
And for those possibly that stayed, has their presence in fact
supported the Burmese people?
And either one of you please. Thank you.
Mr. Moy. I do not know, Craig, if you wanted to start. I
can----
Mr. Hart. Sure.
Mr. Moy. Go ahead, please.
Mr. Hart. Sure. Thank you. Thank you so much for the
question. And I would say that one of the areas that we have
very much focused in on has been the humanitarian assistance in
food security. And so, what we have been doing as part of that
food security spectrum is both bringing in significant amounts
of humanitarian assistance through our partners, but also
looking at local options for supporting the small holder
farmers for processing locally, to ensure that there is another
option to food security.
And so, that is one of areas where we had worked with the
private sector to be able to engage on that. I do not currently
have a breakout of U.S. companies within that mix, but that is
very much an area that we are zeroing in on.
The other area that we have worked with private sector is
the health provision, looking at private health clinics,
because many people are not comfortable or cannot assess public
clinics. So therefore, we have shifted our entire program to
look at working with other partners, be they local NGO's,
international, and others who are operating in that space as
well, because the health gains that we had achieved are
really--have significantly backslid in areas like TB, and other
maternal and child and health areas as well. And so, we are
looking for a range of partners very much to include private
sector to help address those gaps.
Thank you.
Mr. Moy. In terms of American businesses and other
businesses for that matter who are working in Burma, we
regularly consult with them. As you may have seen on the 1 year
anniversary of the coup, we actually issued a business advisory
to frankly or to have a frank discussion about the potential
hazards of working in Burma.
We do support businesses that are legitimately working
there because our commitment is to helping the people of Burma.
And we think that having economic activity there, especially
when they are trusted U.S. firms and trusted foreign farms,
that can help the population there.
But it is tricky. We want to make sure that we are not
legitimizing the junta. We are not legitimizing what we regard
as an illegitimate force that took over a year ago. And so, to
make sure that those sources of revenue do not flow to those
who are perpetrating violence that is----
Ms. Houlahan. Sure. Sure.
And I totally understand from both of you gentlemen the
dangers that exist if the resources that we are sending end up
having unintended consequences. But I do think it is intriguing
and interesting that as near as I can tell neither of you know
of what businesses remain that are American, you know, run or
operated, or maybe have we not documented whether they have
stayed?
Do we have a very directed and specific outreach to them
that clearly these--or not clearly, I would assume these would
be trusted assets and resources because they are American owned
and operated. So it is intriguing to me that we do not have a
direct program or plan or understanding of where they are. Is
that a fair statement?
Mr. Moy. We do keep contact through our embassy. I do not
know--I am not aware of any comprehensive list of U.S. firms
that are working there. However, we are in touch with American
citizens who do business there. And there is a Chamber of
Commerce as well that we maintain contact with.
Again, we would advocate on behalf of U.S. firms that are
trying to do legitimate business there is it is in our national
interest to help the Burmese people and to make sure--I think
earlier there was a mention, and we hate to use this
terminology because it sounds so ominous, but we do not want
Burma to be a failed State.
Ms. Houlahan. Yes.
Mr. Moy. And if the economy does not exist and it continues
to plummet further, that is exactly what we might have.
Ms. Houlahan. No. I appreciate that. I was waning seconds.
I know I have run out of time. I want to foot stomp on the fact
that we should be benefiting from the private sector, as you
guys have mentioned, and particularly those who are American-
owned businesses and operated in the area would be seem to be
trusted resources. And I think we should have a better handle
on who they are and how we can be using them.
And with that, I yield back. And thank you for your time,
gentlemen.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Houlahan.
And with that, let me go ahead and recognize the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Perry, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. I thank the chairman, my friend, the gentleman
from California.
Mr. Moy, I think I will start with you, if you do not mind.
Secretary Blinken when he was confirmed, I think, made a
commitment to make a determination on the Rohingya genocide.
And I am sure you know, and certainly my colleague, Ms. Wagner,
who has brought this up. I think it is kind of all on our
minds. I think in 2018, if memory serves correctly, about 400,
so that has a fairly large chunk of Congress. It is hard to
get, you know, 40 on agreement on something, let alone 400
agreed, you know, to characterize it as such.
I am just wondering if you know and can impart to us what
else it will take or is there something that the Secretary's
waiting on? Is there something he needs to see? What are we
waiting on regarding the determination of genocide?
Mr. Moy. Thank you for the question, Mr. Congressman.
And as I noted earlier, the review is ongoing. I think that
it is just--I think the Secretary is waiting for the conclusion
of that. And so, I do not think that there is any sort of
special delay or reason for delay here. It is just--it is a
fairly meticulous process. It has to go through, you know,
legal review as well as other.
But that does not really stop us at all from continuing to
condemn those who perpetrated these atrocities. And we have
taken steps in recent years, including through global
Magnitsky, to identify some of those key figures involved in
the atrocities and it does not stop us from applying sanctions
on those individuals.
Mr. Perry. And listen, I appreciate that. I do not know. I
suspect there is no timeline associated with it. And look, you
know, as a guy who lived in the private sector, many of us
have, it is frustrating, you know, that we cannot get this
done. I know there is a process, but for goodness sakes. I
mean, you can imagine how much that would help us. It would
help the world community in dealing with what has happened in
Burma.
And quite honestly for the people that continue to suffer
there, my goodness. I mean, I do not know if you just wait
until there is nothing left to do to say, you know, we
recognize what happened in the past. I mean, we want to help
people now. We cannot change the past, but for goodness sakes,
let's speed it up. I would just say that. From my standpoint,
if you are going to send a message back to the Secretary, you
know, light a fire under somebody's rear end, you know. People
are being persecuted, they are being tortured, tormented, and
killed. It is unacceptable, quite honestly. It is just taking
too long.
I will just move on here. Can you or how do you assess
China's approach to Burma? And what do you believe their most
important goals are? And what they might do in the upcoming
months to pursue those goals? So where is China? What is their
position on Burma? What are they going to do?
Mr. Moy. Yes. Thank you for the question. It is a very
interesting one, because as a border country with a long
history, actually, especially the relationship between the sort
of familiar relationships across the border, China has a very
unique way of approaching Burma. What we would request, as we
do with other neighboring countries, is that they all play a
constructive role in achieving peace.
I think that China because of their concerns about
instability across their border, it does not matter if it is
Burma or any other country, it could be North Korea, it could
be other countries that I think there are 17 countries that sit
on China's borders, but I think that is always there, their
central concern. And so, you know, we have----
Mr. Perry. What are they willing to do about it?
Mr. Moy. Well, without going into, you know, too much
detail, it is my understanding that they have reached out to
some of the ethnic groups across the border. I think that they
are trying to in their own ways tamp down the level of violence
right now because it does not serve their interest. And that is
really where China usually comes from. It is not necessarily an
altruistic goal, but it is something that serves their own
national interest. And I think that keeping that border calm,
whether it has to----
Mr. Perry. Excuse me. Is the U.S. Government or any of our
NGO's working directly with China to facilitate our goals in
Burma?
Mr. Moy. I am not aware that we worked together on issues
like humanitarian assistance. I think as I understand they have
their own ways of getting vaccines to Burma. But we have
Secretary Blinken, in fact has raised with his counterpart the
Burma issue and our kind of shared interest in making sure that
the violence stops. And I think that there are other countries
that share those goals as well, including India.
Mr. Perry. OK. Thank you. My time has long expired.
I appreciate the chair's diligence and patience. Thank you
very much. And I yield.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Perry.
I see Mr. Sherman's camera on, but I do not see Mr.
Sherman.
Not seeing the gentleman from California, let me go ahead
and recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Representative
Levin, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much, Chair Bera, and thanks for
having this really important hearing.
I want to thank you Deputy Assistant Administrator Hart and
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary Moy for appearing before
us.
You know, this hearing today speaks not just to the
immediate and ongoing crisis in Burma, but also to larger
questions about our government's duty to the international
community in the face of genocide and our willingness to adhere
to the Democratic values to which we aspire.
During my first trip as a Member of Congress, I visited the
Rohingya refugee camps in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh, where over
700,000 people fled after a horrific campaign of violence
against them.
Long since that trip now, I remain shocked and saddened
that our government has not acknowledged what we already know
to be true, military forces in Burma committed atrocities that
amount to genocide against the Rohingya people. In fact, I
shudder to think that it is in part because of our government's
refusal to recognize this fact that the Tatmadaw continue to
act with impunity and their brazenness grows by the day.
PDAS Moy, I was glad that reading your testimony that the
State Department is working to ensure those responsible for
atrocities and other human rights abuses are being held to
account to quote you. And I have heard some of the earlier back
and forth on this.
But, you know, in 2018 the State Department found that
violence committed by the Burmese military against the
Rohingya, including from August to October 2017 was not only,
and I am quoting, ``extreme, large scale, widespread, and
seemingly geared toward both terrorizing the population and
driving out the Rohingya residents.'' end quote. But also
quote, ``well planned and coordinated.'' end quote.
Given this and reports by groups like the U.S. Holocaust
Museum, and fortified rights that painstakingly, sir, detailed
the systematic violence and crimes committed by the Tatmadaw by
Burmese militants working with them and others. The question of
why the State Department is slow walking this determination
just has to be answered.
On the anniversary of the coup this year, the Jewish
Rohingya Justice Network issued a statement calling out the
United States and the international community's failure to help
the people of Burma. As they put it, remaining silent is not an
option, particularly when it is the very same military that led
the genocide against the Rohingya that is now in control and
continuing to commit atrocities against the Burmese people.
So PDAS Moy, I understand that you are not answering this
question directly today. But I really need you to commit to, me
to a timeline to get back to me, or to explain why the State
Department is taking so much time to something with all due
respect to your earlier statements about how painstaking you're
being and so forth. This is extremely well documented, sir. So
what--give me an answer.
Mr. Moy. Thank you very much, Congressman.
I wouldn't agree with the characterization that we are slow
walking this at all. In fact, I know that this----
Mr. Levin. Five years, sir, it is 5 years.
Mr. Moy. The review--I mean, the Secretary committed last
year to the review and we are undertaking that review. You
know, we are still in the process of finalizing and we are just
going to be very meticulous. It is--we take this very, very
seriously. And I can commit to you that we will continue to
share information about this with you and your team about how
we are proceeding. And we know that people are watching. We get
inquiries from human rights organizations, and other interested
parties all the time.
Mr. Levin. All right. Well, let me go on. I just--I
appreciate your willingness to be in touch with my office
directly.
And Mr. Chair, without objection, if it is all right, I
would like to enter the full statement from the Rohingya Jewish
Justice Network into the report.
Mr. Bera. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Levin. PDAS Moy, I want to turn very quickly to another
way the Biden Administration can hold the Tatmadaw accountable.
I am the colead of the new resolution with the chair and
ranking member of this subcommittee, Chair Meeks, Congresswoman
Eshoo, which both recognizes the sanctions the Biden
Administration has imposed thus far and calls for you to go
further including by sanctioning Tatmadaw-controlled entities
and State-owned enterprises.
Does the State Department agree that continuing to allow
entities like the Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise to operate
freely enables the Tatmadaw to continue to act with impunity
and gives them resources for their oppression?
Mr. Moy. Thank you so much for that question.
It is one that we have been discussing over the last year.
I can say that there is no tool out there that we have
rejected. No tool out there that might have an impact on the
calculation of the junta that we have dismissed. And so,
without going into specifics and revealing our hand, I would
say that we continue that discussion.
We also, and I think, Mr. Chairman, I know that you have
traveled in the region fairly recently, as you probably heard
when we applied these broader kinds of actions, we always have
to consider some of the effects especially on the people of
Burma. And so, those are the kinds of things that we consider.
The bigger the impact, we do understand that there are some
actions that we could take that might have a very, very deep
impact on the thinking of the junta. But we also have to
remember that they do have impacts on ordinary citizens as
well. And that is something that we really do have to take into
consideration.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
Mr. Moy. And also consideration of other countries.
Mr. Levin. Well, thanks.
I think you may know that I am the author of other
legislation to deal with the impact of sanctions on civilians.
And so I am very sensitive to that.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to close by thanking the State
Department and in particular you all have mentioned Ambassador
Vajda. You know, this team, Mr. Chairman, and Ambassador Vajda
in Myanmar worked tirelessly to win the release of my
constituent, Danny Fenster, who was unjustly imprisoned for 5-
1/2 months. And I will always be grateful to the embassy and
consular officials in Burma and the whole State Department team
for their assistance in getting Danny Fenster out of that
unjust detention.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you, Representative Levin.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Burchett for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I realize that we
skipped Representative Sherman. If we need to go back to him we
can do that if you need to. I am cool with it.
Mr. Bera. I am sorry. Go ahead and continue.
Mr. Burchett. Do what?
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Chairman, is it my turn or is it the
gentlemen's turn?
Mr. Bera. We are alternating Democrat and Republican. So
Mr. Burchett, if you want to go and then Mr. Sherman you are up
next.
Mr. Sherman. OK.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This for Mr. Moy and Mr. Hart. I understand that the
Burmese military they do not even recognize the Rohingya
people. And I am wondering what USAID's doing to help these
folks specifically. But then Mr. Moy, you mentioned that they I
think, I am curious about the humanitarian aid that we are
sending and they are ripping us off and they are stealing it.
And I am wondering what we are doing to stop that? And how much
of it is actually getting to the people we intend it to go to?
That is for both of you all.
Mr. Hart. Me, I can start it, if that is OK.
So thank you very much for the question. That is an
extremely important areas for us of course. And the U.S.
Government is leading the donor and humanitarian response to
the conflict. And we have about 1.6 billion since August 2017
of which USAID is about 711 of that. In terms of responding
both to the conflict within Burma and to the refugees from
Burma. So that is the large picture aspect of things.
For Fiscal Year 2021, for example, USAID provided almost
$50 million in critical humanitarian needs of IDPs in Burma for
about 430,000 people. What that really means in terms of items
on the ground is that what we are doing is we are procuring
locally and regionally to be able to provide protection
services, nutrition, mobile medical clinics, shelter and
settlements there, also essential household items, sanitation
kits, drinking water, et cetera. So the basics. This picture is
shifting inside of Burma week by week and sometimes day by day.
And our partners are doing a few things to adapt because
adaptation is critical.
So one, we are working with World Food Programme and others
to be expand our local NGO base to be able to push this--these
items out to Burma in a variety of ways to ensure that we are
actually addressing the most needy of individuals through our
systems.
The great thing is that we have, and since it has been
almost 10 years since we have reopened our USAID office in
Burma and therefore have built a platform by which we can
continue to operate. We have a lot of the relationships in
place. And so with the humanitarian assistance, we are
operating from those relationships. We are also very much
closely working with the U.N. and others such as the ASEAN
center for humanitarian assistance there as well where we have
been assisting them in the past and continue to collaborate
with them to look for new opportunities and new ways to be able
to ensure that these items reach the intended beneficiaries.
That is one.
You also mentioned in terms of the aspect of is this--are
these materials actually getting to the intended recipients.
One, we immediately after the coup, we shifted out $42 million
worth of our portfolio away from assistance that could have
benefited the government. So we took that immediate action. We
took that assistance and made sure that that was supporting the
civil society actors and others in a very direct fashion.
But since then, we have also launched additional programs
for education, as well as human rights in civil society. And
so, we are taking those actions to immediately stand up our
response to support exactly these groups. If there is at any
time--while we do not provide any assistance of course to the
regime, if there is any type of report, we have reporting
mechanisms from our partners in terms of standard practice. But
we also have a public hotline to be able to have folks call in
and identify issues that they see.
And so, we are taking every precaution to ensure that there
is no overlap there, that these items are not hitting anyone
within the regime or that the regime is allowed to even take
credit for any of those. And so, I think those have some of the
critical pieces that you referred to, sir.
Mr. Moy. I think Mr. Hart actually went into some of the
areas I was going into. Our main principle is really to make
sure that we do not legitimize the junta and that we close off
all forms of revenue. And so, I think that we do have some the
system in place to ensure that do not happen.
Specifically in terms of Rakhine State, USAID and the State
Department's Bureau of population refugees and migration, what
we know as PRM. And with the generous support of Congress has
provided more than $201 million in humanitarian assistance to
those affected by the Rakhine State crisis in Burma and that is
since 2017.
So I think in total, Mr. Hart mentioned this before, but we
provided more than $1.2 billion to assist those effected by the
crisis in Burma. And Bangladesh as well where about 900,000
Rohingya are right now. But we work as Craig said, to make sure
that none of those moneys go to the illegitimate junta.
Mr. Burchett. I think I am about out of time.
But I just want to warn you all, the tides are kind of
shifting in Washington. In the past I have supported USAID, but
I would hope we could get some definite answers over if this
aid is actually getting to where it is supposed to be.
And I had some others, but the Russians and their
involvement with the Chinese, but I believe my time is up, Mr.
Chairman. Is that correct?
Mr. Bera. That is correct, Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Thank you, brother. Appreciate
you.
Mr. Bera. Thank you. Let me go ahead and recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I want to build on other comments,
particularly those of Mr. Levin, regarding the Rohingya. We
have seen a democracy movement in Burma, Myanmar that has
inspired us. Many of us have come to know Aung San Suu Kyi as
an inspirational, figure and we are so disappointed when the
democracy movement in Burma was unwilling to State clearly that
all the Rohingya born in Burma should be given citizenship
documents and repatriated.
Has Aung San Suu Kyi herself embraced that explicitly?
Mr. Moy. Thank you, Congressman.
Not that we are aware of but we have focused our attention
on the atrocities themselves and that is why we have called out
the junta. The Burmese military is responsible.
Mr. Sherman. We are being called upon--it is--look, we know
how bad the junta is but we are being called upon to support a
democracy movement that seems to believe in democracy for
almost all the people of Burma and cannot bring itself to
oppose the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya. They make--they
make a few statements like, well, we should respect the
Rohingya according to Burmese law. Then you look at Burmese law
and it says wipe out the Rohingya or at least do not give them
citizenship documents. Make them all illegal residents and then
presumably expel them.
So what have--we have--our friend should listen to us more
than we expect our enemies to listen to us. Has the democracy
movement said that the Rohingya people who were born in Burma
are Burmese citizens and entitled to citizenship documents?
Ms. Moanker. Not that I am aware of, sir.
Mr. Sherman. That is consistent with what I know and is
very disappointing. And I would point out that if neither the
junta nor even the democracy--if Burma is unwilling to govern
its territory in a way that is non-genocidal to the people who
have a right to live there, then maybe a portion of Rakhine
States should become independent or join Bangladesh. We have
only recognized this century, I believe, one changed
international border, that being the creation of South Sudan.
And we did so precisely because the government in Khartoum was
intent upon oppression, some would say genocide, of a portion
of its territory and they lost that territory.
I am also concerned with the fact that we are still giving
economic aid to Burma. I brought this up in the hearing that we
did on September 28 of last year. And we have got a way, money
we send, economic development aid we send to Burma to aid that
we could provide to starving people in Yemen or Tigray. And I
understand why we would provide food aid to displaced people.
But we are also providing economic investment aid that was
defended by your colleague, Mr. Shear, on the theory that we
need to keep the Burmese people on our side. Should we be
helping the junta meet its economic development objectives in
Burma-Myanmar?
Mr. Moy. Thank you, Congressman.
With regard to the Rohingya issue, I am not--I am not going
to speak on behalf of the various groups, especially the pro
democracy groups. But in our recent meetings, in fact, with the
NUG, they have invited in Rohingya to represent part of their
larger groups. And so was that the first time that we covered--
--
Mr. Sherman. That is a step in the right direction and
clearly the democracy groups are less bent on ethnic cleansing
and genocide than the junta is but that is the low Bart.
Go ahead.
Mr. Moy. Yes, thanks very much.
But, yes, there are small steps, and I think there is
recognition, especially after having more and more
consultations with international partners and countries that
are interested in democracy like the United States.
I think we talked about economic issues a little bit
earlier. We are very concerned when the junta can benefit from
any economic arrangements. And so we, when we consult with
companies, that is one thing that we caution. And we are very
much a part, but we are very much in favor of a legitimate
businesses that can help the Burmese people.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, my question was about American tax
dollars going to economic development in Burma. And that ought
to be redirected to less ambiguous situations, situations sort
of where it is clearly beneficial to the goals that we all
have.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you, Representative Sherman.
Let me now recognize the gentlelady from California, Mrs.
Kim, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman Bera and Acting
Member Ann Wagner. And I want to thank all of our witnesses for
joining us today.
You know, Congress stands united in continuing to condemn
the violent coup in Myanmar last year. And that resulted in the
murdering of unarmed civilians, destruction of the
democratically elected government, and continued persecution of
ethnic minorities.
However, the United States' and Allies' pressure on Myanmar
can only accomplish so much, and the country is no stranger to
isolation and relying on China and its Southeast Asian
neighbors.
The question--the first question is to you, Secretary Moy.
Could you please assess ASEAN's efforts to lessen the violence
in Myanmar and urge a return to dialog, and how has the United
States supported ASEAN diplomacy on Myanmar or urged a more
forceful response from its Southeast Asia neighbors?
Mr. Moy. Thank you for the question, Madam Congresswoman.
It is a very good question because, since the very beginning
last year, the, you know, days following the coup, ASEAN has
had to respond to a very uncomfortable situation for them
because so many of the ASEAN members do not support what
happened there.
I think that you saw in the last few months, even though
the five-point consensus had not been adopted yet, ASEAN has
sought to marginalize the junta by not allowing political
representation from Myanmar, from Burma in ASEAN leadership
meetings.
And so just today I was reading an account of the ongoing
ASEAN foreign ministers meeting in Cambodia, and they have not
allowed Burma to send political representation there. So they
are at odds.
And so we really do tip our cap to them because this is
quite unprecedented for ASEAN. As you know, it is a consensus
organization. And they sometimes may be willing to try to
appease or they are unwilling to take a harder position. But we
think that there, in ASEAN today, there is recognition that
this is--this is--that the coup cannot be supported, cannot be
legitimized by ASEAN. And there is, you know, choosing ways to
make that known.
And I think it was, from what I understand, it was very
unexpected from the perspective of the junta. They did not
believe that ASEAN would take this step, and they have. And so
I think that we will continue to rely on ASEAN's neutrality but
also use other kinds of diplomacy--Japan, Korea, India, those,
Australia, other like-mindeds--to make the junta aware that
2022 certainly is not the 1990's.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you so much.
I would also like to ask how you would describe the
opposition to the military junta government, including the
National Unity Government, specifically in organization goals
and decisionmaking. Are they seeking a return to the status quo
pre-coup, or are they looking to establish and reform the form
of government in Myanmar?
Mr. Moy. Thank you very much.
We have met a number of times with the National Unity
Government in recent months including at very senior levels of
the State Department. I know that in the NSC as well. Our
Deputy Secretary, Wendy Sherman, has met with the NUG and
Counselor Derek Chollet has. And I think those meetings were
very productive. We were able to learn that the NUG is very
much, you know, in favor of putting Burma back on the right
path toward full democracy.
And so those are areas that really do overlap with what we
think should happen there. So and not only the NUG, we would
continue to consult with other parts of, you know, civil
society, those who are in support of rule of law, in support of
democracy.
And, you know, I think that, you know, in contrast to times
past, this has really sobered the junta in the sense that what
they thought was going to happen was that they would simply
roll over these, you know, activists, those who favor
democracy. That hasn't happened at all.
Mrs. Kim of California. Proponents of opposition to the
military regime have claimed repeatedly that their organization
is inclusive of all ethnic groups and affiliations including
the Rohingya who have been subjected to ethnic cleansing and
potential genocide for years at the hands of the Myanmar
military.
Let me ask this question. I hope I have some time to do
this. Administrator Hart, is it accurate to say that the
Rohingya stand a better chance at receiving protection and
inclusion with the opposition? If the opposition were to
somehow take back control of the country, what would stop them
from continuing to carry out violent and discriminative
policies to the Rohingya?
Mr. Bera. And, Mr. Hart, I would have you to keep your
answer tight and short.
Mr. Hart. Thank you so much for the question.
While I think my colleague, Kim Moy, may have a more
fulsome answer to this, I think that what we are interested in
doing are assisting the people, the Rohingya and those who have
been affected in Burma. And so that has been our perspective in
terms of how can we best support them so that they can then
achieve their goals.
And that support right now is very basic in terms of the
need to ensure basic humanitarian issues are being addressed,
basic health issues are being addressed. That has been our
focus that enables them to further support their own goals.
Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
I do not think I have any time to yield back. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Bera. OK. Thank you, Representative Kim, and for both
you and Mr. Sherman raising the important issue that the
National Unity Government has to be an inclusive government. I
know in May, I think, it was Representative Levin that raised
that issue when we had a witness. We have also raised that
issue directly with the National Unity Government, if they want
full recognition, full support. They are slowly moving in that
direction, but they are not quite there, as PDAS Moy has
indicated. And we will continue to deliver that answer.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to our
witnesses.
Mr. Hart, you were talking about the mission of USAID is to
help the people and to get assistance to the people. Has USAID
explored or is it now providing humanitarian assistance to
locally administered territories outside the purview or control
of the current military government?
Mr. Hart. Thank you, sir, for that question.
Yes, we are providing a wide range of humanitarian
assistance through the front door, if you will, into Burma to
be able to provide a range that I summarized earlier in terms
of the basic needs, because across the board, education systems
have gone down, health systems have gone down, and we need
better opposites.
Mr. Connolly. So your answer is that, outside of the
control, territories that are outside the control of the
current military junta, that are locally administered, often
backed up by armed militias, we are, in fact, providing
assistance to those territories directly.
Mr. Hart. So assistance is going through both our
international and our local partners. They are adapting on a
regular basis to be able to pursue exactly what you are
speaking of which is delivering these items to the most
vulnerable. They are very innovative.
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry. I am worried about time, but
thank you.
Are you finding resistance from the military junta in your
efforts to do that?
Mr. Hart. Absolutely. And that is why we are definitely
relying on our implementing partner, partners to be able to be
as innovative as possible, given a conflict situation, to be
able to identify who is out there and that needs this
assistance, how we can best get them to them, and we are
working with other donor partners as well to be able to do just
that. We are pursuing as many avenues as we can.
Mr. Connolly. Got it. And the Chinese are already doing
that, are they not?
Mr. Hart. That is our understanding. What our coordination
mechanism usually is, is through the U.N. to be able to
coordinate with other donors, in addition to all of the other
donor conversations that are going on. The U.S.G. Has been
definitely the lead in terms of humanitarian assistance, but we
are also working with, as I mentioned earlier, the AHA Centre
out of ASEAN, the U.N. system, as well, in terms of providing
that response, and others to be able to coordinate the
humanitarian assistance that is coming into country.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Very heartening to hear.
Mr. Moy, why did the U.S. Government not declare genocide
when the Tatmadaw was involved in numerous atrocities in trying
to put down demonstrations opposing the military coup?
Mr. Moy. Mr. Congressman, I am not sure I can answer
exactly--oops. Sorry. I just unmuted myself.
I am not sure I can explain the reasons in the past. All I
can say is that the review is ongoing today to make that
determination. There, I think, are a number of steps that were
taken in recent years to make it known that those atrocities
were unacceptable. And, you know, we will continue to condemn
the regime because they were--the current military was
responsible for those, you know, violations of human rights
starting in 2017.
Mr. Connolly. Well, let me just say as a member, and I am
sure other members feel the same way, you know, the situation
in Myanmar is grave. The violence, the brutality exercised by
the military junta is deplorable, and at some point the U.S.
Government has to weigh in. We cannot, you know, for political
niceties or in the hope that maybe we can create a diplomatic
pipeline to the military by softening our position with respect
to the atrocities that have occurred and I do not mean to say
that we have soft-pedalled it.
But at some point it seems to me the heavy hammer here is
to say these are genocidal, you know, behaviors by the military
junta. And we also need to be very cognizant of the message we
are sending the Burmese people. You know, they have got to be
feeling very isolated right now. The United States is the
essential player even there for them, and that means that we
have got to weigh very carefully how we present this and how we
condemn it.
And so I strongly would urge you to go back to the State
Department with your colleagues and let them know that there
are many of us here on the Hill who believe the time has come
for a much stronger statement than just condemning atrocities.
I mean, of course, we all condemn atrocities. But this
pattern of atrocities means something. And what does it mean,
and what is the United States prepared to say with respect to
it?
Thank you, Mr. Moy.
Mr. Moy. Thank you. And we could understand the importance
and the urgency. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. I am sure you do. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Connolly.
Let me now recognize the gentlelady from Virginia, Ms.
Spanberger, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to followup the sort of line of questioning
related to sanctions. And certainly, you know, along with the
measures imposed last year, the Administration has now
sanctioned 65 individuals and sanctioned export controls on 26
different organizations with close regime ties.
So, Mr. Moy, I would love to begin with you. In your
assessment, could you--and I know that people have talked about
sanctions along the way throughout this hearing. But can you
give a baseline discussion of how effective these sanctions can
be or have been--excuse me? In particular, what are the effects
of sanctions on those who are aiding the Tatmadaw but from
within Burma who do not necessarily have foreign assets?
Mr. Moy. Yes, that is such a thoughtful observation right
there, Madam Congresswoman.
I think that the sanctions themselves were not intended to
in and of themselves create the change but are part of a larger
policy to change the thinking of the regime. I think we all
know that especially the junta leadership is not as exposed
maybe as other, you know, entities in other countries would be
to the international economy. And, therefore, sometimes
sanctions, even, you know, with a targeted approach, they might
not be the, you know, dispositive, shall we say, element in the
decisionmaking.
Ms. Spanberger. And so kind of, given that I think
throughout the course of the hearing today and even just
drawing out from your answer to my first question, you know,
could you just talk about what other policy tools or points of
leverage might be more impactful, you know, considerations
about a ban on aviation fuel going into Burma or Myanmar as an
effort to stop deadly air strikes? Are there other
considerations or policy tools that have been considered and
not implemented or that you would want to raise in response to
that question?
Mr. Moy. Yes, there have been other tools that have been
discussed. And, in fact, as I noted earlier, we haven't
actually rejected any of those as possible tools. We are trying
to find--we are trying to thread a needle, really, to make sure
we are causing no more harm out there to the people of Burma
but also delivering a message to the junta, too.
And so I think a few weeks ago you might have seen we
designated more or we made a few more designations in terms of
sanctions. We will continue to review more possibilities, and
that applies not just to those involved in or in more senior
leadership positions but also family members as well. You
mentioned the entities. We are also in contact with other
governments, those who might control financial pursestrings, so
to speak, that also might be able to apply a little bit more
pressure.
Ms. Spanberger. And so----
Mr. Moy. So----
Ms. Spanberger [continuing]. Mr. Moy, just kind of related
to that, because you mentioned some of out partner nations,
knowing that the military does draw not an inconsequential
amount of money from business interests and networks, in
addition to State-owned conglomerates, what has the United
States or any of our partners done to crack down on these other
sources of revenue that come in for the military? And what in
your estimation could be among the most effective ways for us
to cut down on the junta's access to foreign currency?
Mr. Moy. Right. Yes, without going into the specifics of
the information, we have had conversations with a number of
countries about the things they know and the actions they could
take, because sometimes these, you know, economic or these
transactions, if you will, are not made through the United
States.
And so when we do come across information, we can act on
that information. And we have let other governments know that
we will be coming to them. And I think that there is a
willingness----
Ms. Spanberger. And coming to them with disapproval. Am I
understanding that correctly?
Mr. Moy. Right. Coming to them with information that they
can act on as actionable, so to speak, and in our various
conversations, especially when we have been on the road, I
think that we have heard actually very positive reactions
because, when it comes to other countries, they do not want
their names sullied by dealing with the junta, too. And so they
have their own interests in working with us to make sure some
of those sources of revenue are cutoff.
Ms. Spanberger. Excellent.
Well, thank you, Mr. Moy.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Spanberger.
I am going to allow us to do a second round of questioning,
and I know Mr. Levin had a followup question. We are going to
lose him in a moment.
But, Mr. Levin, if you want to go ahead and be recognized
for a second question.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. You are the
best.
So I want to followup on a couple of questions that I think
Mr. Sher--you know, Representative Sherman, Representative Kim
asked and broaden this out a little bit beyond the questions
about the Rohingya because, you know, in the November 2020
election, more than 1-1/2 million voters or would-be, should-be
voters were disenfranchised from mostly among ethnic minority
communities in Kachin, Karen, Mon, Rakhine, Shan, and Chin
States.
And so this is--and in our resolution, after the coup, we
called not just to restore the government, the, you know, sort
of weird balance between the military and the civilian
government that had existed but true democracy and inclusive
democracy. And what is interesting to me, PDAS Moy, there is
have in the resistance in the organizing of the people to, you
know, against the coup regime, there have been chutes, right,
growing of collaboration. And I think of the majority Burma
people realizing that everyone is in this together and that
they need to work together.
So can you just say a little more about how that--where
does that stand today, not just about the, you know, the sort
of opposition shadow government but amongst--what is happening
in the country about people organizing so that the coup regime
might be followed by a more fulsome democratic order?
Mr. Moy. Yes, thank you, Congressman, for recognizing
actually that there are changes that are underway.
I do want to temper all of this. I mean, you used the
metaphor chutes. Right? And I think that that is true. These
are changes that will happen, you know, gradually over time.
But I think to the extent that we can help in that
conversation, we have urged various groups, civil society
groups, those that are interested in, you know, restoring
democracy in Burma. We have had a constant conversation about
further recognition. And we see, as Congressman Sherman noted,
you know, a little bit of that coming through in where the NUG
has invited representation from Rohingya.
And the statement is true for ethnic groups as well. They
are finding common cause. I guess that is sort of a good thing.
But, you know, we still have a lot, of, you know, real estate
to cover when it comes, to you know, full recognition and these
kinds of issues.
I know my time is running short. But I did want to pick up
op something you mentioned earlier, Congressman. I do want to
thank you actually for, you know, the work that you did,
continuing to consult with the Fenster family. I know that
Bryan Fenster was in touch with you and other family members.
We could not have--no one can do this alone. And when we saw
Danny Fenster, when he came to the department shortly after his
released, he was quite effusive in praise for all of those, you
know, people in Michigan who came to bat on his behalf. I just
wanted to mention that.
Mr. Levin. Thanks. It was a whole-of-community effort. That
is for sure.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And if I could just followup on the point Mr. Levin made,
it does seem like the Myanmar people, you know, now that they
are being attacked by the Tatmadaw, are realizing the
atrocities that were perpetrated against the Rohingya. There is
a long ways to go, but with the common enemy and recognizing
they have all got to come together, the fight for freedom, you
know, for those in the National Unity Government that are
listening to this, that is a step in the right direction. And,
you know, democracy is inclusive and, you know, we would like
to continue to see that as you fight for your freedom.
Let me recognize Representative Kim if she has any
additional questions she would like to ask. Representative Kim?
Any addition questions?
If not, let me recognize myself for an additional question.
And maybe this is for Mr. Hart.
One thing that, you know, when I was in Thailand, talking
to the NGO's, I think Deputy Secretary Sherman heard this as
well, a long history of refugee camps along the border. And
this was in late October. Obviously, the violence has
escalated, the targeted air strikes and the number of displaced
individuals.
Can you give us an assessment of what we are seeing in
terms of the refugee camps, both internally displaced folks--
and certainly we have read open-source stories of, you know,
refugees fleeing into India as well as, you know, Cambodia and
Thailand--and kind of your sense from the USAID perspective or
your implementing partners that are in the camp how well-
equipped the camps are, you know, if the border countries are
allowing folks to flee across the border or if they are being
kept, you know, in camps internally within Burma.
Mr. Hart. Thank you for that question, sir.
Yes, we have--one of the benefits to having an office both
in Thailand and in Burma--and we have opened our office almost
10 years ago in Burma--is being able to have that longstanding
relationship with civil society, the civil society that will
both be responding to and is responding to the humanitarian
assistance crisis but also that same civil society that will
give voice to the democratic movement. And so we are working
across the board with local entities to be able to respond to
the range of issues that are coming up.
To address your specific question, what we have--we also
actually, Kim Moy and I, with State counselor traveled to
Thailand, as well, to have those conversations. We have very
much working together with our Thai counterparts, as well as
with our ASEAN counterparts across the board, to be able to be
creative which it comes to solution sets. We need that
creativity now because the situation is very much fluid. On a
week-to-week basis, things are changing based on the conflict.
And so we need to be responsive, and we need to be adapting to
the situation.
That is exactly the type of guidance that we have given our
partners is to be able to look for opportunities when they
present themselves. There are definitely a sufficient number of
roadblocks in our way, but we have partners and standing
relationships to be able to understand how best we can get some
of these items and services to a range of those being affected
by this.
When it comes to along the border areas, that is an area
very much that we have been speaking with the Thais about as
well and have gotten their support as we look at the best way
in which to address the very complex situation.
And so we do have partners on both sides of the border.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
And let me now recognize Representative Spanberger, if she
has additional questions.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
So just to followup a little bit related--well, on an issue
separate from sanctions, the coup and certainly the ensuing
conflict has resulted in a spike in the transnational drug
trafficking challenges that we see globally, particularly from
drugs emanating and originating in the Golden Triangle region
of Burma. So I was wondering if you all could address some of
the spillover effect, whether narcotics, crystal meth, meth
pills, heroin are destined for countries including the United
States, emanating out of this region, and what you are seeing
in terms of what is the actual kind of current status and then
what is the U.S. response.
Mr. Moy. Well, thank you very much, Congresswoman.
Our assessment is that it is one source of revenue for the
junta and that, since the coup, there has actually been an
increase in the amount of narcotics trafficking coming out of
Burma. And so it is a difficult situation for us just because
of, you know, the instability on the ground.
We do not have our RDA colleagues who are with us today.
But I would say this is something that we have noted through
our information channels, and we are going have to take steps.
But it is, you know, an issue that is very difficult to resolve
just because what is happening on the ground.
Ms. Spanberger. And have we taken either in a collaborative
way or have we discussed or raised this issue related to the
increased flow of narcotics emanating from Burma? Has that been
an issue that we have raised with some of our partners?
Mr. Moy. I think that our main thrust when we talk to our
partners has been the path forward or the return to the path
for democracy for Burma. I think probably increasingly,
depending on the partner, because there are a number of border
countries that are very concerned about the opium trade and
what it might mean to their own, you know, stability and their
own economies, I think that it may actually become more of a
conversation piece down the road.
You know, in the past there has definitely been concern on
the Chinese side of the border about the opium trade and I do
not think that they are interested in seeing an increase in the
amount of drugs or narcotics going into the PRC and I think
that there are other sort of neighboring countries as well that
are concerned about that.
But, again, you know, the situation is unstable as it is
and the trajectory of Burma right now. And, you know, I do not
want to return to the terminology failed State but, you know,
that is where we are headed. There are so many problems that we
are dealing with, and narcotics would be absolutely one of
those.
Ms. Spanberger. Well, certainly in my life before Congress,
when I was over at CIA, I spent some time working in what was
then called the counternarcotics center and certainly have seen
firsthand how an uncontrolled and unbridled or unprofitable
narcotics trafficking enterprise can really just cut efforts to
democratize or strengthen democracies off at the knees.
So I thank you for your answers and I do hope that, moving
forward, central to our efforts to advocate for democratic
values that we will look at some of the illicit activities that
are certainly contributing to the proliferation of criminal
activity and a move away from democracy.
So thank you very much to both of our witnesses.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Representative Span.
Let me now recognize Representative Young Kim and see if
she has got any additional questions.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you so much, and I do
apologize for my technical difficulty here with my computer
this morning.
Secretary Moy, since the coup, Radio Free Asia and Voice of
America both have experienced a dramatic spike in audience. We
have Facebook and online with millions turning to these news
sources as the junta mercilessly cracks down on local outlets
and journalists. But with more Burmese people fleeing unrest
and to border provinces and zones, where there is less cell
signal available, people are turning to radio, particularly
shortwaves, to get potentially lifesaving means of information.
So is the Administration including the State, USAID, and
the USAGM aware of that? And how are they coordinating efforts
to ensure that the shortwave is sustained for the people of
Burma who rely on outside media but especially the RFA and the
extensive coverage of what is happening?
Mr. Moy. Well, thank you very much. And it is actually a
very good observation about what is happening on the ground.
And so one of the things that we are aware of is the huge
crackdown on domestic journalists there. I think that is why
they are turning to, as you mentioned, shortwave sources. We
have mentioned how deeply concerned we are. And we have
actually been, you know, in, you know, in our conversations
with like-minded partners who are in unison in condemning any
actions against journalists. And we called for the released of
those they have detained, and they have detained many.
And so I think, when I was speaking to Congressman Levin's,
you know, interest in Danny Fenster, I mean, this is one of the
great concerns that the Tatmadaw has, right, that there are
journalists that are reporting all of this information and you
have so much more social media ought there. This is another
data point is that there are so many people in Burma on
Facebook, on other social media platforms. And they are
exchanging information. This is what makes it so hard for the
junta to consolidate.
So I think that, you know, we will continue to push. You
know, there isn't a free, independent media right now just
because of the crackdown, but we are definitely in support. We
are definitely in support of other platforms that might be used
and so people can get accurate information out there. And we
have heard from people on the ground that this is absolutely a
source of why they are so--that sometimes it energizes them
when they hear about actions that are taken outside. Otherwise,
they wouldn't have any information sources right now.
So when they learn about some of the things that other
countries are doing or the human rights organizations, what
they are doing out there, it gives them hope. It gives them
energy to continue to resist the junta.
Mr. Hart. Madam Congresswoman, if I may, just to add on
that that answer that Kim has provided, I think one of the
things that has been very critical--and I have to laud the
efforts of our partners immediately following the coup,
supporting each other, including independent media, in very
pragmatic, practical ways. And so I think that has been an
excellent first step.
What we have done about 4 months ago is launch an
additional activity to be able to support human rights and
looking at supporting independent media and other civil society
entities. And I think with that activity, while I cannot say
too much, I would say that one of the principles is to ensure
that we are doing no harm because those who are engaged in this
are very much under threat.
And so we are establishing communication channels. We are
making sure that the right people are engaged in those efforts
and looking to push forward with this extremely critical aspect
of achieving what the people want to see.
Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you very much.
Thank you both for joining us today.
And thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Good. Thank you, Representative Kim.
Let me make a closing statement.
First off, to both our witnesses, Mr. Moy, Mr. Hart, thank
you for your service and the teams there are around you.
Also I just want to once again thank Ambassador Vajda and
our Mission Rangoon team that is operating in difficult
circumstances but continues to support the work.
And, you know, I also just want to deliver a message to the
people of Burma. You know, the United States is the world's
oldest democracy, and one of the values that we uphold is the
rights of individual people to choose their path forward. And,
you know, as we see this young democracy in Burma and the
people standing up for their right to choose their own path
forward, you know, I cannot speak to every in Congress. But I
think it is a sentiment, Democrats, Republicans, the
Administration, and the values of the people as the United
States is that we stand with you, that we stand and want to see
the people of Burma in an inclusive way, understanding the
diversity and the various ethnic groups, find their path
forward.
And we know, as was the birth of our Nation in the United
States, it was difficult and at times violent. But the
perseverance, the will of the people will prevail. And to the
democracies of the world, you know, we will continue to stand
with the people. We will continue to work with the leaders in
ASEAN, understanding ASEAN's centrality and that Burma is one
of the ASEAN partner countries and support those ASEAN efforts
to find a diplomatic path forward, if there is one, but also
continue to work with the countries in the region to provide
their support as they address some of the humanitarian issues
of the people of Burma.
So, again, with that, I want to thank the witnesses and the
members who participated in this important virtual hearing.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned with the virtual
bang of the gavel. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
