- TUNISIA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF DEMOCRACY AND NEXT STEPS FOR U.S. POLICY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TUNISIA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF DEMOCRACY
AND NEXT STEPS FOR U.S. POLICY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA, AND GLOBAL COUNTERTERRORISM

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

October 14, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-80

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-902 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California              MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia       CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida       STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California       SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island       ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California       LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas               ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada       BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California       BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania       KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota       TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota       MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan       GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia       DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       CLAUDIA TENNEY, NeW York
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey            AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
ANDY KIM, New Jersey            PETER MEIJER, Michigan
SARA JACOBS, California               NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina       RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JIM COSTA, California                YOUNG KIM, California
JUAN VARGAS, California       MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism

THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida, Chairman

GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         JOE WILSON, South Carolina,
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island            Ranking Member
TED LIEU, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      LEE ZELDIN, New York
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina      BRIAN MAST, Florida
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
BRAD SHERMAN, California      GREG STEUBE, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California      RONNY JACKSON, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois      MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida

Casey Kustin, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Abouaoun, Dr. Elie, DDS, Director, Middle East and North Africa
Programs, United States Institute of Peace.....................     7
Guellali, Dr. Amna, Deputy Regional Director for Middle East and
North Africa, Amnesty International............................    16
Arieff, Alexis, Specialist in African Affairs, Congressional
Research Service...............................................    21
Acevedo, Eddy, Chief of Staff and Senior Advisor, Wilson Center,
Former National Security Advisor and Senior Deputy Assistant
Administrator for Legislative and Public Affairs at USAID......    36

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    60
Hearing Minutes..................................................    61
Hearing Attendance...............................................    62

TUNISIA: EXAMINING THE STATE OF DEMOCRACY AND NEXT STEPS FOR U.S.
POLICY

Thursday, October 14, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East,
North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:06 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Theodore E. Deutch (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Mr. Deutch. The Subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa, and Global Counterterrorism will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any point, and all members will
have 5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
As a reminder to members, please keep your video function
on at all times, even when you are not recognized by the chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves,
and please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
Consistent with H. Res. 8 and the accompanying regulations,
staff will only mute members and witnesses as appropriate when
they are not under recognition to eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum. We will now proceed. I will
recognize myself for opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we are holding a hearing on the current
situation in Tunisia.
In December 2010, the Arab Spring erupted in Tunisia.
Mohamed Bouazizi, a young street vendor, resorted to self-
immolation to protest police harassment, and, within 10 days
from that moment, President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali, the
country's longstanding authoritarian dictator, fled to Saudi
Arabia. In the days and months following, democratic protest
movements took hold across the Middle East and North Africa,
from Egypt to Bahrain, Syria to Libya to Yemen.
Unfortunately, the widespread hope for a democratic future
that took root in 2011 has reverted to either continued
authoritarianism or civil war in the decades since. Tunisia
alone has stood as the bastion of success in the region. It was
lauded for its first free election in October 2011 and has
maintained peaceful transitions of power and democratic rule
since then.
As we approach the 11th anniversary of the start of the
Arab Spring, it has become apparent that Tunisia's democracy is
at risk. On July 25, President Kais Saied, a constitutional law
professor elected in 2019, began asserting sweeping and
troubling executive authorities by invoking a disputed reading
of his constitutional emergency powers to freeze the
Parliament, suspend parliamentary immunity, and dismiss the
Prime Minister and some Cabinet members.
On August 24, ahead of the anticipated 30-day deadline for
lifting the current state of exception, President Saied
extended it indefinitely. In September, President Saied
announced plans to draft a new electoral code and appoint
transitional leadership, all while maintaining the exceptional
powers that he seized in July.
Most recently, President Saied named the Arab world's first
female Prime Minister, Najla Bouden, and swore in a new
Cabinet. Yet Tunisian Parliament remains suspended, and many
parliamentarians remain in detention on politicized charges,
with no indication from Saied as to when or even if there is a
plan to reopen Parliament or free detained MPs.
Despite some positive movement in recent weeks, I remain
deeply concerned about President Saied's actions. It is a
slippery slope when leaders take action under the assumption
that they alone can fix the problems that their nation is
facing.
We all know here in this deliberative body that progress
does not move in a straight line. Democracy, government by and
for the people, is not a destination or a box to check; it is a
process, a form of government that must be worked on and fought
for. We fight for our own democracy every day.
Tunisia, the democratic example of the post-Arab Spring
world, has made incredible gains over the past 11 years, but
its people and leaders must continue to fight for the
representative government that they want and that they deserve.
I recognize that a democratic form of government does not
nullify or mitigate the legitimate continued grievances of the
Tunisian people, including corruption, political paralysis,
economic stagnation, and inadequate COVID-19 response efforts.
I stand committed and ready to support the Tunisian people
in both endeavors: supporting Tunisia's democratic transition
and constitutional reform process; and bolstering the
international response to the political and economic challenges
facing the country. Both are vital to Tunisia's success.
It is important to note here that there is longstanding
bipartisan support for Tunisia and the U.S.-Tunisian
relationship in this Congress and here on this committee. We
provide substantial support to Tunisia. We all want to see a
stable, prosperous Tunisia, and we want to see the Tunisian
people chart their own successful future.
I am very grateful that we have with us this afternoon a
distinguished panel of witnesses who are immensely qualified to
help us understand the current political crisis in Tunisia, the
root causes of the tension, and hopefully to offer suggestions
that will protect U.S. interests while also promoting the long-
term well-being of the Tunisian people. And I want to thank
them for their participation today.
Unfortunately, Ranking Member Wilson is unable to be with
us today, but I want to note his longtime interest in and
support for Tunisia. And, in his absence, I am pleased to yield
to my colleague, Vice Ranking Member Steube, for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
calling this hearing.
The U.S. has helped the Tunisian people with generous
development and security assistance to help grow Tunisia's
institutions and improve its economy. However, we are not
seeing the results of our significant U.S.-tax-dollar
assistance today.
While the U.S. has invested considerably in Tunisia in
terms of foreign aid and assistance, U.S. policy never
concentrated on promoting trade and free-market economic
development in the country, which could have actually caused
Tunisia's democracy to succeed.
The United States poured millions of taxpayer dollars into
foreign aid in Tunisia, but, without real free-market reforms,
Tunisia's leftist unions continued to push for deepening State
control of the economy and Socialism, which allowed the economy
to stagnate.
The Tunisian Constitution does not say that the President
can suspend the Constitution or freeze Parliament. It does not
say he can fire the Prime Minister, but to consult with him.
However, that is exactly what President Saied did when he
announced this summer a new Cabinet that will ultimately answer
to him rather than Prime Minister Bouden. He swept aside much
of the Constitution, similar to a coup.
Tunisia's President is not our friend. He has pushed an
anti-American, anti-Israel agenda since running in his campaign
and since taking office. Rather than putting forward real free-
market reforms, the President has essentially announced that he
will double down on a Socialistic agenda, and he has even
threatened private businesses to lower prices or else. This
does not bode well for Tunisia's future.
The Tunisians' democracy and Constitution, as well as U.S.
tax dollars, are now being tested. President Saied dismissed
the Prime Minister and froze Parliament, triggering
international concern that Tunisia could backslide away from
democracy. However, these moves were supported by some
Tunisians. Thus, Tunisia's friends face a conundrum in trying
to identify what best serves the will of the Tunisian people.
The recent appointment of a new Prime Minister and Cabinet
was a good step to resolving this political crisis. However,
there are still many outstanding issues that need to be
addressed. I hope our witnesses today will offer some thoughts
on the appropriate role that the United States and our partners
can play in encouraging Tunisia to resolve these issues. I also
hope our witnesses can help contextualize this discussion.
I believe it is past time for us to revisit and reconsider
our foreign assistance to Tunisia, what should be the goals of
the U.S.-Tunisia relationship, and why the United States should
be involved in helping Tunisians address the underlying
challenges that created their current level of discontent with
the government and the economy, especially when one can easily
dismiss the Constitution, and with some Tunisians supporting
this move.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being here today to
offer their insights. In particular, I would like to welcome
back Eddy Acevedo, the former longtime Middle East Subcommittee
staff director who is appearing before us as a witness today.
And, with that, I yield back to the chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Steube.
I will now introduce our distinguished witnesses.
First, Dr. Elie Abouaoun is the director of the U.S.
Institute of Peace Middle East and North Africa Programs, based
in Tunis, Tunisia. He has previously served as the executive
director of the Arab Human Rights Fund, as well as the acting
country director and program manager of the Danish Refugee
Council in Iraq. Dr. Abouaoun has been a visiting lecturer at
Saint Joseph University in Lebanon on human rights, civil
society, advocacy, and citizenship and is a doctor of dental
surgery.
Next, Dr. Amna Guellali is the deputy regional director for
Middle East and North Africa at Amnesty International. She
previously served as senior Tunisia and Algeria researcher at
Human Rights Watch, where she investigated human rights abuses
in both countries; as an analyst at the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court of The Hague;
and as a senior researcher in the department of international
law at the Asser Institute. She has also served as legal
officer at the regional delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in Tunis. Dr. Guellali holds a Ph.D.
from the European University Institute in Florence and was
awarded POMED's Leaders for Democracy award in 2017.
Ms. Alexis Arieff is a specialist in African affairs at the
congressional Research Service, where her analysis focuses on
North, West, and Central Africa. Before joining CRS 12 years
ago, she previously worked as a researcher on Africa for the
Committee to Protect Journalists, as well as a research fellow
in the International Crisis Group's West Africa field office
and as a contributing writer for Freedom House. Ms. Arieff has
been detailed to policy offices at the State Department and
Defense Department and has served as an international election
observer in Tunisia and Guinea. She was a Fulbright scholar in
Conakry, Guinea, in 2008-2009 and holds an M.A. in
international relations from Yale University.
And, finally, it is my great honor to present Mr. Eddy
Acevedo. Mr. Acevedo serves as the chief of staff and senior
advisor to the president and CEO, Ambassador Mark Green, at the
Wilson Center. Prior to joining the Wilson Center, Acevedo
served as the senior director of communications and policy at
the McCain Institute for International Leadership and in
multiple senior management positions at U.S. Agency for
International Development.
But for those of us on this committee, most importantly,
Mr. Acevedo, from 2011 to 2017, served right here on the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, first as the senior professional
staff member overseeing the Western Hemisphere portfolio and
then as the senior foreign policy advisor and subcommittee
staff director for the Subcommittee on Middle East and North
Africa, this very subcommittee, for then chair and my dear
friend, Chairman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen. And we welcome Mr.
Acevedo back to the subcommittee with open arms.
Thanks to all of you for being here today.
I will now recognize the witnesses for 5 minutes each.
Without objection, your prepared written statements will be
made a part of the record.
Dr. Abouaoun, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELIE ABOUAOUN, PH.D., DDS, DIRECTOR, MIDDLE EAST
AND NORTH AFRICA PROGRAMS, UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE

Dr. Abouaoun. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Chairman Deutch, Ranking Member Steube, and
members of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Middle
East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify on the unfolding political crisis in
Tunisia.
I am the director of the Middle East and North Africa
programs of the U.S. Institute of Peace, based in Tunis.
However, the views expressed here are my own.
On July 25, following nationwide protests amidst a deep
political, social, and public health crisis, the President of
the Republic, Kais Saied, invoked Article 80 of the
Constitution to lift parliamentary immunity, suspend the
Parliament for 30 days, and dismiss the Prime Minister.
The decision was greeted with jubilation on the streets of
Tunisia. However, fears of democratic backsliding were
exacerbated on August 24 when the President extended his
extraordinary powers indefinitely.
Finally, on September 22, Mr. Saied replaced much of the
Constitution with a three-page decree that officially dissolved
the Parliament and granted himself control over all executive
and legislative functions, while renewing his pledge to bring
about rule of law, end impunity, and restore the proper
functioning of the State.
A potentially positive development was the appointment days
ago of Prime Minister Najla Bouden Ramadhane, but it remains to
be seen how much influence she will have in decisionmaking.
Even prior to July 25, Tunisia was not a consolidated
democracy. The 2011 revolution resulted in more personal
freedoms and political pluralism, but these elements alone did
not constitute a consolidated democracy and did not necessarily
portend economic prosperity. And, while far less frequent than
pre-2011, the government's use of the security sector and the
judiciary to suppress dissent continued post-revolution.
After his September decision, the President has lost the
support of the major civil society organizations, private
sector, and nearly all of the political parties, including the
largest elected party in the Parliament, Ennahda, an Islamist
party distinct from the Muslim Brotherhood.
In line with their President, there is a consensus among
Tunisians that the expectations of the 2011 revolution have not
been met yet. However, there is disagreement about what kind of
intervention is necessary to put the country on a path to
prosperity and democracy. The President's focus on remaking the
political system overlooks the need for more structural
economic and social change.
In addition, the public's perception that the Tunisian
State has unlimited resources creates unrealistic expectations
that no political system can accommodate. A more reliable
course of action for Tunisia to achieve political stability
would be to focus on economic growth and to lay out a
comprehensive and inclusive political roadmap emphasizing the
return to normal institutional governance, including the
democratically elected Parliament, that delivers justice and
accountability for what happened since 2011.
For the last 10 years, the U.S. has made several strategic
investments in Tunisia, especially in the areas of security and
justice, military assistance, financial support, economic
growth, democratic governance, and civil society strengthening.
While using its points of leverage carefully to decelerate
Tunisia's slide toward autocracy, the U.S. must continue to
proactively support Tunisia's stability and the promotion of
plurality and democratic norms.
In the current context, abandoning engagement with security
forces would not be in the interests of the United States or
Tunisia. Indicators of when security assistance should be
considered include a deterioration of human rights, continued
absence of a plan to restore democratic order, or other
indications that Tunisia's old regime police State is being
restored.
One of the largest successes from U.S. investment in
Tunisia since 2011 is a flourishing and professional of civil
society. Now more than ever, the civil society and key public
institutions need America's steadfast technical support and
encouragement.
Unlike other countries in the region, where similar power
grabs did not trigger the same level of concern, it is
promising that many Tunisians might realize that President
Saied's decisions will likely be dangerous for the country.
Furthermore, despite the polarization and tension in
Tunisia, there has not been an outbreak of unrest. Notably, the
government has not resorted to tactics of large-scale violence
and intimidation, which is encouraging.
Last, beyond some inflammatory media discourse, there has
not been any action taken by Tunisia to downsize the
partnership with the United States.
The most constructive way to influence the President's
actions is through concerted multilateral pressure,
international and regional. As a democratic and friendly
Tunisia is in the national security interests of the United
States, pressure on the President must be targeted, firm,
quiet, and multilateral.
Thank you very much, and I am looking forward to any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Abouaoun follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Dr. Abouaoun.
Next, we will go to Dr. Guellali.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMNA GUELLALI, PH.D., DEPUTY REGIONAL DIRECTOR FOR
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA, AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

Dr. Guellali. Sorry. It took me some time to unmute myself.
Thank you very much, Chairman Deutch and members of the
subcommittee. On behalf of Amnesty International, I would like
to thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony and
for convening this important hearing on the current
circumstances in Tunisia, a country where I am residing right
now, and I am also Tunisian.
Since President Kais Saied claimed exceptional powers on
July 25, Tunisia has been undergoing troubling political
turmoil. However, one must not forget that the country's system
of governance was increasingly dysfunctional long before then.
For a significant number of Tunisians, the daily spectacle
of a Parliament that was, at best, paralyzed and, at worse, the
scene of violence and insults had become insufferable, and many
considered that President Saied's move to suspend Parliament
was a legitimate attempt to give a new impetus to the country's
political transition.
In issuing Decree 117 on September 22, President Saied has
taken an even more radical turn, suspending most of the
Constitution and formally granting himself nearly unfettered
powers to legislate and govern. He has barred people from
challenging his decrees and decisions. This absence of any
supervisory powers, including any authority to review the
President's decision, is an outright weakening of human rights
protections in the country.
Amnesty International has documented several violations of
human rights since the announcement of these exceptional
powers. In the name of fighting corruption and ensuring
security, authorities imposed arbitrary travel bans against at
least 50 Tunisians. They have also placed at least 12 others
under abusive house arrest, including high-profile figures such
as the former president of a State body to fight corruption.
One particularly worrying incident concerns Slimane
Bouhafs, an Algerian activist and U.N.-recognized refugee in
Tunisia who was forcibly abducted by unknown men from his home
in Tunis in August and forcibly returned to Algeria, where he
is now imprisoned and faces persecution. President Saied has so
far said nothing publicly about the incident, and authorities
have not announced any formal investigation into it.
However, while discussing these violations, we must also
remember that Tunisia was not a paradise for human rights prior
to July 25. Arbitrary travel bans and house arrests, violations
of freedom of speech, and trials of civilians before military
courts were already common under previous governments.
Regarding freedom of peaceful assembly, Tunisia's security
forces have responded unevenly to demonstrations since July 25.
During recent protests against Saied, security forces
restrained from carrying out dispersal or responding with
force. This contrasts with the way security forces have
conducted themselves during the socioeconomic protests that
swept the country in 2021, when they arrested more than 2,000
protesters and allegedly mistreated some of them.
As a conclusion, I would say that Tunisia suffered serious
human rights violations both before and after July 25. Despite
recent positive steps, such as the lifting of some arbitrary
house arrests, the long-term outlook is still troubling. Nearly
all powers remain concentrated in the hands of President Saied.
And, meanwhile, the economy crisis could swiftly transform into
a political one, as ordinary Tunisians grow increasingly
desperate, leading people to take to the streets and raising
the chances of violent crackdowns by the authorities.
So, in this situation, we hope that the United States will
continue to support Tunisia's path toward the respect of human
rights during this period of upheaval. And I would like to make
the following recommendations to the Congress and to U.S.
authorities in general: to urgently and publicly call on
Tunisian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release
all those who are detained solely for expressing their human
rights; to halt investigations and prosecutions of civilians
before the military justice system and to lift all arbitrary
travel bans and house arrests; to also push for immediate--to
urge the President to rein in security forces, who have long
carried out abuses with impunity against Tunisians and might be
emboldened by the State of emergency; and hold accountable all
those reasonably suspected of committing crimes under
international law; to push for the immediate opening of a
thorough, impartial, and transparent investigation into the
forced abduction and unlawful transfer to Algeria of a U.N.
refugee and make the results of the investigation public; and,
finally, to support and amplify the call by civil society
organizations and activists on the ground for the government to
commit to a reform agenda on all levels.
So thank you again for allowing me to testify today, and I
look forward to answering the questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Guellali follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Dr. Guellali.
Ms. Arieff, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEXIS ARIEFF, SPECIALIST IN AFRICAN AFFAIRS,
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE

Ms. Arieff. Thank you.
Chairman Deutch, Congressman Steube, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting the congressional Research
Service to testify today.
President Kais Saied's assertion of sweeping executive
powers has fueled uncertainty about the future of Tunisia's
young democracy, which successive U.S. administrations and
Congress have sought to foster, as you know.
Reactions within Tunisia have varied. Many Tunisians share
the view that their political system and leaders have failed to
deliver on the promise of the country's 2011 uprising. Economic
hardships were severe even prior to the depredations of COVID-
19, while political disputes have impeded institutional reform
and anti-corruption efforts.
The extent of agreement on what should replace the status
quo is less certain, however. Opposition to President Saied's
approach may have grown in recent weeks, with some previously
ambivalent political parties and Tunisia's powerful trade union
federation voicing acute concerns about his intention to govern
by decree and amend the Constitution and electoral law.
Yet President Saied appears at present to enjoy greater
popular support than many of his chief antagonists, and he
faces few evident institutional constraints. His opponents are
internally divided and mutually distrustful.
In recent weeks, thousands of Tunisians have turned to the
streets in rival protests for and against the President, and
public opinion is likely to continue to evolve. The potential
for broad coalition building or, conversely, escalating
confrontation is in question.
Even with his apparent control of the State security
apparatus, President Saied's power and claim to legitimacy
arguably rest on his assertion of popular backing. It remains
to be seen whether the President can deliver on his pledge to
improve people's daily lives and how he might respond if more
of the public turns against his leadership. The President has
not articulated a clear roadmap for political reforms or an
economic plan amid stalled negotiations with the IMF over a new
lending package.
Among the issues that Congress may consider is whether
recent developments undermine or strengthen the case for U.S.
aid and engagement and whether a shift in scope or emphasis is
warranted.
Recent developments played out after the House
Appropriations Committee reported its Fiscal Year 2022 aid
appropriations measure, which would provide at least $197
million in economic and security assistance for Tunisia. This
is equivalent to the Biden administration's budget proposal
earlier this year and would continue a practice in which
Congress has annually provided a minimum floor of aid for
Tunisia, with the practical effect of ensuring funds amid
competing global priorities.
The Defense Department has provided additional security
cooperation in recent years. And the U.S. Millennium Challenge
Corporation has approved, but not yet signed, a 5-year, nearly
$500 million development aid compact to strengthen Tunisia's
transportation, trade, and water sectors.
The extent to which U.S. aid and security cooperation
present opportunities for leverage is debatable. President
Saied has shown little evidence of being open to external
pressure or incentives. He campaigned as an anti-system
candidate, won in a landslide, does not have a political party,
and appears to rely on a small circle of advisors. He has
castigated domestic critics as ``corrupt'' and ``treacherous.''
Moreover, U.S. aid seeks to advance U.S.-stated policy
goals, such as supporting civil society, local
entrepreneurship, COVID-19 response, law enforcement capacity,
and Tunisia's ability to provide for its own security.
Encouragement of Tunisia's democracy has been one, but not
the only, stated aim of U.S. engagement over the past decade.
Nor is the United States the sole or necessarily most
influential external actor. Tunisians, for their part, have
engaged in much debate over the desirability of external
pressure at this juncture.
U.S. aid and diplomatic messaging may nonetheless be viewed
as an expression of U.S. ideals and priorities. In the case of
some countries, Congress has imposed legislative restrictions,
or conditions, on certain types of U.S. assistance, often
simultaneously granting the executive branch flexibility to
waive or bypass them on humanitarian, national security, or
other grounds. Congressional oversight represents an additional
potential tool.
Looking ahead. Over the past decade, Tunisians have
repeatedly defied observers' expectations by navigating a
peaceful way out of political crises, yet these crisis
resolutions involved elite bargaining that arguably excluded
the concerns of many ordinary people. Consensus on effective
economic reforms and accountability has been much more elusive,
presaging the desperation and frustrations that many Tunisians
have voiced.
Whether Tunisia can again deliver a course correction while
also addressing deep-seated economic and institutional
challenges, and what actions from the international community
are most likely to help support such an outcome, is a pressing
question today.
This concludes my testimony. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Arieff follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Ms. Arieff. I appreciate it very
much. Thanks for the thoughtful and thorough presentation, what
we have come to expect from CRS. And we are always grateful for
all you provide to help us do our jobs better. Thank you very
much.
And, finally, our last witness--let me find--and there he
is. It is really a pleasure to welcome back as a witness to the
committee that he served so well for so many years Eddy
Acevedo.
Welcome back, Eddy. It is really great to have you. Sorry
to call you that, but that is the way we feel about it.

STATEMENT OF EDDY ACEVEDO, CHIEF OF STAFF AND SENIOR ADVISOR,
WILSON CENTER, FORMER NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR AND SENIOR
DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR LEGISLATIVE AND PUBLIC
AFFAIRS AT USAID

Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Deutch, Congressman Steube, and members of the
subcommittee, I feel like I am returning home. I spent nearly a
decade working in this body, in the people's House, as a former
staffer, and the majority of that time, I had the honor of
serving on this committee under Chairman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen.
So thank you for convening this timely and important
hearing and inviting me to testify. I know all the work behind
the scenes that goes on to prepare for these hearings, so I
want to especially thank Gabriella Zach and Casey Kustin or, as
Ileana used to call her, Deutchette, for all of their hard work
and their friendship.
Over 6 years ago, Mr. Chairman, this same subcommittee
convened a hearing entitled ``Tunisia's Fragile Democratic
Transition,'' where we collectively praised Tunisia for
adopting a new Constitution, electing a new Parliament, holding
elections, and even transferring power peacefully from one
government to another.
Now, however, Tunisia is on a slippery slope as we witness
some democratic backsliding. Recent actions by President Saied
call into question if Tunisia is still heading down a
democratic path.
We have seen this playbook before. A recent example is in
Haiti, where Presidents have ended up ruling by decrees filled
with empty promises and undemocratic norms, allowing the
Haitian Parliament to become nonfunctional and failing to hold
timely elections.
In Tunisia, it is true that people feel let down by the
democratic transition. Most expected their newfound freedoms to
be tied to economic prosperity. Instead, Tunisians are
witnessing high unemployment, a struggling economy, and find it
difficult to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
So, ultimately, why does Tunisia matter?
One, we are friends with the people of Tunisia, who are
yearning for a free, democratic, and prosperous future, which
does not occur often in the Middle East.
Two, a stable Tunisia is important to regional security,
migration, and it counters ambitions of potential malign
actors. Russia already has a port in Syria; another access
point through Tunisia can threaten the stability of the
Mediterranean. Tunisia has welcomed Huawei and wants stronger
economic ties with China, even though its largest trading
partner is the European Union. Further instability and chaos in
Tunisia may lead to a migration crisis in North Africa and
throughout Europe.
Three, from a counterterrorism standpoint, we cannot forget
Tunisia in the broader scheme of the fallout from the
Afghanistan withdrawal if ISIS or its next iteration reemerges.
Tunisia previously had the highest numbers per capita of ISIS
foreign fighters heading to Syria or Iraq to fight for the
caliphate. In addition, ISIS previously used training camps in
Libya to carry out several attacks in Tunisia, and we also
witnessed recently some suicide bombings throughout the country
as well. So a less secure environment only makes it more
difficult for the development professionals to operate.
During my time at USAID, Tunisia was a top priority. Former
Administrator Ambassador Mark Green elevated our presence in
Tunisia to a full USAID mission. In 2020, Ambassador Green then
traveled to Tunisia to help reaffirm how important it was not
only for the Agency but to the furthering of overall U.S.
interests in the region.
This committee often faces many challenges in foreign
policy and sometimes even questions what leverage we have to
demonstrate our values and our principles, especially when they
come to democracy and human rights. But, in Tunisia, we do have
leverage. We can apply a carrot-and-stick approach to
incentivize good behavior or be prepared to apply pressure in
case the situation worsens.
Here are just some recommendations.
One, if democratic principles continue to be undermined,
spaces for civil society organizations close, and there is no
path to restore democratic order in Tunisia by reinstating the
Parliament, then the U.S. should reassess the designation of
Tunisia as a major non-NATO ally or reevaluate our INL security
programs and our foreign military financing initiatives.
Two, we can reexamine any future funds for Tunisia's
sovereign loan guarantee program.
Three, the Millennium Challenge Corporation has seemingly
paused discussion of the nearly $500 million compact. Recent
actions jeopardize Tunisia's eligibility, according to the MCC
indicators and scorecard.
Four, Tunisia is seeking a $4 billion loan from the
International Monetary Fund. We should use our voice, vote, and
influence to seek restoration of democratic and constitutional
order.
Five, our democracy networks need resources to bolster
political parties, civil society, human rights defenders,
independent media, and journalists. USAID, through the
Consortium for Elections and Political Process Strengthening,
also known as the CEPPS mechanism, State Department's own
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Bureau, and the National
Endowment for Democracy should all be allocating additional
resources to respond to the current crisis. USAID can also
dispatch its Office of Transition Initiatives to assess the
current environment and needs that can be addressed by the
Agency's Conflict Prevention and Stabilization Bureau.
In short, Mr. Chairman, we cannot wait to act any longer to
determine whether or not President Saied is the democrat we all
hoped for. Parliament must be reinstated, and the judiciary
should be independent. Stability and prosperity in Tunisia is
in our national security and foreign policy interests. If the
U.S. does not step in now, we will leave the door open for our
adversaries to potentially fill the void.
Tunisians have proven that they have what it takes to turn
this around, but we must lend a helping hand before the crisis
becomes untenable. We can no longer have a wait-and-see
attitude. We want Tunisia to succeed, and we need it to
succeed, but we must act now before it is too late.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Acevedo follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Acevedo, for your
outstanding testimony today.
Thanks to all of the witnesses for being here and for
sharing your important insight.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each. And,
pursuant to House rules, all time yielded is for the purposes
of questioning our witnesses. Because of the virtual format of
this hearing, I will recognize members by committee seniority,
alternating between Democrats and Republicans. If you miss your
turn, please let our staff know, and we will circle back to
you. If you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone
and address the chair verbally.
I will defer until the end of questioning, so we will start
by recognizing Mr. Cicilline for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman Deutch, and thank you to
our ranking member for holding today's really important
hearing.
And this hearing is a reminder, really, of the continuing
obligation that we have to help support emerging democracies
around the world. And, as the chairman said, this is an
evolving and continuous responsibility even in our own country.
So thank you to all the witnesses for your extraordinary
testimony.
I would like to begin with you, Dr. Abouaoun. I hope I
pronounced that correctly.
A recent report from Freedom House shows democracy has now
been on the decline around the world for more than 15 years in
what has been described as a democratic recession.
And, as we continue to see increased fragility in
democratic institutions around the world, particularly what we
are seeing in Tunisia, what can we learn from our foreign
policy approach in Tunisia that might enhance our ability to
support democracies around the world? Are there lessons that we
should learn from this experience?
That is for Dr. Abouaoun.
Dr. Abouaoun. Yes. Thank you for the question.
I think that the U.S. and others offered funding and
supporting democratic transitions in this part of the world.
If I take a few lessons learned from the region of which I
have expertise, I think that one of the lessons learned is that
this funding should aim for longer-term, transformative
intervention.
In most of the cases, the money was spent on mostly
transactional interventions, and the democratic recessions that
we likely pointed to is partly or causedby the fact that the
democratic values are not [inaudible].
And for this to happen, we need to work on transformative
interventions that require a longer-term approach than the ones
that we have seen.
Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Dr. Guellali, one of the primary causes, at least that has
been reported, of the public discontent within Tunisia leading
up to President Saied's announcement was the conduct of the
police and the brutality. And I know you have spoken out a lot
about that.
Could you speak a little bit in the hearing today about the
history of police violence? Does it raise concerns currently?
What steps are the government taking to curtail it? And are
there things that we should be doing, as the Congress of the
United States, to support those efforts?
Dr. Guellali. Thank you very much, Mr. Cicilline.
I think that the history of police violence in Tunisia was
really very important, because they played a central role, a
pivotal role, during the years of dictatorship. And, while
there were some efforts to reform the security services after
the fall of the Ben Ali regime, security services still act in
a very abusive way. And this has culminated, really, during the
socioeconomic protests that swept the country in 2021, when the
security forces really acted in a very brutal way to quell
those protests and to halt them.
So I think what is really needed right now in Tunisia is
for the security services to act in an accountable way. I think
fostering the transitional justice process that has been in
place in the country for the past 5 years or so is really
important. Calling on the Tunisian authorities to hold
accountable those of the security forces who have committed
crimes is really important.
And I would like to bring your attention to the fact that
President Saied, after the 25th of July, has appointed several
security forces members to the high State security apparatus
who are accused of perpetrating crimes against the people of
Tunisia during the dictatorship. They have current trials
before the transitional justice chambers, and they should be
held accountable and----
Mr. Cicilline. I just----
Ms. Guellali [continuing]. Not promoted.
Mr. Cicilline. I just wanted to get one last question
before I run out of time.
We saw firsthand in Afghanistan how corruption really can
erode public confidence in government and ultimately jeopardize
longtime stability.
Do any of the witnesses have ideas of what we can do to
make sure that the funding we are providing is being used
responsibly and that we can provide some kind of better
oversight? Because I think that remains of grave concern to
many Members of Congress.
Anyone who might have a thought?
Dr. Guellali. I believe that, in terms of what are the
mechanisms that the Congress should enforce in order to have a
better system of accountability, including on corruption, I
think supporting civil society is really important, because
civil society plays right now the role of checks and balances
on the work and decisions of the President.
The President has barred Tunisian citizens from challenging
his decisions by calling out any form of challenge, including
through the judiciary. And so the fact that civil society is
still able to play its role and hold him to account and play
the role of checks and balances, I think it is really very
important. And I believe that direct support for civil society
can make a difference here.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
accommodation. I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
I will now yield 5 minutes to the vice ranking member, Mr.
Steube.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My questions are for Mr. Acevedo.
Eddy, how can we best compete with Russia and China and
Tunisia? And what are our best messaging points regarding the
benefits of a relationship with the United States relative to
others?
Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Congressman. That is a great
question.
I mean, I think, for us, we need more engagement. Right
now, the U.S. Government has done a very good job in expressing
concern over some of the actions occurring in Tunisia, but, at
the same time, the U.S. Government hasn't really illustrated
what are we asking from the Tunisian President and what are
some of the democratic reforms that we would like, such as the
reinstatement of the Tunisian Parliament.
I think the Russia/China aspect is one of the things that I
am extremely concerned about, because we have seen in other
parts of the world that they will quickly swoop in if they see
that the U.S. is kind of late to the game in jumping in.
We have seen some of their recent actions in terms of:
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has traveled to Tunisia many
times over the last few years; Huawei was just in the country
as well, and they kind of got a big, red-carpet welcome by this
President.
So our engagement, it is what is needed, and us being able
to articulate exactly what are the democratic reforms that we
would like to see to ensure that stability in the country.
Mr. Steube. And, I mean, that kinds of leads me to my next
question. What is the appropriate role of the United States, as
an outside party, in the Tunisian political crisis?
Mr. Acevedo. So I can tell you, Congressman, from my
personal experience, when I was at USAID, USAID had some really
good programs in the country. We were working to decentralize
the government as much as possible and push matters into the
local level so that we can have a better representation from
the people. We were able to work with the youth to try to
prevent some radicalization that happened in the past. We were
also able to support religious tolerance and religious
liberties in the country.
But I admit, Congressman, that we have done good work but
we need new ideas. And I think that is where my recommendation
regarding the OTI a USAID are really the tip of the spear for
us in terms of foreign policy at USAID. And their, kind of,
reassessment on the new challenges in Tunisia would be helpful.
This office is one of the best-known secrets in our foreign
policy apparatus. Right now, it is only appropriated about $92
million from Congress. It really needs more funds than that,
because they are very spread thin. And the more we can support
these good professionals, the better it is for us and our
foreign policy.
Mr. Steube. So how are our European partners viewing the
recent political developments in Tunisia?
Mr. Acevedo. So, right now, the European Union is extremely
concerned. Trade between the EU and Tunisia--Tunisian trade to
the EU accounts for about 80 to 85 percent of their trade. So
the EU is their biggest market, No. 1.
No. 2, the Europeans are worried not only from an economic
standpoint but obviously from the migration standpoint. We have
seen a lot of, kind of, waves of migrants hitting the seas and
trying to head north.
But there is also a NATO component here, right? And,
ultimately if China and Russia set up a foothold in Tunisia,
that could be destabilizing for our NATO partners in the region
as well.
Mr. Steube. And what are the practical implications of the
President disbanding the Parliament?
Mr. Acevedo. Congressman, this really comes down to
legitimacy. You know, he formed a new government just days ago.
Many of the ministers that swore an oath, they swore an oath to
a Constitution that he suspended. So one begins to question any
decisions that these ministers make, is it legitimate or not?
The MCC compact, for example, needs to be ratified by the
Tunisian Parliament. Obviously, that cannot happen if the
Parliament is disbanded.
So I think, for us, we have to look at the legitimacy as
one of the biggest impacts. Typically, when the Prime Minister
forms the government, there is a little bit of a vote, so to
speak, in the Parliament, and that is part of their
Constitution. Obviously, that did not happen, because
everything has been suspended.
So all of these issues are extremely troubling, and
hopefully we can nudge a little bit so that the right decisions
are made and that the President shows an inclusive process on
how to get out of this current crisis.
Mr. Steube. My time has expired. Thank you for your time
today.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Steube.
We will now go to Ms. Manning.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Chairman Deutch, for organizing
this very important hearing on the deeply concerning situation
in Tunisia.
And thank you to all our witnesses for joining us today.
Mr. Acevedo, you have done a great job of laying out your
recommendations that the U.S. use a carrot-and-stick approach
to influence the future behavior of Tunisia.
Can you talk to us about where has this sort of approach
worked successfully? And what kinds of incentives do you think
would most likely encourage the President to change the way he
is behaving?
Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
So I will be honest; sometimes the carrot-and-stick
approach works, and sometimes it doesn't, right? But I think,
ultimately it is always good to give it the good old college
try.
And, for us being able to articulate, kind of, what our
role needs to be in this process I think is helpful.Pressuring
President Saied on the economic side, I think, is something
that--we hold a lot of leverage. Part of the current crisis in
Tunisia and a lot of the unrest that is happening in the
country is because of the high unemployment and their economy
is struggling.
Through a lot of our efforts and our programs that we have
in the country, whether it is the IMF program that needs to be
redone, some of the economic reforms that need to happen, as
well as one of--something that doesn't get much attention is,
Congress in 2013 passed legislation and appropriated for
something called the Tunisian American Enterprise Fund. And
this is an entity that has been pretty successful in Tunisia to
help small and medium-size businesses. And, right now, it is
sort of the largest supporter of small and medium-size
businesses in the country.
So I think our leverage on the economic side is vital, and
also on the security side. You know, we have a lot of leverage
there, as well, through many of the DOD and State Department
programs.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
Ms. Arieff, since 2011, the United States has steered, as
we just were talking about, significant financial assistance to
Tunisia to help promote stability and improve prosperity. Can
you tell us which USAID efforts have been the most effective?
Ms. Arieff. Thank you, Congresswoman.
As you note, there have been significant U.S. foreign
assistance resources directed toward Tunisia in the last
decade, including by bipartisan support in Congress for these
provisions in annual--or in aid appropriations measures that
have provided in just the past few years, for example, $85
million annually in foreign military financing; $85 million
annually in Economic Support Fund and development assistance,
again, annually; as well as around $13 million to $15 million
annually in additional internal security assistance for
Tunisia's police and security apparatus.
That economic assistance, as Mr. Acevedo has outlined, has
supported a range of initiatives, including economic aid,
entrepreneurship support, policy reforms, as well as democracy
and governance.
Ms. Manning. And is there----
Ms. Arieff. I think the--sorry. I was going to say, the
success is obviously mixed.
Ms. Manning. That is what I was hoping for. Is there some
investment that has worked that we want to continue or double
down on?
Ms. Arieff. It is a judgment call, in many cases, but I
would say that there is some evidence of effectiveness for some
programs, including both on the economic and security side.
Ms. Manning. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Guellali, do you see any reason for hope with the
appointment of the first female Prime Minister, or was this
solely aimed at placating critics? And can you also talk about
the status of women's rights in Tunisia?
Dr. Guellali. Thank you very much, Ms. Manning.
When it comes to the new government, on paper, I think that
this government has a great potential. It is, as you know, led
by a woman, Mrs. Najla Bouden, and is composed of 26 highly
qualified ministers, including 9 women.
Unfortunately, the new Prime Minister does not have a lot
of powers, unlike its predecessors, who used to have even more
powers than the President. The reason is that, in Decree 117
that the President enacted on the 22d of September, this decree
declared that the President exercises all the executive powers
and he is assisted by government.
So the President may, for example, unilaterally dismiss any
minister. He is the only one responsible for designating State
policies and has the power to create or dissolve institutions.
And, in this framework, the head of government, under this
system, has only a secondary role and would be dependent on the
President's will and whims.
And so, in this situation, while it is really great that
Tunisia has a new government--I believe that this was one of
the demands and expectations from the various observers and
analysts, including from Tunisian people. But, at the same
time, it remains to be seen whether they will have all the
powers that they need in order to enact those reforms leading
to a new system of governance, which is one of the promises
from President Saied.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Representative Manning.
Representative Perry, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. OK. I thank the chairman and the ranking member
for the opportunity. I thank the witnesses.
My first question is going to Ms. Arieff, so if you want to
unmute now. First, thanks for providing your input, your CRS
background, prior to the hearing.
Given that the United States has provided hundreds of
million of dollars over the years for the purpose of augmenting
Tunisia's counterterrorism capabilities, their total investment
in that goal is of reasonable, if not paramount, importance to
the United States of America.
Now, in 2016, news outlets, including The Jerusalem Post,
reported that the Mossad had eliminated a Hamas operative,
Mohamed Zouari, working with Tunisia within Tunisia.
My objective here is not to figure out or to talk about or
discuss who did what when, but, rather, pose the question to
determine the motivation of the government in Tunis to prevent
or otherwise marginalize the influence of Hamas, specifically
and especially within its borders.
When he won the 2019 Tunisian election, President Saied
draped himself in a Palestinian flag, and he has frequently
expressed anti-Semitic sentiment, particularly as he has tried
to shield himself from his own shortcomings and those of his
own domestic policies.
Now, to quote him, and I quote: ``We know very well who the
people are who are controlling the country today. It is the
Jews who are doing the stealing, and we need to put an end to
it,'' unquote.
Now, for years, the United States and Tunisia have
maintained a robust counterterrorism relationship, and, in
fact, Tunisia is the largest beneficiary of State's Trans-
Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership.
However, in speaking specifically about Hamas, I would like
to ask you if it is your assessment that the United States can
trust--can trust--the Tunisian President and his government
enough to prevent Hamas from growing in influence within
Tunisia, or is the 2016 instance an aberration, so to speak?
Ms. Arieff. Thank you, Congressman.
I am afraid I don't have much insight into the incident
that you mentioned beyond what was reported in the press. But I
would note that 2016 was before President Saied was
inaugurated, so it was under the previous government.
The only other thing I would add is that U.S.
counterterrorism assistance for Tunisia is primarily focused on
countering U.S.-designated foreign terrorist organizations that
are active in Tunisia and Libya as well as parts of Algeria, so
local Islamic State affiliates, al-Qaeda in the Islamic
Maghreb, and its various offshoots.
And what we have seen in the last 5 years is an improvement
in Tunisia's internal security coordination and a decrease in
the pace and scale of terrorist attacks within Tunisia.
Mr. Perry. And do you think--so you can't really speak to--
I mean, let me phrase it another way.
Based on at least the last part of what you just said, you
think that, with President Saied, that that is continuing at
the current pace that it was prior to his ascension to the
Presidency?
Ms. Arieff. I think that is a good question for the
executive branch in some ways, whether military and
counterterrorism cooperation have continued apace or whether
there are new challenges under President Saied.
But what I can observe publicly, in terms of public
statements from USAFRICOM and others, is a fair amount of
satisfaction with ongoing military cooperation.
Mr. Perry. And, listen, I appreciate it, and I know that
this is a hard question to answer. It is like asking ``how long
is a string'' or something like that.
But just based on what happened in Afghanistan and the
information coming out that, for many, many years, we knew
where al-Qaeda was headquartered in Quetta and things like
that, after seeing trillions of dollars, tax dollars, go into a
place like that, I think it is just important that we have to
ask these questions.
So I appreciate your answer, but I just have to keep asking
this stuff.
Dr. Abouaoun, in late 2017, a pro-Hamas leader in Tunisia's
Islamist Ennahda Party met with the United States Institute of
Peace. And when the Investigative Project on Terrorism
organization asked about why a Federal-funded U.S. institution
would willingly meet with individuals who embrace such a toxic
concept as terrorism--which calls for the destruction of
Israel, by the way, and expressing overwhelming anti-American
sentiment--USIP responded by saying that it is important to,
and I quote, ``engage and maintain relationships with a variety
of actors, such as political parties, government officials,
religious officials, and civil society groups, to ensure
inclusivity,'' unquote.
So I guess my overarching question is, does the USIP feel
that by engaging in these meetings that they give individuals
or organizations that espouse openly terrorism a platform that
they should not otherwise have?
And then, as a follow-on question, what other terrorist
organizations or individuals has the USIP met with?
Dr. Abouaoun. Thank you very much. I raised my hand before
because I wanted to comment on the previous question
regarding----
Mr. Perry. Feel free.
Mr. Deutch. Dr. Abouaoun, if you could--we are past 5
minutes. So you can go ahead and answer, and if you could just
be respectful of our time, I appreciate it.
Mr. Perry. Thanks for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Abouaoun. Right. Thank you.
So, very briefly, I can say with confidence that there is a
steady and consistent will within all branches of the Tunisian
Government to prevent the--to continue engaging in reform
efforts. So this has not changed. And I don't think it's the
President alone who can change this. There are different
dynamics when it comes to this kind of activity.
Back to your second question, I stick with the answer
provided by USIP. Because of the nature of our work, we have to
engage with different actors. The purpose of our engagement
with these actors is not to promote a political position. There
is a very specific purpose that has to do with our work on the
ground, where if you want to be a facilitator and to prevent
violence on the ground, there are a specific set of actors we
have to work with.
Whether you like them or not is another story. Whether you
endorse their political positions is another story. But I can
assure you that, in all cases, we make sure that we won't give
agency to actors who act against what the interests of the
United States.
Thank you.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Deutch. All right. Thank you, Representative Perry.
Representative Malinowski, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you so much, Chairman Deutch.
Let me start by defending USIP more explicitly than USIP
just did.
The individual and the political party that USIP met with,
Ennahda, not only does not support terrorism, it is one of the
strongest opponents of terrorism and extremism in the Tunisian
political sphere. Mr. Ghannouchi has met with senior U.S.
Government officials from multiple administrations and has been
seen by Republican and Democratic administrations as a very
positive force in that country.
So let me just categorically reject what Mr. Perry
suggested. There is nothing inappropriate about that meeting.
We should all be meeting with--in Tunisia's democratically
elected political parties.
Look, I have been a very strong supporter of U.S.
assistance to Tunisia. I think we should have done a lot more
over the last 10 years. I traveled there multiple times when I
was in the State Department.
And let's face it: The reason why we have tried to pay
attention to Tunisia--and, in part, it has been an important
partner in counterterrorism, but largely it is because this
small country has played an outsized role in the drama that has
engulfed the Middle East since the Arab Spring. It is the only
survivor of the Arab Spring--or it was until the recent coup
against democracy. So it is important in the larger debate in
the region between democracy and authoritarianism.
And my first question goes to whether Tunisia has been
important in that context not just to us but to others who may
be on the other side of that struggle between democracy and
authoritarianism. And I am thinking particularly about some of
the Gulf countries that supported the coup in Egypt as well,
that supported the anti-democratic Haftar movement in Libya,
that see a Muslim Brotherhood conspiracy everywhere, that
citizens in the Arab world push for more open and democratic
systems of government and that are threatened by the rise of
democracy.
And I wonder, perhaps, Ms. Arieff, if you can adjust that
question. There was a lot of rhetorical support for the coup in
Tunisia from a lot of voices in the UAE and Saudi Arabia in
particular. I wonder if you can comment on whether there is any
evidence that that support has gone beyond just rhetoric.
Ms. Arieff. Thank you, Congressman.
It is true that some of the strongest rhetorical support
that we have seen from government officials for President
Saied's actions has come from Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and UAE, and
to a slightly lesser extent, Algeria.
So that rhetorical support does suggest an interest in what
is happening in Tunisia and perhaps a different view of
President Saied's actions than what has been expressed by the
Biden administration and many Members of Congress.
Mr. Malinowski. And why are they so interested in this?
What is their motivation?
Ms. Arieff. You know, a range of motivations, no doubt, but
I think, clearly, there is less concern for an erosion of
formal democratic norms or checks and balances internally.
There is an interest in stability and perhaps a perception that
President Saied is well-placed to deliver that.
I would say, you referred to resources. One thing that we
might look to in the coming weeks and months--we have touched
on Tunisia's economic and fiscal challenges--is whether we will
see new pledges of direct financial support for Tunisia through
bilateral assistance, for example, or grants or loans coming
from some of these countries. And that would give, perhaps, a
stronger indication of the level of stakes that these countries
perceive in the outcome.
Mr. Malinowski. OK.
And then let me ask maybe you, Ms. Guellali: What should
the United States do? What is to be done, is the ultimate
question here.
I mean, there is, I think, a broad consensus within the
Biden administration that this was a coup. They may not use
that language. I think there is a debate about the best way for
the United States to use its leverage with respect to military
aid, security assistance, assistance to the police and the
military especially.
The President's actions were popular, at least initially,
in Tunisia, and that is a factor also weighing on the
administration.
What is your advice? What is the bottom line in terms of
the primary leverage that the United States has to effect a
return to parliamentary democracy?
Dr. Guellali. Thank you very much, Congressman Malinowski.
I would say that I can advise on what not to do rather than
what to do, basically. Because that is really a very difficult
question to answer to in terms of policy.
But I believe that one thing that the U.S. should not do is
cutting military and security aid to Tunisia to pressure the
return to the democratic process. And I believe that this would
be a misguided decision, as it will have really very bad
repercussions on the security of the country and might lead
also to the deterioration of the security environment not only
in Tunisia but also in the entire region.
It will be also inconsistent with U.S. policy in Tunisia
for the past years. I believe I mentioned during the testimony
that security forces have committed numerous and grave human
rights violations during the transition. And, most recently,
under the Mashishi government, they arrested thousands of
people and mistreated allegedly hundreds of them. So cutting
military aid or conditioning it right now to the return to the
democratic process while the U.S. remained silent in the face
of such human rights violations in the past would be really
inconsistent, I believe.
I think the U.S. should maybe use its leverage on Tunisia's
security and armed forces to impose respectful human rights on
all levels, including during the policing of demonstrations and
fostering accountability.
I think also that what is really needed right now in
Tunisia is to impose checks and balances on the actions of the
President, especially that, so far, he has shielded himself
from any kind of challenges to his decisions. And that is
something that could be done through the pushing of a reform
agenda but also working with civil society in Tunisia.
I think amplifying the voices of civil society is really
important, because it is difficult, I believe, in this
environment, where the President enjoys such a broad
popularity, for the U.S. to cut ties with Tunisia, because it
will be considered really as cutting ties also with the
Tunisian people. And I think this is not the right moment to do
that.
Mr. Acevedo. Congressman, can I add something real quick?
Mr. Malinowski. Well, my time is up, so it is up to the
chairman.
Mr. Deutch. Yes. Thanks, Mr. Malinowski.
Mr. Acevedo, I am confident that you will have an
opportunity to respond to that, but we are well past time, so I
am going to keep this moving, as your old boss would have done
in this same situation.
Thank you very much, Mr. Malinowski.
And, Mr. Mast, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Yes, Mr. Deutch, I will let Mr. Acevedo respond
right now. That is fine.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Mr. Mast. As a native Floridian, I
appreciate that.
Just two real quick things.
One, to the Congressman: I think if the administration can
send unequivocal messages that we would like the Parliament to
be reinstated, it would be a very important message. I think
that, while it is true, obviously, that the Tunisian Parliament
is not popular, it doesn't mean you can just suspend it just
because they are not popular. And I think sending that message,
I think, is important.
Second, I would say, we should be doubling down on our
civil society programs. I think all of our democracy networks,
whether it is at USAID or DRL, could be out there and
allocating additional resources to help civil society right now
during their time of need.
Mr. Mast. I think your response to the previous question,
it actually plays right into one of the things that I wanted to
speak about.
And let's be clear about Tunisia: It was the start, it was
the starting point for the Arab Spring, really. I mean, just
symbolically, very important.
But there was a great Bloomberg article that I read a few
weeks back on this, and I went back and looked up the quote for
it, because I think it does sum up the administration's
response to this very well. And I am going to quote this
article.
It says: ``Yet all the Biden administration managed was a
neutral-sounding message from Secretary of State Antony
Blinken--'encourag[ing]' Saied 'to adhere to the principles of
democracy'--and a still weak, if slightly better message from
National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan, who 'called on' Saied
to form a new government and 'ensur[e] The timely return of the
elected parliament.' In the coded language of diplomacy, these
messages basically told Saied to go ahead and do whatever he
wanted.''
That was how the article summarized the response of the
administration to what had gone on there.
You just called, Mr. Acevedo, for a strong response. We
didn't see a strong response. That is a fact. We saw a very
weak response, which is not surprising in the midst of
everything that was going on with Afghanistan and the weakness
that we saw being portrayed there.
But I want to ask a slightly different question, and that
is in terms of something that you talked about, and that was
the fighters from Tunisia in Afghanistan over the course of the
time that we have been fighting in Afghanistan.
Do you have an idea, personally, of the path, whether a
land path or through ports of entry from the air, on how
Tunisians were getting into Afghanistan? Was it a land path
going through Egypt and Jordan and Iran? Was it a path flying
into Pakistan, flying into Iran, flying into other places? What
was the path that fighters were making their way to
Afghanistan?
Mr. Acevedo. Congressman, to my knowledge, I think the
majority of the path was through land, but perhaps my colleague
from CRS may have more information on that.
Mr. Mast. Yes, I would yield there.
Ms. Arieff. I would have to get back to you, sir. And it is
possible that the intelligence community could provide a more
definitive answer on that question.
Mr. Mast. No question about that; the intelligence
community can. But certainly would look forward to you all
getting back with a response, as well, on the most prominent
paths for those fighters to make their way to the battlefield.
I think that is something that is important for all of us
to know as we look at future relationships with any of those
nations that would allow fighters to move through their
territories, as well as what is going on in Tunisia and those,
whether in a dissolved Parliament or the President, now
dictator, and what actions they were doing to allow fighters to
move throughout those timeframes.
With that, I have no further comments or questions, Mr.
Chairman, and I yield my time back.
Mr. Deutch. All right. Thank you, Representative Mast.
Representative Keating, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It has been a few years since I have been in Tunisia. I was
there after one of the suicide bombings that occurred. In our
discussions with officials then, the primary concern they had
was the economy, unemployment, particularly unemployment among
young people.
I had, subsequently, civilian conversations with Tunisians.
And it wasn't as much that they were radicalized to these
groups; they were given economic promises and promises to take
care of their family that were really the precursor. They might
have become radicalized later. But that explained, I think, a
lot of the large increase pro rata of Tunisians engaging and
being recruited here.
Now, with President Saied, he is telling the world right
now that he is not going to be affected by any external
pressures, that he is going to make sovereign decisions, and
external economic aid or assistance really won't be
determinative. However, this is, I think, the best textbook
example of how we can engage with the European Union, something
I have talked about repeatedly.
So what I would like for comments from the panel would be
this: I think--I can't see another situation that cries out
more for this--the EU is the leading trading partner with
Tunisia. And if the U.S. and the EU together can calibrate more
closely and hopefully even formalize the kind of assistance
they have in an effort, I think that is our best case of trying
to affect the process of backsliding that we are seeing occur
now.
So I would like to ask the panel, in the remaining time, to
really comment on how our effectiveness can be multiplied by
working more closely with the European Union in this respect;
and on the President's comment, President Saied's comment,
about not being affected by external forces or influence.
Any member of the panel that wants to jump in.
Dr. Abouaoun. Thank you very much.
So I think that what you said, Congressman, is in line with
what I suggest in my presentation, but any pressure or
engagement with the President has to be multilateral. I think
the effectiveness will be much higher in this case.
But beyond the channel, beyond the form of the engagement,
I think that a lot of money has been spent on economic--
supporting Tunisia economically and financially, but the area
that has been somehow overshadowed and ignored is social
mobility. Take what Tunisians are looking like, especially
young Tunisians,, is prospects for social mobility--upwards
social mobility, obviously.
And one of the reasons why the President is so popular is
that he embodies this. He is an example of someone who climbed
the ladder, the social ladder, fromuniversity professor to
President, without the support of the party leader and without,
really, the financing----
Mr. Keating. In the 1 minute that is left--I apologize----
Dr. Abouaoun. Well, I would emphasize multilateralism and
social mobility.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Want to comment on this?
Well, thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
Representative Burchett, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you all hear me?
Mr. Deutch. Yes, we can.
Mr. Burchett. All right. Great.
Since the European Union is Tunisia's top donor and since
China and the Gulf States are looking to get more involved in
the country, would scaling back our foreign aid even be
effective in pushing President Saied back to more democratic
norms?
Anybody can answer that.
Mr. Acevedo. Congressman, I think it is a little too early
to tell, to be honest with you. But I think if we have these
serious conversations with President Saied and potentially
floating out there the conditioning of some of our foreign
assistance, I think it is better for us to find out today where
this relationship is going with the President as opposed to
waiting 6 months or a year from now.
Mr. Burchett. OK. We are on the same--did anybody else want
to try that?
No? OK.
What is you all's take on the new government that President
Saied recently approved?
Anybody?
Mr. Acevedo. I can jump in real quick, Congressman.
You know, I think the new government under this apparatus,
where the President is still ruling by decree and holds all the
power, doesn't really have the effect we would like. So, while
some may potentially spin this as a positive step forward,
which it is, giving credibility to a government and ministers
who are not abiding by the Constitution doesn't carry as much
weight as it should.
Mr. Burchett. OK.
Anybody else want to take a shot at that?
You all aren't talkative.
Ms. Arieff. I can add one point.
Others have illustrated the constraints, the institutional
constraints, that are now placed on this new Cabinet, in
contrast to the latitude that a head of government and Cabinet
enjoyed under the Constitution. In addition, the decree that
President Saied issued on September 22 defining those
constraints States that the Cabinet is responsible for
implementing the President's general policy.
We still don't know, based on public statements, what the
President's general policy is in many domains. So, as others
have noted, it is very hard to predict at this point where
things are going.
Mr. Burchett. All right.
President Saied apparently is very popular in Tunisia. I
understand he might even be making the ranks of our own
chairman, Ted Deutch, in his home district, but maybe not as
much. I am not sure.
How does this affect you all's--our strategy, I guess, to
coax and/or push him back on the democratic track?
Mr. Acevedo. Congressman, this is probably one of the most
toughest questions, is the one you are asking, right? Because I
think--I would assume that President Saied will say, ``Hey, I
am doing what the people want me to do. Look at my popularity
numbers.'' And I think, for us if you are going to be a
democracy and a place where rule of law is respected, where the
branches of government are respected, then you have to abide by
those Constitutions.
You know, the irony of this all is that, in 2014, as a
former constitutional lawyer, he helped create this
Constitution. And, now, here he is suspending it. And, so far,
we have not seen a path on how he is going to get out of this.
So I think we can help him get out of this mess. I think we
definitely want Saied to succeed. It is in our national
security and foreign policy interest. But, ultimately, just
because some decisions may be popular or unpopular, it doesn't
mean you can just sidestep the Constitution, in my opinion,
Congressman.
Mr. Burchett. All right.
Anyone else?
If not, I will yield back the remainder of time.
But I would tell you, Eddy, that ``W'' up in your left-hand
corner looks sort of like a ``WWE'' from the World Wrestling
Enterprise. I know Congressman Deutch, being a semi-
professional wrestler himself, would have pointed that out to
you if I hadn't already, so----
Mr. Acevedo. Well, usually, Congressman, in Florida, we
like to come off the top rope. So it is quite fitting.
Mr. Burchett. I am a bionic-elbow man myself, but----
Mr. Deutch. The gentleman has yielded the balance of his
time. You are welcome in south Florida anytime, Mr. Burchett.
And I am going to jump in before this hearing goes off the
rails, some might say.
Mr. Sherman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
We were all inspired by Tunisia in 2011, where a simple
merchant, vegetable seller, started an Arab Spring. We all want
to see all of the elements of democracy adhered to. But we are
also cautioned by the success, on occasion, of the Muslim
Brotherhood, which believes in one person--actually, they
probably just believe in one man--one vote, one time.
And it is important that, as we coax Tunisia toward the
full rule of law and constitutional principles, that we
remember that the Muslim Brotherhood does indeed lurk, and,
while they are willing to use democratic methods to take power,
they are not willing to cede power.
I was unable, for technical reasons, to hear one of our
witnesses, Dr. Elie--well--A., so I read his testimony. And he
said, in part--and those of you with the same technical issues
may not have heard this--``Some have advocated for the removal
of President Saied, but that would only embolden the Ennahda
Party and the Muslim Brotherhood, as well as remnant forces of
the old regime, which has its own dangers and implications.''
That may explain why the Biden administration has not
labeled this as a coup, has not cut our relationship with
Tunisia. It is easy to say that if there is any departure from
exactly the way we would like to run things that we slam the
table and we show how strong we are. But I think our witness
from the Institute of Peace shows that strength without wisdom,
while occasionally describing American policy, is not the
policy that the Biden administration has pursued or should
pursue.
Mr. Acevedo reminds us that Tunisia has been a source of
Islamic terrorists. We have talked about even how they get to
Afghanistan. The U.N. said 5,800 were there just half a decade
ago. And they were fighting for the Islamic State, rather, not
necessarily in Afghanistan, more in Syria and Iraq. And, of
course, these people have mostly gone back. So, as we work for
all of the democracy that we would like to see, we certainly
don't want to see those forces.
It is interesting that President Saied is a constitutional
lawyer. He has invoked Article 80--I don't know if he wrote
it--which allows the President to take pretty much the measures
he has taken if there is an imminent threat against the
country's security and independence.
Of course, that envisions a constitutional court that would
oversee that process. Of course, for 7 years prior to Saied and
under his opponents, they failed to form the constitutional
court.
The article also requires that the President guarantee as
soon as possible a return to normal functioning of State
institutions.
So, Mr. Acevedo, some of the Tunisian Americans in my
district have talked to me, and they envision that they would
be a plebiscite for a new Constitution. This would, in a way,
be a plebiscite on President Saied. But they would envision a
Constitution more modeled after that of the United States than
of France, with a strong President rather than a Prime
Minister/Parliament system.
It is hard to say that any system of government is
undemocratic if it is modeled after ours. Had I been at the
Constitutional Convention, I would have proposed a
parliamentary system. But, then again, I would have been
wearing a wig, and that would have been a benefit as well.
So, Mr. Acevedo, what do you know about the possibility of
a plebiscite on a Constitution that reflects President Saied's
desire for more of a Presidential system?
Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Congressman.
I think you hit a really good point, which is the question
that I would ask, which is, what is it that President Saied--
and where does he want to go from here? And that is what we are
missing in this equation.
I think, from my standpoint we need the President to
articulate a plan that is inclusive, a plan that does not
exclude the political parties. And we need to ensure that
during the reconciliation process he is talking to those who
may support him and those who may oppose him, right? That is
part of the democratic process.
And I think it is also important to note that the message
that we should be sending from the U.S.--obviously, President
Saied is an important factor, but there is a whole political
class in Tunisia that goes far beyond just one individual.
And I just have to reiterate how important this hearing is,
because I think the more we shine a spotlight on what is going
on in Tunisia and especially the parliamentarian issue--of
course, the U.S. Congress speaking about a parliamentarian
issue in another country really sends a very strong message. So
even after this hearing, I look forward to working with all of
you to continue that pressure, because I think it is very much
needed to help the Tunisian people.
Mr. Sherman. Democracy, yes; Brotherhood, no.
I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Sherman.
And I now yield myself a time for questioning.
I think I want to start with, Dr. Abouaoun, what would the
Constitution and the government look like if President Saied
implemented his longstanding beliefs?
Dr. Abouaoun. Thank you.
I guess the vision of unimpeded, I mean he did not flesh
out very clearly. But, in general, what is known about the
President is that he prefers a more popular direct democracy
where there is a very strong emphasis on how much local
structures (ph) have power versus how much central structures
have power.
And, obviously, he is using the dysfunction of the last ten
years and the grievances of the people resulting from these
dysfunctions to push for a Presidential regime, combined with
this direct popular democracy.
Thank you.
Mr. Deutch. Ms. Arieff, do you have anything to add to
that?
Ms. Arieff. I agree that he has said different things at
different times. I would note that he was not necessarily a
direct actor in the drafting of the 2014 Constitution; he was a
big critic, even at that time, of the direction that things
took.
He has, over the many years that he has been a professor
and then public persona and then Presidential candidate, he has
talked about a vision of local councils which would, in turn,
select parliamentarians, so not through direct election of the
legislature. And so he describes this as kind of power flowing
upward from the ground instead of downward from a unified
executive.
At the same time, earlier this year, prior to his actions
on July 25, he expressed support for returning to something
like the 1959 Constitution, which is Tunisia's Constitution
after independence, which was a strongly Presidentialist system
with few checks and balances, so a very different political
vision.
I am curious if Amna has additional insight, but it is
difficult to say.
Mr. Deutch. Well----
Dr. Guellali. I think----
Mr. Deutch. Let me actually--I am going to turn to you, Dr.
Guellali, but I want to put something else on the table first.
Tunisian General Labor Union, UGTT, which is the main trade
union federation, reportedly the country's largest independent
organization, has been an influential organization in Tunisian
society. It won a Nobel Peace Prize alongside other Tunisian
civil society groups. It served as a channel for ordinary
Tunisians' economic grievances and mediator of political
disputes.
And so UGTT President Tabboubi expressed qualified support
for President Saied's actions after July 25, but the
organization came out in opposition to his increased
consolidation of power in September and referred to his actions
as a ``danger to democracy.'' Nevertheless, President Saied
says he is acting out of the will of the Tunisian people.
So, Dr. Guellali, let me go to you now. How has civil
society, more broadly, felt about President Saied's actions?
And to what extent do you feel civil society is empowered to
speak out and continue to play a role in what may come next?
Dr. Guellali. Thank you very much, Chairman Deutch, for
this question.
I think civil society had a very diverging and varied
reaction to the President's move on the 25th of July. Some,
such as the powerful UGTT, the workers' union you were
mentioning, considered that the move was necessary to put an
end to the political paralysis, but they called on the
President to initiate a negotiated and quick return to the
democratic process. Other civil society groups condemned the
decision to suspend the Parliament and considered that the
President has acted outside of his constitutional powers.
However, all civic forces in Tunisia today have expressed
their desire to participate in the elaboration of the roadmap
for the country. They have urged the President to create an
open, inclusive, and consultative dialog with all stakeholders
and with a timeframe for the next steps and the next stages for
this situation.
And, so far, the President has not responded to these
demands and has even mocked calls for a roadmap. He has
recently voted to have a dialog with the youth, especially in
the forlorn regions of Tunisia, but has not so far unveiled a
timeline or the forms of this dialog.
So this is really--for civil society groups, it is really
very important that they can participate in this dialog and can
be part of forging the new system of governance. I believe that
none of the civic groups in Tunisia has called for the
reinstatement of the Parliament as it was, but they are calling
for a new democratic--new parliamentary democracy, basically.
Mr. Deutch. That is very helpful. Thank you very much.
And one last question.
Mr. Acevedo, Tunisia was a top local source of IS foreign
fighters from 2014-2015, at the height of the group's
territorial influence in Iraq and Syria. U.N. estimates that,
in 2015, over 5,800 Tunisians were fighting for ISIS across the
Middle East and North Africa. Many of these actors are now
returning to Tunisia with no intention of giving up the fight.
How could current political instability in Tunisia impact
counterterrorism operations in the country? And if you would
care to comment on how that might impact the rest of the
region, especially Libya.
Mr. Acevedo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It really comes down to recruitment. On the security side,
my concern with Tunisia is, we have different elements in this
pot that are exactly what we have seen before: a struggling
economy; we have a youth bulge that cannot find jobs, so they
have to find where to go to feed themselves and feed their
families. And if the people start losing hope, then it could
become a hotbed for recruitment for terrorist activities.
Now, because of Tunisia's history and, kind of, where we
were in 2013, 2015, on the recruitment side, all the elements
are still there, which is why I am concerned that either the
spillover effect from Libya or any potential consequence from a
potential reemergence on the Afghanistan front can once again
pop up in Tunisia and further destabilize the region.
And we usually talk about the migration crisis kind of
going north toward Europe, but let's not forget, we also have a
security crisis on the Sahel, on the south of Tunisia, and that
could be jeopardized, as well, if more recruitment is happening
in that region.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Acevedo.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for an important and
robust discussion today about the situation in Tunisia.
This isn't easy, obviously, but I think it is really
important to recognize the United States can and, I think,
really must stand firm in supporting the continued democratic
transition in Tunisia, calling attention to concerning actions
that President Saied has taken since July, and has demonstrated
no intention of changing course of action, despite vocal
concern from civil society and the international community.
It is also our responsibility to not disregard the
continued legitimate grievances of the Tunisian people and to
use our voice and our vote and our assistance to strengthen
Tunisia's ability to respond to the economic stagnation and
terrorism challenges that they face. We all want to see a
stable, prosperous Tunisia. We want to see the Tunisia in which
people chart their own successful future.
And, in sum, the purpose of this hearing is to talk about
the importance of continuing to see Tunisia move forward in
democratic fashion. Again, this is not easy, but all of our
witnesses have offered really helpful and insightful analysis
of what is happening now.
We are grateful to you for your participation.
I want to thank all the members for participating today.
And, with that, this subcommittee hearing is now adjourned.
Thanks very much, everyone.
[Whereupon, at 2:46 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
