- RENEWING THE UNITED STATES' COMMITMENT TO ADDRESSING THE ROOT CAUSES OF MIGRATION FROM CENTRAL AMERICA

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RENEWING THE UNITED STATES' COMMITMENT TO ADDRESSING THE ROOT CAUSES OF
MIGRATION FROM CENTRAL AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WESTERN HEMISPHERE, CIVILIAN SECURITY,
MIGRATION AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-120 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California               SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California                 LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                  ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California                MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              RON WRIGHT, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Civilian Security, Migration and
International Economic Policy

ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey, Chairman

JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                MARK GREEN, Tennessee, Ranking
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                     Member
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California

AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida

Alexander Brockwehl, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Zuniga, Ricardo, Special Envoy for the Northern Triangle, U.S.
Department of State............................................     9
Natiello, The Honorable Peter, Acting Assistant Administrator,
Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    16

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    45
Hearing Minutes..................................................    46
Hearing Attendance...............................................    47

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN SIRES

Opening statement of Chairman Sires..............................    48

INFORMATION FOR THE RECORD

Chart submitted for the record from Ranking Member Green.........    52

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    53

RENEWING THE UNITED STATES' COMMITMENT TO ADDRESSING THE ROOT CAUSES OF
MIGRATION FROM CENTRAL AMERICA

Wednesday, April 14, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere,
Civilian Security, Migration and
International Economic Policy
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Albio Sires
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Sires. Good morning, everyone. Thank you to our
witnesses for being here today.
This hearing, entitled ``Renewing the United States'
Commitment to Addressing the Root Causes of Migration from
Central America'' will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point, and all members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and questions
for the record, subject to the length limitation in the rules.
To insert something into the record, email the document to the
previously mentioned address and contact subcommittee staff.
As a reminder to members, staff and all other physically
present in this room, per recent guidance from the Office of
the Attending Physician, masks must be worn at all times during
today's hearing. Please sanitize your seating area. The chair
views these measures as a safety issue, and, therefore, an
important matter of order and decorum for this proceeding.
As a reminder to members joining remotely, please keep your
video function on at all times, even when you are not
recognized by the chair. Members are responsible for muting and
unmuting themselves, and please remember to mute yourself after
you finish speaking.
Consistent with House Res. 8 and the accompanying
regulations, staff will only mute members and witnesses as
appropriate when they are not under recognition to eliminate
background noise.
I see that we have a quorum, and we will now recognize--I
will now recognize myself for opening remarks.
While I am thrilled that we have two experienced witnesses
with us to discuss how to strengthen U.S. policy and foreign
assistance toward Central America, I believe our goal should be
to ensure that every individual throughout Central America has
the chance to achieve a life of dignity and opportunity in
their home country. Only--only then will we be able to solve
the challenge of irregular migration.
I know from speaking with both of our witnesses that they
come to this hearing with proposals for how to do this, but I
am also eager to hear ideas from our members on what we can do
better. To me, this is what the relationship between Congress
and the executive branch should look like. We are here to work
together on a bipartisan basis to achieve the best policy
outcomes for the American people.
I have been working on this issue long enough to know that
success in this effort will not be achieved overnight. It will
take many years of sustained effort, and I applaud President
Biden for sending a clear message at the start of this
Administration that this issue is a priority and that he and
Vice President Harris are ready to invest necessary time and
resources to achieve real progress.
As we all know, this hearing comes at a moment when the
border arrivals are once again on the rise. Our immigration
system is in dire need of reform, but the purpose of today's
hearing is to look south of the border at the issues that are
forcing people to flee their homes.
My experience from traveling many times to the region is
that most individuals who make the journey know that it is
dangerous. They also know that it is unlikely that they will be
granted entry into the United States, but they are so desperate
to escape that they take the costly and dangerous trip anyway.
Violence, impunity, inequality, and the impact of climate
change are among the many push factors driving this trend.
Hurricane Eta and Iota hit Honduras, Guatemala, and
Nicaragua extremely hard at the end of last year, impacting as
many as 9 million people in Central America. In San Pedro Sula
alone, hundreds of thousands of people were forced into
temporary shelters after their homes were flooded.
This devastation is closely--is clearly contributing to the
current wave of migration, and I welcomed the USAID
announcement last week that it has deployed a disaster response
team to address food insecurity and other humanitarian needs in
the region.
I also urge the U.S. Government to prioritize Central
America in future efforts to distribute excess vaccines and
provide resources to help countries buy COVID-19 vaccine
directly.
As the U.S. Government takes a longer term and more
holistic approach to addressing migration, I believe that
promoting democratic governance and human rights must be
central. We need to tackle corruption. We saw progress in
Guatemala and Honduras when the international community
provided backing and protection to courageous domestic
prosecutors.
The anti-corruption mission in Guatemala helped reduce
homicides by 5 percent annually during the 10-year period in
which it operated. It showed that reducing corruption directly
advances all our other policy goals. Unfortunately, there are
economic and political elites in these countries who will fight
tooth and nail to protect the status quo.
In Honduras, after the international mission helped convict
prominent officials like the former first lady, President
Hernandez and the Honduras Congress fought back by ending its
mandate and pushing through a new criminal code to reduce
corruption sentences. In Guatemala, corrupt officials were
emboldened after they ended the mandate of CICIG.
Now they are trying to hijack back the judicial selection
process and capture the Constitutional Court. We cannot respond
to these setbacks by throwing our arms in the air. We should
redouble our support for those investigating and prosecuting
high level corruption. That is why I included language in the
Northern Triangle Enhanced Engagement Act, which was led by
former Chairman Engel and Ranking Member McCaul--and it was
passed into law last year--to sanction officials who obstruct
corruption investigations or seek to harass or intimidate anti-
corruption investigations.
We also need to support local civil society organizations;
in general, the U.S. assistance to support bottom-up solutions
that are driven by local leaders. The Inter-American Foundation
provides one excellent model of this kind of work.
We must also reinforce our foreign assistance with
strategic diplomacy. Ambassador Popp is doing a great job in
Guatemala. We urgently need Senate-confirmed Ambassadors like
him in El Salvador and Honduras, who are deeply committed to
combating corruption and protecting human rights.
Expanding a lawful pathway for Central Americans to work in
the United States, particularly through the H-2 visa program,
should also be part of our regional strategy.
I will close my remarks by addressing an issue that
threatens to undermine our efforts to engage constructively
with countries in Central America. In recent weeks, Salvadorian
government officials have attempted to discredit individual
members of the U.S. Congress or to use disinformation to
misrepresent individual members' views.
Unfortunately, this campaign to manipulate public
perception has been supported by millions of dollars in payment
to U.S. lobbyists. Members of Congress are receiving death
threats and harassment as a result, including this chairman
here. Members of Congress are receiving death threats and
harassment.
Recently, it escalated to the point where El Salvador head
of State urged a Member of Congress' constituents to vote her
out of office and designated conspiracy theories supported by
her political opponents. This is foreign election interference.
If it continues, we will confront it as a national security
threat to the United States.
During his short term in office, President Bukele has
achieved a historic reduction in violent crimes. Maybe more
important, he has given Salvadorans hope, and he deserves
credit for that. But diplomacy is not a one-way street.
Exposure to criticism is one of the burdens of leadership.
Trust me, I have gotten plenty of it in my 15 years in
Congress.
I have spent my time in Congress advocating for closer U.S.
engagement with countries throughout Latin America and in the
Caribbean because I care deeply about the people in this
region, and I believe wholeheartedly in the capacity and the
autonomy of the people in this region. I want to promote U.S.
interests while lifting up our neighbors throughout the Western
Hemisphere. This can only be done if we engage with one another
in good faith about the issues where we agree and those where
we see things differently.
Let's commit to fostering a culture of integrity, decency,
and mutual respect. That is what all our constituents deserve.
Thank you, and I will now turn to Ranking Member Green for
his opening statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Sires. And thank you to our
witnesses. We are here to discuss the crisis of illegal
migration from Central America and address its root causes. It
is a timely topic, as President Biden caused the massive surge
at the border, failed to understand how it happened, named the
Vice President in charge, who has yet to visit the border, and
failed to listen to members of his own Administration and party
who actually seem to get it.
Unfortunately, there is no action other than a highly
suspicious $87 million hotel bill, $350 a night per room, and
as we saw yesterday, a 530 million no-bid contract, and I
quote, ``potentially worth more than 12 times the group's most
recently reported annual budget, according to Axios.''
But I would also like to report that there are members at
the State Department with whom I have had conversations who do
get it. You cannot just announce a 4 billion in cash payment,
pass amnesty in the House, strike down all barriers, and when
the rush to the border happens, expect people to believe it is
Trump's fault. The Administration is literally hanging a
welcome sign at our border, but many Democrats are actually
acknowledging quietly to us that that is stupid, and that gives
me hope.
You see, some of them recognize, like many of us, that
there are three stages to migration. And if you would, consult
the handout that I have provided at each of your seats.
First, this committee meeting is being held to mainly
address those push factors that you see on the handout that I
have shared, like improving the safety of people in their home
countries and developing prosperity opportunities that make
staying in their home country attractive. However, we should
also reinstate path migration factors like recruiting the
Mexican government to block its southern border, something the
previous Administration did, as well as reinstating barriers to
entry and asylum agreements which disincentivize illegal
migration.
Since this hearing is primarily focused on push factors, I
would like to share my vision to solve those issues. We have an
opportunity to address them as well as other foreign policy
crises in one fell swoop. Let me first summarize the problems.
Economic opportunity in Latin America was severely
disadvantaged by the commodity boom and corresponding rise in
currency values caused by China's growth. It became cheaper for
Latin Americans to buy Chinese goods. And as they did, they
lost their own manufacturing base and the corresponding jobs.
That is problem one.
China, on the other hand, gained those manufacturing jobs,
creating a global dependency on that country that was on full
display during the COVID crisis. That dependency is an issue
for the United States, PPE, medications. Problem two.
The loss of opportunity in Latin America, as my handout
displays, has created a substantial push for migration out of
Latin America into our southern border. Problem three.
However, instead of just throwing more cash at the problem
with no accountability, we should redirect existing dollars
already appropriated for Latin America to incentivize companies
to move manufacturing from China to Latin America, decrease our
dependency on China, increase manufacturing and job
opportunities for our brothers and sisters to the south, and
decrease the push factors and pressure on our southern border.
This is a win-win-win. And I am working on legislation to
this effect and hope to collaborate across the aisle with you,
Mr. Chairman, on this.
In addition, I urge the Biden Administration to fully
implement the bipartisan United States Northern Triangle
Enhanced Engagement Act enacted in the last Congress. This
legislation, as Chairman Sires said, sponsored by former
Foreign Affairs Chairman Eliot Engel, addresses significant
issues in Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. Among other
things, it requires the Secretary of State, heads of relevant
agencies, to implement a 5-year strategy.
While there have been some improvements, there is still a
lot of work to be done. And I urge the Biden Administration to
stop rescinding asylum cooperative agreements that were enacted
by the last Administration. The results of these policy
reversals have been predictable.
Rather than requiring migrants to remain in Mexico and
their home countries for their claims to be processed, we have
created a refugee crisis in American facilities. The Biden
Administration has gone so far as to offer Federal employees 4
months of paid leave to care for migrant children. This is
unsustainable.
It is a public health emergency and humanitarian crisis.
Migrants are risking their lives on the dangerous trek to the
United States, and many are being violently and sexually
exploited by human traffickers. Mind you, all of this during a
global pandemic.
We do not have the strategy or the resources to deal with
this. President Biden must show he is serious about ending this
crisis. Open borders lead to disaster, but it isn't too late to
reverse course. The Administration must do so immediately if we
are to have any hope of stemming the flow of illegal
immigration and the danger refugees face due to our open border
process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I now turn to the full chairman--the chairman of the full
committee, Congressman Meeks, for opening statements.
Mr. Meeks. Let me start by thanking my good friend and
Chairman Albio Sires for inviting me to join you all here
today. And I am thrilled to participate in such an important
hearing held by this subcommittee.
As we look at the ongoing challenges both in Central
America and at our own southern border, I believe that now is
the time for an honest and frank conversation about our
commitment and approach to addressing the root causes of
migration. And while I am encouraged by some of the initial
approaches taken by the Biden Administration, it may take years
to recover from the damage done in Central America by the
previous Administration.
The Trump Administration's reckless policies over
suspending assistance and forcing Guatemala, El Salvador, and
Honduras into joining bilateral asylum cooperative agreements
has been a major setback for the United States' credibility in
the region. Now the heavy task of recuperating some of that
goodwill falls on the Biden Administration, and it is up to
us--it is up to us in Congress to play a proactive and
supportive role.
The countries of Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras have
long suffered from violence, corruption, and fractured economic
growth. Severe drought experienced in what is known as the Dry
Corridor has devastated communities, taken away jobs, and left
people without food. The very real and present danger of
climate change has brought on devastating hurricanes and
natural disasters that are increasing in frequency and
intensity.
For years, illegally armed gangs and drug traffickers have
had a vice grip on the region, terrorizing women and children
as well as extorting countless families and businesses.
And, finally, we know that these three countries are facing
one of the highest levels of corruption in our region.
Given these underlying problems, it should be no surprise
that so many Central Americans decide to take the incredibly
dangerous journey in the hopes of a better life. The key
challenges and drivers of migration in Central America cannot
be addressed without serious and constant dialog between the
United States and the governments of Guatemala, El Salvador,
and Honduras.
And while we are--and we will continue to be--critical of
some of those governments, we must try and find areas of common
ground that we can work as partners together and explore our
pathways for action. Rather than cutting assistance, we must
explore ways to work around obstructive government and
prioritize funding civil society partners, doing crucial work
on the ground.
Now, more than ever, strong implementing partners are
needed to help push the region to address countless crucial
issues, like the debilitating impacts of COVID-19 pandemic,
skyrocketing femicide rates, and to reignite anti-corruption
and transparency initiatives.
At the same time, we also need to provide a space to listen
to the most vulnerable in the region and help empower the
voiceless. As Members of Congress, we must not be afraid to
speak out against the numerous injustices that have taken
place.
In Honduras, we must continue to call for justice for the
Berta Caceras and Keyla Martinez and the Garifuna leaders who
are missing in--who are still missing.
In Guatemala, we must support indigenous leaders defending
their land and ensure that country has a transparent judicial
system.
In El Salvador, we cannot stay quiet as women who seek
abortion remain criminalized, and basic press freedoms are
under attack.
So, in closing, again I would like to thank you, Chairman
Sires and Ranking Member Green, for letting me participate and
join you today. And I look forward to hearing the testimoneys
from Special Envoy Zuniga and Deputy Assistant Administrator
Natiello.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Sires. I now turn to Ranking Member McCaul for his
opening statement. Is he on?
[Off microphone comment]
Mr. Sires. Okay. We will now--before we go to witnesses, I
would like to take this opportunity to ask unanimous consent
that Representatives Abigail Spanberger, Scott Perry, Sara
Jacobs, and Ronny Jackson participate at today's hearing after
all subcommittee members have had their opportunity to
participate and question any witnesses.
No objection? Thank you.
We will now go to our witnesses. First, thank you very much
for being here today. I will now introduce Mr. Ricardo Zuniga.
He is President Biden's Special Envoy for the Northern Triangle
at the U.S. Department of State, and a career member of the
Senior Foreign Service.
Mr. Zuniga was previously the Interim Director of the
Brazil Institute and a Senior Diplomatic Fellow at the Woodrow
Wilson Center. His government assignments have included serving
as U.S. Consul General in Brazil, Special Assistant to the
President and Senior Director for Western Hemisphere Affairs at
the National Security Council, and Political Counsel at the
U.S. Embassy in Brazil.
Mr. Zuniga, thank you for being with us today, and we
welcome you to our hearing.
We will then hear from Peter Natiello. He is the Deputy
Assistant Administrator in the U.S. Agency for International
Development's Latin America and Caribbean Bureau. Mr. Natiello
has served as a USAID Mission Director in Afghanistan, El
Salvador, Colombia, and Bolivia. He began his career with USAID
in Bolivia, and he has also managed USAID democracy and
governance programs in Ecuador.
Before joining the Foreign Service, Mr. Natiello served as
a Peace Corps volunteer in Ecuador and as a Research Analyst
with the Inter-American Development Bank. Mr. Natiello, thank
you for joining us.
I ask each witness to please limit your testimony to 5
minutes. And without objection, your prepared statement will be
made part of the record.
Mr. Zuniga, you are recognized for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD ZUNIGA, SPECIAL ENVOY FOR THE NORTHERN
TRIANGLE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Zuniga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the House Foreign
Affairs Subcommittee on the Western----
[Audio interruption]
Mr. Sires. All right. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member, and members of the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere. Thank you for inviting
me here today. I am honored to have this opportunity to speak
with you and honored to serve as the State Department's Special
Envoy to the Northern Triangle.
In my role as Special Envoy, my job is to advise the
Secretary of State and oversee the Department's plan for a
comprehensive approach to migration in North and Central
America. To do that, I engage with governments in the region--
Mexico, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala, in particular--on
a range of issues, and my work is also much broader national
effort defined by President Biden in his February 2d Executive
Order creating a comprehensive regional framework on migration.
This approach includes a collaborative strategy for
managing migration for North and Central America, for
addressing the root causes of forced displacement and irregular
migration over the long term. The Vice President leads this
national effort, and the State Department supports and advances
the objectives set by the Vice President and defined for U.S.
agencies.
Since assuming this role on March 16, I have traveled with
senior State Department and National Security Council officials
to Mexico, Guatemala, and El Salvador, where we spoke with a
wide variety of stakeholders. And here I want to emphasize our
intent to engage the whole of society.
Just as all of U.S. society has a stake in the outcomes in
Central America, so too does the whole of society in Central
America. So on every visit, I met with members of civil
society, the private sector, government of course, and other
interested members, including media.
The message I am sharing is that the United States is
committed to working with governments and all those who are--
who share a common vision of a prosperous, secure, and
democratic Central America. We do so while enforcing U.S.
immigration laws, promoting safe, orderly, and humane migration
and improving access to protection for those who need it.
Mr. Chairman, at this point, I think it is very clear to
the United States and to the partners of the United States that
the current episode of migration from Central America is part
of a recurring pattern of mass migration driven by the push
factors that have been defined earlier here today--insecurity,
lack of opportunity, and, most of all, despair that lives are
going to improve in Central America.
Our job--our very difficult job--as a government, working
in consultation with Congress, working with the stakeholders I
described earlier, is to find a way forward, first of all, to
enforce our laws, enforce our borders, but also to demonstrate
that there are other legal pathways that can be used by those
seeking legal migration to the United States, and most of all,
generating hope in Central America that they might have a
better day and a reason to stay.
Right now, the logic, as you described it, is on the side
of the push factors, aided by coyotes who are misrepresenting
the conditions on the U.S. border, and suggesting that it is an
easy path to arrive in the United States.
It is important to underscore here that people seeking
safety, people seeking prosperity, people seeking justice, have
a right to have all of those things in their countries. And we
appreciate the recognition when that is provided by leaders in
El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala about that right. Our work
is to help generate enabling conditions that make that
possible. That is difficult work; as you say, difficult work
that will take many years to accomplish. But we have to begin
somewhere, and we have to build on what has already been
accomplished.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zuniga follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Natiello.

STATEMENT OF PETER NATIELLO, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN, U.S. AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Natiello. Chairman Sires, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. Addressing the root causes of irregular
migration from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras is a top
priority for USAID, and we are grateful for this committee's
ongoing bipartisan support for our work.
At the direction of President Biden, USAID is aggressively
ramping up programs to address the economic, security, and
governance challenges that drive irregular migration from
Central America.
There is no doubt that the conditions on the ground are
difficult. COVID-19, plus the damage wrought by Hurricanes Eta
and Iota, have only further complicated the situation. To help
mitigate the impact of recurrent drought, severe food
insecurity, and COVID-19, USAID recently deployed a Disaster
Assistance Response Team to Guatemala, Honduras, and El
Salvador. Thank you for mentioning that, Mr. Chairman.
Providing urgent, lifesaving humanitarian aid is a key part
of USAID's mission, and we are also particularly focused on
addressing the root causes of irregular migration.
USAID uses data to identify migration hotspots, so that we
can scale up and focus our programs on would-be migrants from
vulnerable places and help returned migrants reintegrate into
their communities.
Our programming strengthens economic opportunities,
security, and governance, and builds resilience to climate
change in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. We know that
opening doors to employment and education for citizens in their
home countries would lead to safer, more prosperous societies,
which is why USAID is broadening economic opportunities,
especially for young people who are most at risk of migrating.
As just one example, in Guatemala, USAID recently
inaugurated a new agricultural center in Huehuetenango, an area
of high out-migration. This center will help more than 20,000
small farmers improve their productivity, connect them to
markets, and increase their incomes. While fostering improved
economic opportunities is key, these efforts will not be
successful if security challenges are not addressed.
El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, as has been noted,
are among the most violent countries in the world, and their
citizens are the target of crime and violence from criminal
groups and gangs. USAID is reaching those most at risk of being
victimized or committing crime and violence.
Per President Biden's February 2 Executive Order, we are
particularly focused on addressing rampant gender-based
violence in the region. To address this in El Salvador, USAID
provided assistance to establish 52 victims' assistance centers
operating at justice institutions, with staff trained to
provide legal and psychosocial services to victims, including
victims of gender-based violence.
USAID also supported a specialized training program for
judges related to gender-based violence crimes.
Transparent, accountable governance is also essential.
Citizens of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras deserve
nothing less. That is why USAID works with civil society
organizations to increase transparency, build respect for human
rights, and promote accountability.
In Guatemala, we have recently done this through support to
the Attorney General's Office to expand services to new
municipalities. In fact, last week the Attorney General's
Office, with our Ambassador, inaugurated 68 municipal
prosecutors' offices, expanding services from 16 percent of the
Nation to 100 percent coverage. These types of interventions
are helping extend access to justice and to stop impunity.
In Central America, climate change is also a serious issue,
contributing to more severe droughts and hurricanes and reduced
water availability. Without predictable harvests that can
provide stable sources of income, many rural Central Americans
are driven away from their homes so that they can feed their
families.
We are building resilience in Guatemala and in Honduras by
promoting innovative practices and technologies that help
farmers maintain and increase sustained yields throughout the
year. For example, in Honduras in the Dry Corridor, which was
mentioned earlier, USAID investments have provided agriculture
and nutrition assistance to 251,000 people in recent years, and
these beneficiaries have reported that their intention to
migrate was 78 percent lower than the country overall.
As the former USAID Director in El Salvador, I have seen
firsthand the powerful human impact of our programming. At the
same time, USAID approaches this challenge with humility. We
know that more needs to be done to ensure people have
opportunities to build a better future in their home countries.
As USAID scales up efforts to address the root causes of
migration, we also recognize that assistance alone will not be
enough. Our success in the region depends on a long-term
commitment by governments, the private sector, and civil
society to combat corruption and improve governance.
To close, we are committed to supporting countries in their
efforts at becoming stronger, safer, and more prosperous, so
citizens can remain at home and create a better future for
themselves and their families.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Natiello follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Sires. Thank you very much.
We will now start with members' questions. I will start
myself.
You know, I have been on this committee now for 15 years,
and for years I have advocated that this country should focus
more intensely on the Western Hemisphere. Whether I have not--
you know, I have noticed that we just do not focus enough on
this region, whether it is Republican, Democratic, and I am
very happy to hear that President Biden now is really focusing
in this region.
But, you know, like anything else, it has to be sustained.
We are not going to change the things that are wrong with these
countries, or help change the things that are wrong in these
countries, overnight.
And one of the concerns that I always have is the
corruption piece that when we are just getting ahead in some of
these areas, you know, all of a sudden there is a change, and
all of the good things that we did for a few years is thrown
out.
So I was just wondering if you can talk a little bit about
sustaining the effort of this country in the region to make
sure that we just do not do it when there is a crisis at the
border, that we need to focus on fixing some of the issues
there.
Mr. Zuniga. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I believe
you have identified exactly the most important issue here,
which is sustainability. The United States has a long-term
commitment in Central America, particularly dating from the
1980's forward. We have assisted, through multiple initiatives,
beginning with the Caribbean Basin Initiative, and our security
support during the 1980's, and extended over decades various
levels of support.
But as you say, the conditions in Central America have
worsened over time, and at this point the question is, how do
we arrest that slide?
Our cooperation in Central America is really focused on
three areas: security cooperation to improve that very high
level of crime that citizens experience; prosperity promotion,
so that people can have a way of life that is dignified and
gives them reason to remain rooted; and third, governance.
And I would say that as President Biden approaches this
issue, he has put governance at the very center and anti-
corruption at the center precisely because you cannot have
those other two, prosperity or security, if you do not have a
government in which citizens can have confidence, a government
that delivers public good and which deals with cases of
corruption from the inside and works to improve its
performance.
Our approach is really learned from the experience of CICIG
and MACCIH--CICIG in Guatemala and MACCIH in Honduras--in a
proven model. And that proven model is that there are people in
Central America within the public sector and civil society, and
in the private sector, who have the political will and who have
the capacity to improve governance. But they face entrenched
corruption in many cases, and systems that have worked to
prevent government from working at the service of the people.
Our job is--as an outside actor is to recognize that change
has to come from Central America. In order to be sustained, it
must come--it must be organic, and it must come from the
systems that exist, but with political cover and other
technical support for those who are willing to do the hard work
of uncovering and dealing with corruption. That is the only way
that we can have sustainability in these other areas.
I mentioned CICIG and MACCIH. Again, the model works when
you have outside support, and not just from the United States.
It can be from the OAS. In the case of CICIG, it was with the
United Nations. But in the case of El Salvador, we had a very
active attorney general, Melendez, who all he required was the
support of the U.S. Embassy, plus the support of a few other
external actors.
And what we see is that if you have that level of
international support and clear backing for those actors, they
have enormous public backing. The political will exists. It
exists in the population, and our job is to try to find ways to
energize that and have that turn into policy locally.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. My time is up.
Congressman Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman.
And, again, thank you both for your testimony today.
Congratulations on your new positions. I want to--really
appreciate that, and for your service to the country. Thanks
for the call yesterday. I really appreciated that and enjoyed
starting our relationship.
I think there is a real opportunity for some bipartisanship
here. I mean, I really do. Despite all of the other stuff where
we disagree, I think most--or let me--let me make sure my words
are as accurate as I can make them. There are many Democrats
and many Republicans who recognize that dependence on China is
bad for America, certainly in certain supply chains.
I think there are Democrats and Republicans who see that
manufacturing jobs have been significantly lost, and
opportunity in Latin America is down. And I think there are
Democrats and Republicans who see that that decreased
opportunity is a part of the push factor out of Latin America,
decreased opportunity and with the corruption and crime, all of
the other things that we have talked about. So there is an
opportunity.
And I mentioned this--going after whether it is, you know,
the Development Finance Corporation, you know, private dollars
or some other source to incentivize--create incentives to have,
you know, companies that are manufacturing in China move from
there to Latin America. It would be great if they could come
into the United States, but in many cases their business models
just do not support that.
So my question to both of you, and I really want to make
sure I leave time for both of you to comment on this, what do
you think are the real incentives? And what do we have to do to
get those manufacturing jobs from China to Latin America?
Mr. Zuniga. Mr. Ranking Member, thank you very much. That
is a crucial point. The real factor in driving improvements in
Central America is the creation of opportunities in Central
America. Over the last month, since assuming this role, I have
been approached by many U.S. companies and local companies with
many ideas about ways to incentivize precisely that transfer of
manufacturing from China to Central America. In many cases, it
involves building out existing capacity.
There is extensive capacity in the textiles sector, for
example, and I think you identified correctly that we have an
opportunity. And the fact that China is involved in Central
America is because they also see an opportunity. We are talking
about the challenges here today, but it is also important to
note that CAFTA-DR countries represent our third largest market
in the Americas. They support 134,000 U.S. jobs, and that is in
dire conditions.
If we are able to energize manufacturing, working with the
actors that you named, the Development Finance Corporation, the
IDB, the World Bank, and other actors, then--and identify those
roadblocks, and they are beginning to come in with those
roadblocks, and I would really welcome a chance to talk with
you about that.
Mr. Green. Yes. I look forward to that, too.
And from USAID's perspective, I would really love to hear
from you as well, sir.
Mr. Natiello. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member,
and we absolutely are keenly interested and promote the
creation of jobs and the placement of young people in those
jobs in Central America. Our efforts would benefit greatly from
greater private investment in the region certainly.
When I was Mission Director in El Salvador and would talk
to private sector actors there, both from El Salvador and from
other countries, I would ask them, what are the things that
prevent greater private investment here? And they would often
name two things. They would name inefficient customs, and they
would name high energy costs. And that is why USAID has
provided technical assistance to those countries, to help
improve the efficiency of their customs systems and also to
help with the issue of a regional integrated energy market for
Central America.
I do think some of the comments that have been made here
this morning about perhaps local monopolies, et cetera, not
having an interest in those kinds of regional integrated
markets are a block that our diplomatic colleagues have worked
on. They are important to address because it is tough to break
those bottlenecks with foreign assistance alone.
It is really important as we work together with the State
Department and with our embassies in the region to address
those kinds of governance blockages to the kinds of issues
that----
Mr. Green. Any help that we can give in addressing those
blockages, as you--to use your term, I am all in.
Real quick, for the written testimony coming back, because
I only have 12 seconds, I would love also to hear about your
thoughts on China and the commodity boom and its impact on the
environment and how much that is a push factor. And I will have
to get that in written testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Congressman Green.
We now recognize Chairman Gregory Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me, again, thank
you and Ranking Member Green. And I could not agree with you
more, Mr. Chairman, that part of the problem has been we are
not focused enough on the Western Hemisphere. I have been in
Congress now for 22 years and on the Western Hemisphere
subcommittee for 22 years before I became chairman of this
committee.
And I am saying that this committee will be focused and
utilizing our oversight responsibility on what we are doing in
trying to make--in the Western Hemisphere and making sure that
we have some consistency as to what is taking place. That is
tremendously important. There is a lot that is going on.
And when we are talking about the underlying conditions
that is taking place in the Northern Triangle, it is time for
us to take a real focus on it and come and to make sure that we
are getting the best bang for our buck.
For example, let me ask this question. One of the issues
that I often, you know, that concerns me, in 2019 the Honduras
had the highest femicide rate of any Latin American country.
And it was followed by El Salvador and Guatemala was rated
seventh in femicides in the region.
So, you know, then we had COVID-19 and many women and girls
were isolated in unsafe environments. And although data on
gender-based violence and femicide during the pandemic is hard
to collect, we know that it continues.
So my question is, to our witnesses, how does gender-based
violence affect women and girls' likelihood of migrating and to
try to get their children out? And how will the United States
address gender-based violence in its strategy to tackle drivers
of migration from the Northern Triangle?
Mr. Zuniga. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that question. It
really is central to the social difficulties and challenges
faced across Central America. Gender-based violence is a major
push factor, but it is not just that. It is also a major factor
in the social dislocation that feeds, for example, the growth
of gangs in El Salvador, and in many cases we have focused
rightly on transnational organized crime and on crime
associated with drug trafficking.
But the fact is, crime is experienced different ways in El
Salvador and Honduras and Guatemala. Extortion is one way, but
violence in the home and violence against women is one of the
leading causes of social instability.
So the strategy that we are driving is going to put gender-
based violence at the center of our work because of its
importance across all aspects of society in Central America,
including for that matter in the economy. Women make up a very
large proportion of the informal economy. Violence and
insecurity experienced by women is a drag on every aspect of
social life.
Part of this is going to involve raising up the issue of
gender-based violence as a core problem. But a lot of it is
going to involve work that has been ongoing, working with civil
society, working with law enforcement, and working with
judiciaries to ensure that women have access to security and
access to the judicial system. Unfortunately, impunity around
domestic violence has also been a key factor in why it has
continued.
I am going to see if the other witness has anything that he
would like to add. Mr. Natiello?
Mr. Meeks. Do you have anything to add?
Mr. Natiello. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for that
question. And I am just going to add to the Special Envoy's
response that USAID uses foreign assistance resources to
support responses to gender-based violence.
Just two quick examples. In Guatemala, we recently
inaugurated with the government two new centers that co-locate
10 or more government services and government institutions to
provide 24-hour services to women and child victims of
violence. We are now working with the Guatemalan justice sector
to expand this model to other regions of the country.
And I will just say that in El Salvador we forwarded the
establishment of 52 victims assistance centers with the
Attorney General's Office. These operate with trained staff to
provide legal and psychosocial services to victims, including
victims of gender-based violence.
I visited one of those centers when I was the Mission
Director there in 2019, and it was good to see those women
getting the services that they need because we all recognize
that gender-based violence is an important driver of irregular
migration.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. Let me just ask another quick
question with the little time I have. What impact does climate
change have on migration? And do you believe that the United
States should receive climate refugees? Yes or no.
Mr. Zuniga. Climate has an immense impact on migration from
Central America. Mr. Chairman, I believe you are familiar with
the Dry Corridor, the expansion of the Dry Corridor, and the--
so there has to be an intense focus and has been already. We
have dedicated significant resources to helping improve water
systems and irrigation systems. That is also going to be an
area of focus.
The reality is that we have to help, in many different
ways, the agricultural industry adapt to the new realities that
we are seeing. Central America is one of the most impacted
areas in the world as a result of climate change, affecting
everything from the coffee harvest, the main export crop of
Honduras, for example, to the ability of subsistence farmers to
endure 1 year after another.
And, finally, I would note that the historic hurricanes,
two in a row, one right after the other in November of last
year, are further evidence of the vulnerability of the region
and why we are spending time there.
On the issue of climate refugees, that is beyond my scope
as Special Envoy, but I am happy to take that question back to
the Department of State.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. I am out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Sires. We are now going to recognize Congressman
Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Green; to the witnesses, congratulations, as my colleagues have
mentioned, for your service, and thank you for stepping
forward.
Mr. Zuniga, for you, have you been to our southern border
in the last couple of months to visit any of the facilities,
whether they are processing sites, emergency intake facilities?
Mr. Zuniga. Representative Pfluger, thank you very much for
that question. I have not been to the southern border to
examine the facilities. My very first posting was actually in
Matamoros, Mexico. I am familiar with the Rio Grande Valley.
But in this role, I have been focused on cooperating with
governments in the region and assisting my colleagues who are
very focused on the border itself, which is a very large
contingent of both DHS, Health and Human Services, and other
colleagues.
Mr. Pfluger. So we have an HHS facility in my district that
was just opened about 4 weeks ago. And one of the things that
HHS officials are saying in Midland, Texas, and I suspect this
is also the same in others, is that the asylum cooperative
agreements that were in place and, you know, other policies,
MPP, that have been rescinded, have directly led to an
opening--a thought, a perception of opening the border.
And right now you can look at the numbers. I think they
speak for themselves. Whether it is 34,000 in March 2020,
172,000 in March 2021, you know, there is an enormous amount of
pressure on our southern border. So when will we get--I know
there is discussions on these cooperative agreements. When will
they actually be put back in place from the State Department's
or the Administration's perspective?
Mr. Zuniga. So President Biden, upon taking office, as part
of his Executive Order suspended the implementation of the
ACAs. Certainly, we recognize that there is immense pressure on
the southwest border, as there has been in past years. In 2019,
there was another massive wave of migration, even though it was
very clear that the messaging was that people would not be able
to get across the border.
Our assessment is the push factors at this point, and
especially now because of the hurricanes and the effects of the
pandemic, are driving migration, along with messaging. Much of
it is driven by coyotes and others who are making money.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you think that the reason that the cartels,
the coyotes, the drug trafficking organizations are
incentivized--because the HHS officials in Midland have told me
specifically that the--this is the largest amount and
percentage of children who are being trafficked in the history
of these issues.
So I am very concerned, and I appreciate your testimony
saying that Vice President Harris is going to take a strong
stance to work with agreements in this countries. But to date,
I have not seen any messaging. And as reflected in the lack of
agreements, the reversal of these agreements, that is causing
this surge right now.
So I would like to understand what Vice President Harris is
going to do, what you all are recommending to her on
communication, coordination, and these different agreements
with these countries that will stop that surge and actually
lead to a more humane way of dealing with some of these folks
who are in bad condition.
Mr. Zuniga. So I think--Representative Pfluger, I think it
is very important for us to communicate that we are going to
enforce our border, that the law will be enforced.
With respect to the ACAs, looking back at where they were
implemented, it was really only implemented in Guatemala, and
the total number of people removed under the ACA was 1,000
people. Given the numbers of people that came in 2019 during
that wave, and in earlier years and in the current one, that
ultimately did not represent much of a disincentive.
The other is there are many ways to communicate and create
a psychology that people have a better reason to stay than to
try to make that dangerous journey. And among other things, we
have to work with governments on the communication side of
this, and we do that. Just for one example, in the case of
Guatemala, we communicate in five different indigenous
languages using local providers who know the community and
using information gleaned from the people who have had that
experience to highlight the areas. The story is not just do not
come, but why should not you come.
Mr. Pfluger. I appreciate that. I am going to reclaim the
last 15 seconds. And, look, I think the comments have been made
before, we need to address the root causes, but there are also
systemic symptoms that we can communicate better on that tell
cartels and those organizations that are trafficking people
that it is not okay to exploit children, especially right now.
Title 42 should remain in place. It should be applied
across the board, especially with the threat of COVID. Ten to
11 percent in Midland, Texas, in our facility are positive with
COVID, and this is just one of the issues that is going on.
I would encourage everyone to think about how we
communicate. It is imperative that Vice President Harris
communicate that our border is closed. We will address the
situation and the root causes in the best way we can, but right
now that message is not being delivered. It needs to be
delivered to everyone.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the extra time.
Mr. Sires. We now recognize Congressman Castro, and then we
will go to our Ranking Member McCaul.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. Earlier this week there were reports
that the Biden Administration had made an agreement with the
governments of Mexico, Guatemala, and Honduras to temporarily
increase security at their borders in order to stop migrants
from reaching the United States border.
We have been informed by the State Department that those
reports were not accurate, and there were no agreements reached
with these countries. Rather than agreements, we have been told
that there are continued conversations about reducing the flow
of migration, including by strengthening border security. As
you may understand, these early reports cause many human rights
organizations to express concerns about potential escalating
violence against migrants in the hands of police and troops.
So I just want to confirm, were there any agreements
reached in relation to increasing border security in these
countries?
Mr. Zuniga. Representative Castro, no, there were no
agreements concluded with governments regarding border
security. We do agree that it is very important to continue to
work together and collaborate, to manage migration in a way
that enhances the security of every country and allows
governments to enforce their borders as--just as the United
States does.
In the case of unaccompanied children in particular, this
very vulnerable group, one area that we want to continue to
work on is with--to enhance the ability of social welfare
agencies in each country to identify children that are
traveling with caravans and other groups, and ensure that they
are not able to continue on that dangerous journey unattended
by any supervision at all, and there we have had some progress,
including in Honduras, including in the most recent caravan.
That seems to be an area where we have some additional
cooperation.
Thank you.
Mr. Castro. All right. I have a question for Mr. Natiello.
The role and presence of the United Nations in Mexico and
Central America has increased significantly in the last several
years. Today organizations like the U.N. Refugee Agency have an
active and daily role in the processing of refugees reaching
the U.S.-Mexico border.
Can you describe the role of the U.N. in supporting
refugees in the U.S.-Mexico border--at the U.S.-Mexico border?
Mr. Natiello. Thanks for that question, Representative. Our
colleagues at the State Department, the PRM colleagues, manage
the refugee challenges, so they are best placed to respond to
that. I will simply say that USAID has important partnerships
with U.N. agency----
Mr. Castro. Yes. I was going to ask, how can USAID work
with the U.N. on this mission?
Mr. Natiello. Thank you so much for that. And so through
our humanitarian assistance programs--and, again, as I have
mentioned earlier, we have recently stood up a Disaster
Assistance Response Team, a DART. We stood one up in November
after the hurricanes and took it down, but have stood it up
again, given the serious acute food insecurity issues. We work
very closely with the U.N. on humanitarian assistance with the
World Food Programme, and with other U.N. organizations, as
well.
We have close relationships with the International
Organization for Migration, and with IOM we are supporting
returnees to have a dignified and a humane return back to their
countries when they are sent back. With IOM, it is part of the
U.N. system. We support seven returnee centers in the three
countries, in El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala.
We also work closely with the UNDP on a program called
Infosegura, and it is a really important tool to help the three
governments collect data on crime and violence. And the
governments and civil societies in those countries are using
that data from UNDP to inform the making of public policy and
to help mayors come up with better responses for----
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Mr. Natiello. Let me reclaim my
time, just because I want to make some closing remarks here.
First of all, Mr. Zuniga, I want to wish you the best of
luck on all of your very important work. I do think that the
Biden Administration has a chance to reimagine how we approach
this challenge. I think that whatever our politics are, I hope
that we can agree that most people do not want to trek 1,000
miles, leaving their home country, oftentimes with kids in tow,
if they do not have to. I do not think that people consider
that a summer camp activity.
And so, as you think about how you do development, I think
we have to be mindful of a few things. I mean, there are
current conditions like the natural disasters, the abject
poverty, corrupt leaders, violent drug gangs, that force people
to leave their homes.
There are also historical facts, including destabilizing
U.S. interventions, significant interventions in Latin America
over the years, if we are going to be honest with ourselves,
that have destabilized the situation there.
And we also have to make sure that in terms of our
development work, often what I have seen is that the part of
the way that we measure success is whether American companies
get rich doing business down there. That is not the measure of
success.
I mean, look, we are all for American enterprise. We want
our businesses to do well. But if we are talking about lifting
a group of people and nations out of poverty, the measure--the
primary measure cannot be whether, you know, a Fortune 500
company or--you know, makes a lot of money in Latin America.
So we have to be mindful of what we do with our investments
and how we give the people of those nations a stake, including
I think an ownership stake, in these enterprises, so that they
can also take ownership and be lifted out of poverty and
restore the rule of law in many of these places.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. Ranking Member McCaul?
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
holding this very important and timely hearing. I have dealt
with this issue probably my entire professional career, both as
a Federal prosecutor in the Western District of Texas, as
chairman of the Homeland Security Committee for 6 years, and
now as the ranking member of the full committee on the Foreign
Affairs Committee.
You will see in these pictures the recent trip--I just
returned from the Rio Grande Valley sector. I think as both of
you know, it is probably the most active, busiest sector, down
on the border right now. It was, in my judgment, the worst I
have ever seen it. A true humanitarian crisis.
A trail of tears coming out of the Rio Grande River to the
temporary detention facility, and then to the Donna Detention
Facility, where these children were 100 percent over capacity
in the pod space. Ten percent have COVID. That 5-year-old
crying, not knowing where she was, not knowing--her parents
aren't there, her family is not there, she is 5 years old.
This should touch all Americans, not just Republicans or
Democrats, but it is a sad, sad story. And we need to do
something about this.
When I talked to the Border Patrol sector chief, he told me
this was not a seasonal phenomenon, that this was a direct
cause and effect by the rescission of certain policies from the
previous Administration, specifically the Remain in Mexico
policy and the agreements that were hammered out between
Central America, the asylum cooperation agreements.
On the first day of office, President Biden rescinded these
agreements. And within 2 months, we have the worst crisis that
we have ever seen down there. And the Border Patrol--you listen
to them, not the politicians--they will tell you it is a direct
cause and effect of the President's actions.
So, but I think we can still solve this problem, and we
have to. We cannot allow this to go on. The traffickers, quite
simply, are controlling our borders now, out-resourcing our
Border Patrol agents, better technology, making $15 million a
day, almost half a billion dollars a month, off these children
that they exploit the 40-day trek from Central America. They
exploit them and extort, as you know, the families, at 5-to
$8,000 a child. They have to mortgage their homes and their
ranches. We also need to address the root cause.
I can talk all about border security all day long. But
until we address the root cause it is going to continue to
happen.
We passed bipartisan--the chairman and the former chairman,
Eliot Engel, and I--the Northern Triangle Enhanced Engagement
Act signed into law. It requires basically the Administration
to submit a 5-year strategy to address the drivers of illegal
immigration. I think that is very prescient looking back on it,
and we look forward to the report that is due I think within
the first 6 months of this Administration.
I want to close with this, and I have been talking to our
Ambassadors, Mr. Zuniga, as I know you have been working very
closely. I will be meeting with several of them later today
about solutions.
One solution I want to throw out to you. If the President
is not willing to take these asylum policies and bring them
back in place, we need to look at I think a very creative
approach. This committee authorized into law the Development
Finance Corporation. It was designed essentially to eliminate
the political risk in developing nations to counter the
influence of the Chinese Communist Party.
I can think of no region in the world where this
corporation, the DFC, could fit better, given China's
activities in Central America. I have talked to a lot of
investors about whether they think this is an opportunity, and
I think the Development Finance Corporation, as you know, gets
a return on its investment.
I would urge you--I look forward to working with you, the
two of you, on this very creative approach that I think from a
foreign policy standpoint--I would consider this to be a
foreign policy blunder, but I think a foreign policy success
for all Americans and this Administration would be to work with
the DFC and private investors.
When I talked to the investor from Guatemala, he told me
that that would help more than anything. Throwing billions of
dollars down a rabbit hole in corrupt governance isn't always
the answer. But this I think creates a very good opportunity
that we should all be taking advantage of that can really get
to the root cause of the problem.
With that, I yield to the witnesses.
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member. And I have to
say, in fact, we have been working very actively with the DFC
precisely because we believe that assistance has to be
targeted. It is limited in how we can use it. Often you cannot
use it with governments for precisely the oversight reasons
that you mentioned. And it really is about creating
opportunity.
And so we have to work with people who know how to create
opportunity, and that is the private sector, that is technical
specialists in the DFC and others who know how to build small
and medium enterprises, which is the major employer really in
Central America beyond manufacturing and large-scale
enterprises.
There is a lot of talent in not just the DFC but in the
partners that they work with. For example, in the Central
American Economic Integration Bank where they already have $100
million to assist small companies affected by COVID, the
pandemic, and there is enormous opportunity there.
With regard to the strategy, we are in fact working on that
strategy. We would like it to be collaborative. And rather than
presenting a finished product, what we want to do is bring a
product that--and we are going to continue to work with you and
your teams to ensure that we have as much of a consensus vision
as we can possibly get regarding our investment, the investment
of tax dollars, but also the investment of our political
profile and our time and the time of Members of Congress to
address these root causes, and beginning with rule of law,
which--and creating a level playing field for those who want to
invest in Latin America and Central America.
Ambassador Quinonez of Guatemala is an excellent partner,
and we completely agree and we work very closely with him and
look forward to working with you and your team.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Chairman, if I could say in closing, I am
not--I am really not interested in scoring political points on
the backs of these children. What I am interested in doing is
solving a crisis, and it is a crisis. So I would offer my
assistance to work with this Administration to resolve this
issue, because it is an American issue that we need to fix for
these children precisely.
And this is, Mr. Chairman, why this committee I think had
the foresight to authorize the Development Finance Corporation
into law in the first place. I was one of the main authors of
that bill, and I know this is precisely what it was designed to
do.
And so thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Ranking Member.
We now recognize Congressman Andy Levin for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this incredibly important hearing.
Hurricanes Eta and Iota devastated Guatemala and Honduras
last year. People lost their homes and in some cases their
crops, schools, and access to roads. These storms were part of
the most active Atlantic hurricane season on record, and
climate change experts say it is just a preview of what is to
come for Central America.
Storm winds and rains are getting heavier, and storms are
getting slower, sitting on top of communities for days at a
time. Experts say that as these impacts of climate change
intensify we should expect to see even more migration
northward.
So let me ask both of you to comment briefly. Given that
the region has struggled with repeated environmental shocks in
recent years, does the Administration intend to put a greater
emphasis on climate adaptation efforts as part of its plans to
tackle the root causes of migration?
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you very much, Representative Levin. Yes.
That is absolutely the intent of the Administration. As you
say, the extraordinary vulnerability of populations in Central
America to the effects of climate change, which are felt today
and in recent years, and not at some future date, we understand
that that is a major driver of insecurity and lack of
opportunity in Central America.
That seems like a very clear area in which we need to put
our focus. That happens to be one of the areas where the Vice
President is very focused as well. And we are looking to work
with partners to drive that agenda.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Natiello, do you want to comment briefly?
Mr. Natiello. Yes. Thank you very much for that question.
And we see climate change certainly as a critical issue for the
region. USAID has and will continue--and we expect to deepen
our efforts under the current Administration--to support
communities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to better manage
their water, so better watershed management.
We currently do--we work with thousands of farm families on
drip irrigation. We have had great success with that. As I
mentioned in my opening comments, we have reached about 250,000
people in Honduras in the Dry Corridor with those efforts which
are increasing incomes. And these people say they are less
inclined to migrate than the national average.
We also help farmers diversify their crops to manage their
risks against climate change, and particularly by introducing
agroforestry and tree crops because those are important for
climate as well.
And the last thing I will say is that our Bureau of
Humanitarian Assistance at USAID is very focused on these
issues. They just stood up a Disaster Assistance Response Team
and are providing support now, given the acute food insecurity
in the region that we are seeing. And that will continue to be
an important intervention for USAID. We will continue to
support governments in terms of strengthening their
capabilities to better manage disasters and to get out ahead of
them, so that there is a lower impact on human lives.
Mr. Levin. All right. Let me move to my next point. And
since you already spoke to this, I am just going to ask you to
get back to me on it. Regardless of how well we do with
mitigation, the impacts of climate change are so massive at
this point that we are not going to prevent climate refugees
from Central America from migrating northward altogether, in
the short term certainly.
So I am going to ask you to get back to me. You said that,
you know, the whole question of asylum for climate refugees is
something that you are not sure about or it is not in your
wheelhouse. I am going to ask you to get back to me about the
Administration's policy, because this is something we simply
have to deal with.
Finally, let me ask you, Mr. Zuniga, about our history in
Central America, our history of intervention, which is both
very long and goes to very recent times, including overthrowing
democratic governments.
What can you tell us about the level of trust or, on the
other hand, the level of skepticism that exists in the region
about our relationship, and how does that impact your
diplomatic efforts? And given the level of skepticism, what do
you think could be done to rebuild trust between the United
States and the countries of the Northern Triangle?
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you, Representative Levin. I think the
important point here is twofold. One, that certainly we have a
complex history in Central America. We also have very deep
connections between our societies. Just in the case of El
Salvador, with 3 million Salvadorans living in the United
States, the reality is that they view, Central Americans view
themselves as deeply connected to the United States.
And I would say that the recent episodes demonstrate that
when things go wrong in Central America, they impact the United
States. That is why it is so important for us to respond as a
nation on that point.
The second point I would say is, how do we build trust?
First, by presence, by being there, by demonstrating that we
are on the side of those who are enduring difficult conditions,
and in particular in the area of government. They should have
hope, and that is something that the United States can do in a
very clear manner.
Mr. Levin. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
very much.
Mr. Sires. We now recognize Congresswoman Salazar.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you, Chairman, and Ricardo Zuniga,
welcome, and may the Lord help you with your new job.
You know, I represent District Number 27, which is the home
of thousands of people from Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador,
Nicaragua, Miami, the capital of the Americas. Not only I lived
in Central America, was a war correspondent for Univision
Network while the civil war was going on, so I not only love
the area, know it very well, but now represent the people.
We have been talking about child sex trafficking, which is,
I am sure you know, one of the fastest-growing international
crimes in the world, and unfortunately the southern border is
the port of entry. This year, the Biden Administration has
apprehended 52,000 families, but only 140--52,000, under 140
were DNA tested.
So that means that we do not know if the adult that is
accompanying the child is the father or the trafficker. And now
it has stopped running DNA samples--the Administration.
So, in other words, if you think about it, the American
authorities are facilitating the traffickers to keep their
preys. Don't you think this is embarrassing? This is a problem.
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you, Representative Salazar. I agree that
it is a priority to identify and for the U.S. authorities to be
able to make sure that the welfare of the children is at the
top of the agenda.
Ms. Salazar. But it is not happening. It is not happening,
and there is no money to it. Now let's go to the money; that is
what we are here for. $4 billion in direct cash payments to
Central America. I agree with you that we should have a marshal
plan in place for the area. But when you see that the
Hondurans--1 out of $10 in Honduras goes to the hands of
corruption or to corrupt politicians or to the drug cartels.
And in Guatemala, 65 percent of the Guatemalans do not
trust the government. One out of 4 has paid a bribe. Who are we
giving this money to? To the NGO's?
Mr. Zuniga. Primarily to--first of all, we completely agree
that oversight of U.S. taxpayer dollars has to be the priority.
Ms. Salazar. Right.
Mr. Zuniga. So the way that we do that is by working with
trusted partners who have reliably worked----
Ms. Salazar. And who are those?
Mr. Zuniga. So it depends on the circumstance, but usually
it is implementers that the United States has a long experience
with that are either in the United States or in the region.
So----
Ms. Salazar. But who are they, NGO's, private sector?
Mr. Zuniga. NGO's.
Ms. Salazar. Because the private sector does not have--this
bill does not include any moneys directly to the private
sector. And as my colleague Congressman Mark Green said, that
we need to be giving incentives to the private sector to
attract those American companies that leave China and come to
Central America. But you do not have one penny in this $4
billion package that will do that.
Mr. Zuniga. So the money that we are talking about here is
money that is for development assistance. There is funding that
goes to finance--to prioritize financing. The Development
Finance Corporation uses and stimulates private lending, but
there is also additional forms of financing that----
Ms. Salazar. How much is that? Don't you think that a piece
of the 4 billion should be going to incentivize the American
companies to come to Central America and absorb that labor
force?
Mr. Zuniga. At this point, I believe the Development
Finance Corporation has over $1 billion invested in
facilitating the economy, in stimulating the economy in Central
America, with a focus on small, medium-sized----
Ms. Salazar. That is a good start.
Mr. Zuniga [continuing]. Business.
Ms. Salazar. You know, corruption. We have been talking
about corruption. It starts when the police force stops doing
its job and loses credibility.
Here is a fact: 66 percent of Hondurans do not have any
confidence in their police force. And look at Guatemala. That
is the Guatemalan map. Those red dots are land invasions by
narcos, and the Guatemalan forces do not have the capacity to
go in there. It is the whole country. Did you know about this?
I am sure you will.
So this 4 billion package does not include security
cooperation agreements. What is that? American advisors, ex-
military colonels or military personnel, going and living in
those countries and helping train those--I am sure you know
this--and helping train the police forces in Guatemala, El
Salvador, throughout the whole Central America.
This 4 billion package does not have any of that. So if
you--if the police force cannot go save their own people, do
you think the NGO's are really going to invest anything or any
money in this? So do not you think it would be a good--so did
you know about the security cooperation agreements?
Mr. Zuniga. So, Representative Salazar, actually, a
percentage of the $4 billion is going to go through State INL,
which is intended to support exactly the kind of police units,
particularly vetted units that we can trust to help us overcome
the very significant threat of transnational organized crime.
And I think you exactly identified the main point here,
which is lack of trust in government. And that requires work on
behalf of our partners. We think----
Ms. Salazar. In simple terms, in which way we, our
military, can help and train those police officers or those
police forces?
Mr. Zuniga. U.S. military cooperation in Central America
has been a vital supporter of stability but also governance.
And that is going to remain a very important fact of our
cooperation. U.S. Southern Command has extensive relationships
and uses those to promote exactly the kind of close
collaboration and respect for civilian leadership that we
support in the United States.
Ms. Salazar. But you are not giving them extra funds to
expand that program, coming from the Southern Command, in this
4 billion direct cash payments to Central American governments.
Mr. Zuniga. So there is security cooperation over which DoD
has control through DoD funding, and then you also have
basically collaboration between U.S. Southern Command and the
work that is done with development dollars.
And just as one example, the U.S. Southern Command also
helped build resilience for natural disaster response. They
were very active after the hurricanes. In fact, they were the
first forces on the ground in Guatemala and Honduras in
delivering aid but also in rescuing people, so we have a very
close relationship----
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Mr. Zuniga [continuing]. With them.
Mr. Sires. Thank you very much.
Ms. Salazar. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Congressman Vincente Gonzalez, you are on.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And thank you to the panel, and
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Folks, I am going to ask you--I have a few questions, so if
you can keep your answers as concise as possible.
And I agree with a lot of Representative Salazar just said.
The Biden Administration has emphasized the importance of the
private sector in creating employment opportunities in the
formal sector and contributing to economic growth. For
communities in the Northern Triangle, the concern seems to be--
in the U.S. is these funds going to corrupt institutions or
officials or NGO's that really do not get the job done. We have
invested hundreds of millions already, and really we--a lot of
us do not see the results.
What are we doing differently this time to be able to
measure results and be able to pull the plug on something that
is not working earlier on before we go all the way in? Do we
have a system in place to where we have expectations, whether
it is an NGO or the private sector or whatever government
institution we are dealing with, so that does not happen?
Mr. Natiello. Thanks for that question, Representative.
Just a few quick points on that. As a general rule, at USAID we
do not give our funds to foreign governments. That is
particularly the case in the Northern Triangle.
Just to put it in perspective, of our Fiscal Year budget of
$311 million, 5.8 million I believe went to governments. That
is about 1.6 percent of the total appropriation in 2020.
Again, we work with trusted partners, contractors, NGO's,
international organizations like the U.N. that I mentioned
earlier. We work through grants and contracts that are subject
to audits. The oversight starts with our field missions in the
three countries, and it certainly extends to the USAID
inspector general----
Mr. Gonzalez. So what are we----
Mr. Natiello [continuing]. Who watches those and--yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. What are we doing to check in on them
regularly, every so often, to assure we are moving in the right
direction? Because we have spent hundreds of millions of
dollars in Central America and still I can tell you--I
represent a border district, the Rio Grande Valley, that has
really been hit hard by the complexities of Central America.
So I would love to see the investments have results, and
hopefully calm the migration that we have coming. What are we
doing besides getting NGO's and USAID? Do we have a plan in
place to have measurable results before we spend all of these
billions of dollars that we are committed to, to assure that at
the end of the day we have measurable results that have a
lasting impact on our southern border?
Mr. Natiello. Thank you for that, sir. For all of the
investments that we make, we do have performance monitoring
plans. We have project managers that monitor regularly those
investments. We absolutely take feedback from our monitoring
systems and we make adjustments.
I will just give you one quick example. When I got to El
Salvador in 2017, we had just cutoff a project in a
municipality where the mayor was not keen to work with us, and
he was not serious about addressing the challenges that we
wanted to address in partnership with him and with his
municipality.
More recently, in El Salvador, we took a look at our data.
We take a hard look at data on who is migrating and why, and we
used that data to shut down one line of effort, which was
university partnerships, and we are moving it toward more
vocational training for young men, unemployed, victims of
violence, in urban areas.
Mr. Gonzalez. I have a few more questions I would like to
ask. The next concern is Honduras. As we know, the present
president's brother is serving a life-term sentence here in the
United States. I think he has been looking at--he has been
looked at, and now we have a candidate, Yani Rosenthal, who
spent 4 years in U.S. prison and is--now I believe is indicted.
What are we doing to assure that people like this do not
become presidents of these countries?
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you very much, Representative Gonzalez. I
think it is important here to point out that it is really up to
the people of Honduras to elect their leaders, but of course
the United States selects who we work with. And as we have made
very clear, we are prepared to work with those who are as
committed as we are to the fight against corruption and
transnational organized crime.
So we respect the elections, but we also have standards for
the people that we work with.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. This is obviously a critical concern.
And last, and I know we are running out of time, is--and some
of you all may know, I have been advocating being on the
border, and on border with small municipal communities that
cannot--do not have the resources to deal with, you know, the
last 173,000 people who came mostly to my section of the
border, has really overwhelmed us and overwhelmed, you know,
all our local capacity.
And what I have advocated for is to have the same system
that we have in my district in a very humane, clean, first-
class American facilities closer to them on the southern
Mexican border or the Guatemalan border, because I do not
believe this is going to end. I mean, we are talking about
climate migration down the road, and maybe other countries down
the road.
What are we doing in planning long-term ideas to be able to
help folks closer to home and have these processing centers and
maybe refugee settlements, or whatever it is to do--to help
this mass migration that is coming north, further south, and to
keep them from coming through Mexico, which at this time me and
my neighboring Congressman calculated that just in the last 90
days cartels have probably been enriched about $1.2 billion
just from the migration that occurred this year.
At $6,000 a head, at an average of $6,000 a head that they
are charging, I figure that if we had the operations that we
have in my district, in cooperation with Mexico or Guatemala or
both on that border, and had the same system in place, and
whether you are looking for a credible threat or ultimately I
envision actually having--being able to have your asylum
hearing in safe zones where we can assure their--guarantee
their safety, I think we need to start having out-of-the-box
ideas or we are going to continue dealing with this on our
southern border.
And when I say ``doing this in these countries,'' I mean
doing it in a fashion that is first class, that is respectable,
that is humane, that is clean and dignified, no different than
as if they came to the United States. And if they have a
credible threat, or if they are granted asylum, they can just
get in an airplane and fly in and kick the cartels out of this
equation.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Congressman.
Do you want to respond to that?
Mr. Zuniga. If I could. Congressman, you have exactly
defined our effort in Mexico and in northern Central America to
build that capacity locally because, among other things, Mexico
is no longer just a transit country. It is a destination
country.
And we do know that--and, in fact, we have committed
significant resources over the last few years working with
international organizations to build protect capacity into the
immigration systems along the way, and in close collaboration
with governments in Mexico and in Central America to do
precisely that.
And, as you say, the importance has to be treating people
with dignity and giving them access to the resources locally so
that they do not feel like they have to transit to the U.S.
border.
Thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. I would----
Mr. Sires. Lo siento. Sorry.
We now recognize Juan Vargas, who is a member of the
committee, and then we will do Mr. Scott Perry.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate, again, the opportunity to speak. I want to thank
you for holding this hearing, and the ranking member of course,
as well as the witnesses who have testified here today.
I want to agree with some of the things my colleagues have
said on that side of the aisle. I certainly think that China
poses the greatest threat for the United States going forward,
and I do think that many of the things they are doing in
Central America are very damaging, not only to Central
Americans but certainly to us.
And I do hope that there are ways for us to bring
manufacturing back to the United States. If we cannot bring it
back to the United States, Central America, or Mexico, or other
places, again, I think that China is our--not only our greatest
competitor but our greatest threat. I agree with that--my
colleagues on the other side.
I do agree also that many of them who spoke and have great
sensitivity and love for the children that are coming and want
to take care of them, I agree wholeheartedly with that. But the
notion that we have open borders is ridiculous, absolutely
ridiculous.
I live on the border. I can tell you we have 60 miles of
border in San Diego, linear border. We have 2,200 border patrol
agents. In 1993, we had 1,000. If you take a look at some of
the apprehensions that we have had, certainly they are high,
but nowhere near as high as we had in 1986 and 1996. We had
ones that reached up to 1.6 million. The numbers were much,
much larger. It all depends on what happens in Central America
or Mexico.
We have had, of course, these disasters in Central America.
We have had these two giant hurricanes. And something that was
brought up just slightly by my colleague, Representative
Salazar, I, too, lived in El Salvador for a while. I was a
Jesuit at the time studying to be a priest. I was in an
orphanage.
I can tell you, during that civil war, 200,000 Guatemalans
were killed, most of whom were murdered because they were
indigenous people that were supposedly potentially guerillas or
guerilla sympathizers. They were murdered by death squads, and
they were murdered by the military.
In El Salvador, 70,000 people were killed during that civil
war, again, many murdered by death squads, and also by the
military, so--including a number of my Jesuit colleagues.
So when you take a look at what is happening in Central
America, it has been a disaster. But the notion that this is
new, that this has never happened before, is not true. We have
had this in our history. I can tell you along--I have lived
most of my life along the border in California and Mexico. We
have at different times large numbers of migrants coming. That
is just the way it has been.
I do want to ask, however, about the issues associated with
the two hurricanes and especially in Honduras. It does sound
like climate change, the dry areas that they speak of have
really been disastrous for Honduras and the rest of the country
there, but especially Honduras.
Can someone comment directly on that? Maybe Mr. Zuniga.
Mr. Zuniga. Thank you, Representative Vargas, and I should
just add, I was with the rector of the University of Central
America, Padre Andreu, last week and had an opportunity to
speak with him about the work done by the Jesuit community in
El Salvador and the work that they continue to do to promote
civil society and human rights in Central America.
With regard to the hurricanes, we are talking about storms
that displaced hundreds of thousands of people, that as the
chairman noted at the very beginning affected 9 million people
in total in Central America over a period of several weeks.
That disaster is not over. It continues. There remain tens of
thousands of people who are effectively displaced, joining, in
the case of Honduras, up to 250,000 people who were already
displaced for other causes.
This is the community that is highly at risk, and so this
is why we dedicate significant resources to attending to their
humanitarian needs as an acute manner. As opposed to being a
root cause, this is an acute cause, and we need to focus on
victims of disaster now, and that is how we have been directed
to dedicate our time and attention. And we are pleased to do
that with our colleagues at USAID.
Mr. Vargas. Any comment from USAID?
Mr. Natiello. Yes. Thank you, Representative Vargas, for
that question. Just with respect to the Dry Corridor in
Honduras, again, we are very focused on that. We work with
thousands of farm families there. Our focus has been
onmanagement, introducing drip irrigation, diversifying crops,
and helping farmers grow crops that have better market
opportunities.
And we combine that with nutritional interventions, so that
families have a better diet. And, again, we have--just going
back to the issue of measuring, when we survey a sample of
those farmers and their families, they tell us they are 78
percent less likely to migrate as they see these improvements
in their situation than the national average of Hondurans. So
that is just one example of the kind of work we are doing in
the Dry Corridor.
Thank you.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you. And just to conclude, I want to
thank Mr. Zuniga for mentioning La UCA. La UCA is the
Universidad Centroamericana Simeon Canas. They were my
superiors when I was there, and the director there was Ignacio
Ellacuria, one of the Jesuits who were murdered. They are great
people, and thank you for working with them. I appreciate it.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Congressman.
We now recognize Scott Perry, Congressman Scott Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to speak this morning. And congratulations to Mr.
Zuniga.
And for many Americans, what seems to be happening or what
they believe right now is happening is what appears to them is
we are replacing national-born American, native-born Americans
to permanently transform the political landscape of this very
nation.
The President's policies have led to nearly 19,000--19,000
unaccompanied minors being apprehended last month. That is a
100 percent increase from February.
A 2017 survey conducted by Doctors Without Borders
indicates that nearly one-third of all girls and women were
sexually abused during their journey to the United States. That
is staggering to me. That is staggering to me. Because of
this--the Biden-Harris Administration's immigration initiatives
that actually encourage disregard for our laws, border
traffickers reportedly made $14-to $15 million a day. I do not
know which one it is. But it is a whole lot of money, and we
are encouraging that. We are aiding and abetting that. I find
that completely unacceptable.
The human and drug trafficking are a twofold scourge on our
Nation, and this Administration's negligence in confronting the
exploitation of children--of children. It is disgusting,
untenable, unacceptable, and in complete contradiction of our
values.
Now, this Administration is proposing taxpayers now pay
billions to Central America to stem this tide. While we are
talking about resources, let's just talk about what a Border
Patrol agent would tell you if you asked them what they need,
what they are looking for to do their job, to protect our
country. That is a border wall.
On day one of this presidency, this President stopped wall
construction, which had an estimated cost of 2-to $3 billion to
terminate all of the construction contracts. Whether this $4
billion, or whatever it is going to be, is meaningful and
successful or not, is immaterial to the fact that we just threw
2 to $3 billion away for something that does, in some effect,
work. Not completely. It is in concert with other things. We
just threw that money away.
The sad truth is that border officials encountered 172,000
migrants last month, which is 10 times the figure from April in
2020. I disagree with my good friend from San Diego that this
isn't a problem and this hasn't happened before.
Let me ask you this, Mr. Zuniga. Does this Administration
consider Mexico an unsafe country?
Mr. Zuniga. Mexico, as the authorities in Mexico themselves
would tell you, has to contend with a very high level of
violence and insecurity. In fact, they dedicate significant
resources to contending with precisely that.
Mr. Perry. So does that mean the Administration--do you
consider Mexico an unsafe country?
Mr. Zuniga. Mexico has to contend with----
Mr. Perry. I mean, I am using the term ``unsafe country''
because, as you probably know, it is definitional regarding
policy. So unsafe or not? I mean, I know you--I know I keep
saying it, but I am trying to figure out if you are going to
say it is unsafe or not.
Mr. Zuniga. Representative Perry, Mexico has areas that are
safe and areas that are not. It is a large country, and there
are areas that are particularly vulnerable to transnational
organized crime.
Mr. Perry. The foreign minister, in September 2019, Ebrard,
stated that the trend is irreversible, that we did not need a
safe third-party agreement with Mexico because there were less
and less people going to the border, due to policy by the way,
due to policy, but he said the trend is irreversible, so we do
not need a safe third-party agreement, which goes to unsafe or
safe.
You are saying it is--well, you are not saying anything.
You will say some of it is safe, some of it is unsafe. For the
point that it is unsafe, I would ask you, why are we allowing
hundreds of foreign nationals from this unsafe country to come
into America? And I am sure you know, over 1,000 of people that
came in just last month convicted of assault, battery, domestic
violence, burglary, robbery, theft, drug possession and
trafficking, sexual offenses, some on the terrorism watch list.
Why would we allow that?
And if it is not unsafe, and if it is a safe country, then
why aren't we enforcing the international standard that
refugees who seek asylum in the first safe country--why aren't
they doing that in Mexico? And I would just ask you, one or the
other.
Mr. Zuniga. So, Representative Perry, No. 1, the
Administration is committed to enforcing U.S. law and to
securing the border. Second, as has been noted, the United
States has dedicated resources and worked with Mexican
authorities and international organizations to reinforce the
ability of Mexican authorities and others to provide security
in Mexico and to provide security for those who are in
vulnerable situations.
So improving protection capacity, not just in Mexico but in
Central America as a whole, is part of the Biden
Administration's policy toward Central America.
Mr. Perry. I yield back. It ain't working, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Congresswoman Sara Jacobs, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks for letting me
participate in this subcommittee hearing. I would first like to
just associate myself with the comments of my fellow San
Diegan, Representative Vargas, about the situation we have in
San Diego, and welcome any of my colleagues who would like to
come visit us and see.
To our witnesses, thank you for joining us.
I wanted to talk a little bit about violence reduction. You
both mentioned in your testimony how important violence was as
a push factor, and we know that gang violence is distinct from
other forms of conflict but also has a lot of similarities.
So I was just wondering if you both could talk about what
you are doing to address violence and what we have learned from
other efforts to address violence and conflict in the region.
Mr. Zuniga. I will speak briefly, but my colleague from
USAID has direct experience in El Salvador where we have
managed many of those.
I would say we have actually learned quite a bit over the
last few years about how to deal with what is a very deeply
embedded social violence in the case of gang violence. It is
not just in the case of homicides, which have come down
significantly, but also in what people experience in daily life
in terms of insecurity and their perception of insecurity. That
changes behavior, and it changes the sense of when people feel
like they can make their lives and home.
What we found is that there are interventions that are
particularly effective, and they are not always, at first
glance, what would be popular in communities that have been
racked by violence. But interventions like cognitive behavioral
therapy, not just with perpetrators but with their families and
people who are their victims, it is particularly effective over
time.
One thing that we found is that one of the real challenges
of gangs, not just in Central America but in many other places,
is an inability of people to leave that life. And so looking at
it as a phenomenon and not just the crime that happens, but
where it comes from, is an important part of finding ways to
contend with it, and we have found excellent partners across
Central America in helping us deal with this.
It is an intensive approach, but it does yield results.
There are others as well, some involving law enforcement, and
that is very important. This is not a situation where you can
take law enforcement out of the equation. It has to be a part
of it, but there also need to be other interventions.
Let me pass this on to my colleague.
Mr. Natiello. Thank you. Thank you, Representative Jacobs,
for that question. USAID is very engaged in this space, and let
me talk about how we work at the national level and then come
down to the community levels.
At the national level, we do a lot of work to collect data
and evidence on what kind of crimes are occurring and where
they are occurring. We share that data. We use that data to
bring together policymakers from the three countries, so that
they can make smarter policies that address violence. That is
at the national level.
We share that data with mayors in the most dangerous
municipalities. And then we work closely with those mayors,
with the local leaders in those municipalities, to focus even
at the neighborhood level, to build community centers and
after-school programs for kids, the kind of therapy programs
that the Special Envoy mentioned when we find at-risk families.
And I think it is important to note that over time the
murder rates in the three countries have gone down
considerably. I think in 2013, in El Salvador, the murder rate
was 103 people per 100,000 citizens. I think in 2019, it came
down to 52, and I think today it is even much lower. So we are
seeing impact. We are seeing positive impacts in that space.
And then another key thing that we do as part of these
efforts is to take back territorial control from the gangs and
from the violent actors. One quick example there, the Cuscatlan
Park in the city center of San Salvador, really an emblematic
park for that country, was overrun by gangs and violence.
We worked with the mayor, we worked with community leaders,
we worked with the private sector, to take that park back.
There were 70,000 visitors to that park over the course of the
3 months prior to COVID, and I think about 90 percent of those
people said they feel safe in that park.
That is an example of taking space back for citizens, so
they can be with their families, they can recreate their
communities, and they can envision a better future.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you for that work and the progress.
In my last couple of seconds, Mr. Natiello, I was just hoping
you could talk about the Partnership for Growth model, if you
are planning on bringing it back, or if there are any lessons
you are taking from that program to how you are operating in
these countries now.
Mr. Natiello. So on the Partnership for Growth, I would say
that, you know, we will implement the policies of the Biden
Administration, and certainly economic growth is critical to
address the kind of problems that we have discussed here today.
USAID is very engaged with private sector partners and with
governments to try to create economic opportunities in these
three countries.
We have had some success, but as many have said, this is a
long-term challenge that requires us to continue to look for
those private sector partnerships, build those conditions for
private investment, so that the jobs can be created
particularly for young people in these countries.
Thank you.
Mr. Sires. Thank you. Thank you again to our witnesses and
the members for joining us for this important hearing. Stemming
the flow of irregular migration from Central America will
require long-term commitment from the United States to deepen
our diplomatic and foreign assistance efforts.
I look forward to working closely with my colleagues and
the Biden Administration to help foster the necessary political
and economic conditions whereby citizens throughout the region
can imagine a future in their home country.
With that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT FROM CHAIRMAN SIRES

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CHART

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4120.004

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
