- THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES AND THE FISCAL YEAR BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY
PRIORITIES AND THE FISCAL YEAR BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

APRIL 28, 2022
__________

Serial No. 117-144
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

47-347PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      DARRELL ISSA, California
AMI BERA, California      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      LEE ZELDIN, New York
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California      BRIAN MAST, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      MARK GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      GREG STEUBE, Florida
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDY KIM, New Jersey      AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
SARA JACOBS, California      PETER MEIJER, Michigan
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina      NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
JIM COSTA, California      RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California      YOUNG KIM, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas      MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

BLINKEN, HON. ANTONY, SECRETARY OF STATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE..........................................................     8

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    77
Hearing Minutes..................................................    78
Hearing Attendance...............................................    79

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Representative Connolly............    80

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    82

THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY PRIORITIES
AND THE FISCAL YEAR BUDGET REQUEST

Thursday, April 28, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:04 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gregory Meeks
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Meeks [presiding]. The Committee on Foreign
Affairs will come to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point.
And all members will have 5 days to submit statements,
extraneous material, and questions for the record, subject to
the length limitations that are within the rules.
To insert something into the record, please have your staff
email the previously mentioned address or contact full
committee staff.
As a reminder to members, please keep your video function
on at all times, even if you are not recognized by the chair.
And members are responsible for muting and unmuting
themselves. Consistent with House rules, staff will only mute
members, as appropriate, when they are not under recognition,
to eliminate background noise.
And I see that we now have a quorum, and I now recognize
myself for opening remarks.
Let me start by thanking Secretary Blinken for appearing
before the committee today to represent the Administration's
Fiscal Year 2023 budget request and priorities for U.S. foreign
policy.
This budget request makes clear the Administration is
putting diplomacy and development first, leveraging the United
States' unparalleled soft power, network of alliances, and
unmatched influence at international organizations and
institutions to protect the American people and advance the
United States national interests.
And, Mr. Secretary, since your last appearance before this
committee, we have seen, unfortunately, Russia launch an
unjustifiable and renewed full-scale war of choice against
Ukraine. And I want to take the opportunity to commend you and
President Biden and the Administration for leading the global
effort to support Ukraine as it repels this act of Russian
aggression. The Biden-Harris Administration, through its
handling of the Ukraine crisis, has demonstrated what can be
achieved when the United States leadership is marshaled to push
back against brazen aggression and attacks on sovereignty,
democracy, and human rights.
And while Russia and Ukraine are, understandably, on the
top of everyone's mind, we also cannot take our eyes off other
threats and challenges that we must face in partnership with
other allies and the global community, whether they be the
expansionists of China; preventing a nuclear-armed Iran;
drought and political instability in the Horn of Africa; the
ongoing effects of COVID-19, or the existential threat of
climate change, and armed conflict around the world.
Indeed, Russia's war on Ukraine has only intensified some
of these challenges. In Africa, the home of the largest
concentration of internally displaced and refugee populations
on the planet, these vulnerable populations are bearing the
brunt of rising food insecurity, which has been exacerbated by
Putin's war in Ukraine and threatens hunger around the world.
We should celebrate where we are seeing successes; for
example, in Yemen, a fragile truce brokered with the assistance
of the U.N. and the United States Special Envoy, which offers a
vital opportunity for warring parties to commit to a lasting
cease-fire.
But many daunting challenges remain. Following our
withdrawal from Afghanistan, the end of that war raises
important questions about how we move forward after a 20-year
conflict and how to best help the Afghan people, especially the
women and girls of the country, and address a humanitarian
crisis.
And it is vital that the United States also remain focused
on our regional neighbors in Central and South America and the
Caribbean. And over the past several years, we have seen a
deterioration of democracy globally, including in several
Western countries in the Western Hemisphere, which have also
been marked by weakened democratic institutions, politicized
judicial systems, corruption scandals, and blatant lack of
respect for the rule of law.
Despite these challenges, there are some reasons, also,
though, to celebrate and be hopeful. I never like to be just
negative. We have to also point out some of the hopeful things.
Barbados became a republic and swore in its first President
since it became independent 55 years ago. We are also seeing
positive changes with recently inaugurated Presidents in both
Honduras and Chile, ushering in new perspectives on fighting
corruption and strengthening democracy.
And for the first time since 1994, the United States is
hosting the Summit of the Americas, this time in Los Angeles,
with a focus on a sustainable, resilient, and equitable future,
and recommitment to upholding democracy in the region.
Of course, we cannot meet global challenges without
providing our diplomatic and development professionals the
tools that they need to succeed. So, I welcome the
Administration's recent steps to build a more agile, diverse,
and equitable work force. I would be remiss if I did not
implore the Department to do more, particularly to address
inequities at the mid and senior ranks, and address notable
disparities in career progressions.
The Department's establishment of paid internship positions
is an important development, key to opening the door for
historically excluded groups. And I hope the Department will
take further steps to convert its internships entirely to a
paid status.
I also appreciate the steps the Department has taken to
support more expeditionary diplomacy and face-to-face
engagement in support of America's interests around the world,
as well as to modernize visa and passport processes that
further facilitate such engagement.
In addition, I am encouraged to see the Department
prioritize meetings its obligations at the United Nations,
where the United States remains the largest contributor to
global peacekeeping operations and other important multilateral
efforts.
So, Secretary Blinken, let me again thank you. Thank you
for being here. Thank you for being the face to American
diplomacy and working around the world. There are so many
things that are happening at this time in our history, but I do
believe that, in the end, the camera of history will record us
as taking us into a better place, once we get out of this tough
place that we are in right now, primarily led by Putin's
vicious and unilateral war against democracy that I think,
really, not just in Ukraine, but around the world.
And I look forward to hearing your testimony and answers to
what I know will be very thoughtful questions from our members.
And I now yield to Mr. McCaul for his opening remarks.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today. I also
want to thank you for meeting with us when we were in Poland
recently. We have a very good discussion. In fact, I have been
there twice in the last month.
But I will say our delegation, bipartisan, came back
resolved more than ever that we need to help Ukraine win this
war. And it was very bipartisan.
And I also want to thank you, sir, and the State Department
for your efforts to bring Trevor Reed home to his family. I
have met with his parents many times. I want to thank the
Special Presidential Envoy for Hostage Affairs, Roger Carstens,
and U.S. Ambassador John Sullivan, a good friend of mine, who
were really critical to bringing him home, securing his
freedom. His parents are very grateful, sir. And we thank you
and your team for that.
We are currently witnessing the largest invasion in Europe
since World War II, my father's war. And as you know, the
brutality is shocking. We just passed a war crimes bill, the
chairman and I, on the floor, bipartisan, calling these out for
what they are and holding Mr. Putin accountable as a war
criminal.
But the images of corpses littering the streets after
Bucha, hands tied behind their backs, bullets in their heads;
reports of mobile crematoriums being brought in to cover up the
mounting body counts and cover up the evidence; the pregnant
woman covered in blood being carried out of a recently bombed
maternity hospital, for God's sakes. Tragically, both she and
her baby, as you know, did not survive. But these are Putin's
war crimes, and he must be held accountable. He fancies himself
as reclaiming the glory of the Russian Empire. Yet, his legacy
will be that of a war criminal.
And yet, in the face of these horrors, President Zelensky,
I think, and the people of Ukraine, have really inspired the
world with their bravery and their determination. And I
appreciate the fact, sir, that you when to Kyiv with the
Secretary of Defense to meet with him. I think that was very,
very important, and I would love to hear more about that visit.
But, you know, they are standing in front of these tanks,
risking their lives to fight for their freedom, and against all
odds, they are holding off the invading force. We were told in
4 days this would be over. We are now into the third month. Mr.
Putin has underestimated the Ukrainian people, I think to his
own peril.
And that is why it is critical, as you know, to get Ukraine
the weapons they need to completely defeat Putin's invasion
now. I appreciate the efforts made to get these desperately
needed weapons into the hands of Ukrainians, once the war
started. I wish more of these weapons had gone in before the
invasion and not after. I know there was concern about
provocation, provoking Putin. The President, in my view, sat on
critical weapons packages in the spring of 2021 and again in
November 2021--all the while Russia amassed its massive troops
on the border.
And as the battle for the Donbass heats up, the United
States and her allies are only just now training Ukrainians on
vital heavy weapons, including MLRS artillery, air defenses,
armed drones, and tanks.
As President Zelensky put it, he said, you know, ``It's
unfair that Ukraine is still forced to ask for what its
partners have been storing somewhere for years. If they have
the weapons that Ukraine needs here, we need them now. If they
have the ammunition that we need here and now, it is their
moral duty, first of all, to help protect freedom.'' And then,
he said this would help save the lives of thousands of
Ukrainians.
As I have often said, the world is watching. This is an
historic time. And history will judge us by how we respond and
whether we learn from our mistakes.
I will say the narrative has gone from it will be over in 4
days to we need to help Ukraine defend themselves, to I was
very pleased to hear you and Secretary Austin say, ``Ukraine
can win.'' And I think the narrative has changed with the
American people as well, as they see the horrific images coming
out of these atrocities. And I know, with Mariupol, once the
dust settles, we are going to hear--I think we have just
scratched the surface, unfortunately.
This unprovoked aggression on Ukraine has opened the
world's eyes to the threat, though, of other malign actors,
primarily China, and to our partner Taiwan. At the Winter
Olympics, as you know, Putin and the Chinese Communist Party
General, Secretary Xi, announced their unholy alliance, ``no
limits,'' they call it, compact against the United States and
NATO.
I think it was not a question of if, but when, and I think
Putin made the calculation, based on what he saw, that this was
the time. And we are very worried that President Xi may make
the same calculation. I hope with Putin's miscalculation,
however, and his lack of success, if you will, he will change
that paradigm.
But they just reached a secret military agreement between
the Solomon Islands, China did, which took us all by surprise.
These are the very islands that my father's generation fought
and died for to liberate during World War II. And now, it is
under the thumb of the CCP.
It is clear that they are preparing for some sort of
conflict, whether it is by military or otherwise. And I think
the United States must act now to prevent such an invasion. We
must also make sure our Defense Industrial Base is embracing
innovation to make weapons more quickly using 21st century
technology.
In short, our arsenal of democracy needs rejuvenation. And
that may be for a longer discussion, sir, that we could have.
But the slow pace of these weapons that the chairman and I sign
off on, not going out, raises concerns.
Turning to Afghanistan, Republicans and Democrats alike
expressed alarm over the Administration's failure to prepare
for the fallout of the withdrawal. We were promised that this
would be planned for all contingencies. But, in the end, 13
soldiers died during the evacuation; hundreds of American
citizens and tens of thousands of Afghan partners were left
behind. I will be releasing an interim report very soon
outlining what our investigation has discovered so far. And I
look forward to discussing that report with you, sir.
But, at the end of the day, we are in this together. And it
is in the interest of the free world to defeat the evils of Mr.
Putin and all of our foreign nation adversary countries.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. It is now my honor to introduce the
Honorable Antony J. Blinken, who currently serves as the
Nation's 71st Secretary of State.
There are a lot of questions that want to be asked. So, in
the interest of time, I will skip your biography, Mr.
Secretary. I think everyone knows it well, you know, on this
committee, and we have introduced you in the past.
So, basically, you will have 5 minutes to deliver your
opening remarks, and I will gently tap my gavel at the
appropriate time. I may be a little more liberal with you
because I think it is significant and important to hear from
you and the reports back, as we deal with the government's
budgetary concerns, with the requests, with reference to the
State authorization and the State Department.
You are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ANTONY BLINKEN, SECRETARY OF STATE, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Secretary Blinken. Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member McCaul,
thank you. Thank you for having me here today to speak about
the Administration's proposed budget for the State Department.
But thank you more broadly----
Mr. McCaul. Secretary, could you pull the mic a little
closer maybe?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Sorry. Is that better? Try that.
But thank you as well for your partnership and, also, for
your leadership. That CODEL that both of you led in Poland at a
critical moment made a big difference, and it has been
gratifying to be able to work with both of you and other
Members on this urgent issue, but also on many others. And I
deeply appreciate it.
And I did recently get back from Kyiv with Secretary
Austin, where we wanted to show, as well as deliver on,
America's commitment to the government and to the people of
Ukraine.
This brutal war of aggression against Ukraine has
underscored to me the power and the purpose of American
diplomacy. Our diplomacy is rallying allies and partners around
the world to join us in supporting Ukraine with security,
economic, humanitarian assistance to impose massive costs on
Russia for its aggression; to strengthen our collective
security and defense, and to address the war's mounting global
consequences, including the refugee and food crises that have
flowed from it.
We have to continue to drive this diplomacy forward; also,
to seize the strategic opportunities and address some of the
risks that are presented by Russia's overreach, as countries
reconsider their policies, their priorities, their
relationships.
The budget request before you predates the crisis, but
fully funding and the new emergency resources the President
requested earlier today is critical to ensuring that Russia's
war in Ukraine is a strategic failure for the Kremlin and
serves as a powerful lesson to those who might consider
following its path.
The supplemental resources Congress provided in March have
made a decisive different on the battlefield, helping
Ukrainians defend their country and win the battle for Kyiv.
Your support also helped meet the mounting costs caused by the
Kremlin's brutal invasion in Ukraine itself, across Europe,
around the world, while bolstering the security of our allies
and partners. This assistance was provided with broad
bipartisan support and it has sent a clear signal of the United
States' commitment to the Ukrainian government and to its
people.
We ask the Congress do the same with the emergency request
that is before you as of today, which seeks $20.5 billion for
security assistance, $8.5 billion for economic assistance, and
$3 billion for humanitarian aid, including to address the
growing global food security crisis, which is a direct result
of Russia's aggression. Approximately $14 billion of this
request would be directed to the State Department and to USAID.
Let me just underscore, we cannot take our progress so far
for granted. Ukraine's enduring independence and sovereignty
depends in no small part on ensuring that the country's brave
defenders have what they need to keep up the fight and meet the
urgent needs of their people.
But, Mr. Chairman, to your point, as we focus on this
urgent crisis, the State Department continues to carry out
missions that are front and center to our diplomacy--like
responsibly managing great power competition with China;
facilitating a halt to fighting in Yemen and Ethiopia; pushing
back against the rising tide of authoritarianism and the threat
that it poses to democracy and human rights.
We also have evolving challenges that require us to develop
new capabilities--like the emergence and re-emergence of
infectious disease, and accelerating climate crisis; a digital
revolution that holds enormous promise, but also real peril.
Last fall, I had a chance to set out a modernization agenda
for the Department and for U.S. diplomacy to enable us to even
more effectively respond to many of these complex demands. And
in no small part, thanks to the Fiscal Year 2022 budget
approved by Congress, we have been able to make real progress
on this agenda, though much remains to be done.
To give you just a few quick examples:
We strengthened our capacity to shape the ongoing
technological revolution, so that it actually protects our
interests; it boosts American competitiveness; it upholds our
values.
With bipartisan congressional support and encouragement, we
just launched a new Bureau for Cyberspace and Digital Policy
with 60 team members at the start, and I am grateful for the
support and the advice that we got along the way.
We are also making headway on ensuring that our diplomats
reflect America's remarkable diversity. This is a tremendous
source of strength for our diplomacy. The Department's first-
ever Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer has spearheaded an
effort to analyze and address the obstacles that have been
preventing underrepresented groups from joining, but also
advancing at the State Department.
We expanded the Pickering and Rangel fellowship programs,
and, Mr. Chairman, as you said, paid internships at State,
again with strong congressional input and support.
My first 15 months on this job have only strengthened my
conviction that these and other reforms aren't just worthwhile,
they are essential to delivering for the American people.
Ensuring we can deliver on this agenda will require
sustained funding, some new authorities, and most importantly,
partnership from Congress. That is why I am grateful to have
worked with Congress to reestablish a formal dialog on the
State Department authorization.
Last month, we sent congressional staff the first package
of legislative authorities required to meet the challenges we
face and we expect to send more in the coming weeks, and to
working with you on State authorization.
If we want to deepen our capability in areas like climate
and multilateral diplomacy, if we want to expand on Secretary
Powell's vision of a Foreign Service training float, if we want
to strengthen global health security and the capacity to
prevent, to detect, and respond to future outbreaks, we will
need some additional resources.
If we want to be able to swiftly stand up new missions, to
deploy our diplomats when and where they are needed, and make
these decisions based on risk management, not risk aversion, we
will need to reform the Secure Embassy Construction and
Counterterrorism Act.
There are other things that I would point to that we need
to do, but we look forward to working with you on that.
So, in the issue of time, let me stop there, and, of
course, we can address these and many other issues throughout
the course of the testimony.
Thank you. Very good to be with everyone.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Blinken follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. Thank you for your testimony, Mr.
Secretary.
And I am now going to begin to recognize members for 5
minutes each. Pursuant to the House rules, all time yielded is
for the purposes of questioning our witness.
I will recognize members by alternating between Democrats
and Republicans. And if you miss your turn, please let our
staff know, and we will come back to you.
If you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone
and address the chair verbally, and identify yourself, so that
we know who is speaking.
One of the other things that may come up are votes. And we
are going to try to continue the hearing. So, members will be
aware, we are going to try to send some members to go vote and
come back, so that we will be able to make sure we are
maximizing the time that we have with the Secretary. He has a
hard stop at 4:30. And so, we are going to try to get as many
questions in as we can.
Many of you are aware that, when I became chair of the
committee, that I made a commitment to elevate the voice and
the role of not only our senior members and our subcommittee
chairs, but also rank-and-file members, including and
especially our junior members, who bring valuable experience
and perspectives to this committee.
And as such, for budget hearings with the Secretary, I have
committed that whenever we hold such hearings, that all members
who were not able to ask questions previously, due to time
constraints, that I would resume the next hearing where the
previous one had ended.
And as such, I believe that Ranking Member McCaul will also
give members who did not have an opportunity on the Republican
side, those who did have an opportunity to ask questions the
last time, to ask questions first also.
And that will be, of course, after Mr. McCaul and I ask our
questions.
[Laughter.]
So, let me start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes for
the purposes of asking questions.
And just so that the members will know, the first ones on
the members' side to ask questions on the Democratic side will
be Mr. Malinowski, and on the Republican side, Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Secretary, there are so many things that we could ask.
I am going to try to focus my questions just on, since this is
a budget hearing, on trying to focus on what is happening
internally within the State.
And you know what has been really important to me, looking
at it last year. Fortunately, this committee passed the very
first State authorization bill to be signed into law since
2002, which included many important measures to promote
diversity and inclusion at State, including the establishment
of an appeals process for security clearance restrictions and
mandatory training for hiring managers on implicit bias.
So, the budget. How will the budget request enable State to
carry out those new authorities and integrate them with other
DEI activities?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And let me underscore something that you said, but also
that you have been leading on, which is, as I said, our
determination to make sure that we are building a Department
that actually reflects the people that it represents. And we
have taken steps over the last 15 months that I think put us
dramatically in a new place, and better place, to actually make
good on that commitment:
The creation and appointment of a Chief Diversity and
Inclusion Officer, and office that goes with it, reporting
directly to me on the seventh floor of the State Department;
senior officials in every bureau responsible for tracking and
making sure that we are following through on this agenda.
A 5-year strategic plan that was just put forward on
diversity, inclusion, access--a plan that reflects input from
more than 700 Foreign Service Officers and civil servants, as
well as, of course, many experts.
Work that we're doing, innovative work, to actually get
data disaggregated, so we have a complete picture of where we
are and where we are not.
Programs, for example, as well to make good on one of the
challenges we have, not only getting people through the doors
of C Street to join the Department, but to keep them there,
once they are there. And we have had issues with that. We have
seen, disproportionately, Foreign Service Officers and civil
servants from underrepresented groups in the Department leave.
We want to understand why and we want to make the changes
necessary. So, we have an entire program now for retention,
including exit interviews, so we actually understand what is
motivating people to leave, and if there is a concern that we
can address, we address it.
The paid internships that you referenced, these are
critical to making sure that, socioeconomically, we have people
who start out and open their eyes and minds to the perspective
of having a career in foreign policy at the State Department.
If they are at the Department, they have the ability to do
that. That is critical.
And for all of these programs and more, the budget lays out
a funding request to make sure that we can actually carry them
through. And so, we really welcome the partnership with
Congress on this.
My commitment is this: this is turning around, to some
extent, an aircraft carrier. It does not happen overnight. But,
by what we are doing, by what we are putting in place, I am
convinced that over the next few years, if we sustain it and
stick to it, and resource it, you are going to see manifest
progress throughout the ranks, making sure people have career
paths that they can aspire to and get to the highest positions
in the Department. All of that will play out over a few years,
but we have now put in place the building blocks to do that
more effectively, and I hope the resources can follow.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you for that.
And also, I think that I have to raise this question also,
Mr. Secretary. During the early chaotic days of Russia's
horrific invasion of Ukraine, there were some reports and
videos of the mistreatment of non-white residents of Ukraine
while trying to flee the country. And during my trip that Mr.
McCaul and I took to the Polish-Ukrainian border, I was assured
that any mistreatment or discrimination was being addressed.
And so, I just have to ask the question, Mr. Secretary: are you
aware of any further such discrimination against non-white
refugees? And did this come up at your recent travel in Poland?
Secretary Blinken. Mr. Chairman, we took these reports very
seriously. And not only did we take them seriously, we acted on
them. So, when this first emerged, we were immediately in
contact with our counterparts in Ukraine, as well as in
neighboring countries like Poland, making sure that they saw
what was apparently happening and that they took action to
correct it.
And as I have seen it--and we are happy to provide more
information to the committee--the governments in question did
take action to send very clear messages to folks throughout
their system that people could not in any way be mistreated or
treated differently, in particular, as they were trying to
leave Ukraine in the face of the Russian onslaught.
To the best of my knowledge, the reports of such incidents
have decreased significantly, but it is something that we
track. And we will be happy to be in close touch with you.
Needless to say, if any further reports emerge, please let us
know, so that we can followup with the governments in question.
Chairman Meeks. And before I go to Mr. McCaul, I have just
got one final question I need to ask, Mr. Secretary.
Recognizing the disparities by the providence in Afghanistan
before the fall of the Ghani government, how would you
characterize the security situation in Afghanistan and the
treatment, especially, of women and girls in Afghanistan, under
the Taliban rule, as we speak right now?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Very quickly, I would say this: the overall level of
violence in the country has decreased, but we are seeing
terrorist attacks, including, horrifically, most recently,
against Hazara and Shiite minorities. We are, of course, seeing
retribution attacks by Taliban against those who are part of
the former government. These seem to be, for the most part, not
centrally directed; that is, they tend to be happening at a
local level, but they are happening. And that, of course, is
egregious.
And then, more generally, there is no doubt that, when it
comes to the basic rights of the Afghan people, and especially
women and girls, that has moved backward across the board. We
have seen, for example, when it comes to women and girls, the
inability of girls to go to school above the sixth grade. The
Taliban had made a commitment that they would be allowed to do
so. It reneged on that commitment. We are pressing, and many
other countries are pressing, very hard on the Taliban to make
good on what it said it would do. We will see if they do that.
So, the rights picture is challenging. The security
picture, as I said, is mixed because, while the overall level
of violence has gone down, terrorism attacks within Afghanistan
against Afghans continue and some of these retribution attacks
continue.
Chairman Meeks. Mr. McCaul?
Mr. McCaul. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary, you know, I have been critical that more
weapons did not go in before the invasion; seemed to be waiting
until after the invasion. I will say I was at the Polish-
Ukraine border last week, and I was actually very pleased to
see a lot of 18-wheelers going in. And we know what they were
carrying.
But Zelensky said, ``If we had access to all the weapons we
need, which our partners have and which are comparable to the
weapons used by the Russian Federation, we would have already
ended this war.''
I do not think we can afford to make the same mistakes,
though, in Taiwan. The stakes are high. They make 90 percent of
the advanced semiconductor chips. If the CCP controlled, if
they take Taiwan, they could weaponize the semiconductor supply
chain and decimate the United States economy.
If CCP controlled Taiwan, it would give China physical base
in the first island chain that would cut the United States off
from our allies and put us in a strategic disadvantage to
future aggression in the archipelago of the Solomon Islands and
that security group.
My question, very quickly, the chairman and I do sign off
on foreign military weapons sales. We sent a letter, a joint
letter, to you on December the 3d of last year. There are about
10 weapons systems. I won't go into detail on all of them, but
all very important. When I met the Ambassador from Taiwan, she
said, ``I have not received any of these.''
I think deterrence is important here. And we wrote to
request notification of the pending shipment of these sales to
Taiwan. Why is this being held up? Many of these were signed
off by the chairman and myself 2 years ago.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Let me just very quickly
address Ukraine, and then, come quickly to your question.
First on Ukraine, again, with great appreciation for
everything that you have done, that the chairman has done, and
continue to do--and we have got to keep doing together--the
reason that the Ukrainians were able, so effectively, to push
back the Russians from their aggression against Kyiv and the
surrounding areas, and push them back to the east and the
south, is two things.
One, starting with their remarkable courage and resilience,
which the Russians underestimated, and probably the entire
world did.
But, two, because they actually had in hand in the moment
the tools they needed to do it. And the reason that they had
those tools in hand is because, among other things, President
Biden engaged in a drawdown way back on Labor Day of last year;
another one, Christmastime. And these things were not----
Mr. McCaul. And I apologize. I have got a few minutes, and
I have one more question for you.
Secretary Blinken. Yes. So, I just wanted to make that
point.
Mr. McCaul. When will Taiwan receive these weapons?
Secretary Blinken. So, on Taiwan, two things. I agree with
you that it is vital that Taiwan continue to have the means to
defend itself, because we have seen mounting aggression from--
--
Mr. McCaul. And I agree. I think there is a problem. I do
not know if it is State or DOD or defense contractors. But
maybe to move on to my next question----
Secretary Blinken. Well, the point----
Mr. McCaul [continuing]. Maybe it would be helpful if we
got State and DOD and the contractors in the same room together
to find out, how can we fix this broken system? And as you
know, these are Patriot battery systems, right? We cannot even
give those to the eastern flank NATO countries. We have got a
serious backlog in weapons systems, and I would like to work
with you to fix that.
My last question, Financial Times broke a story yesterday
that the CCP's national champion for memory chips, a company
called YMTC, is breaking the U.S. foreign direct product rule
and providing critical technology to Huawei. Do you agree that
any company that violates U.S. law to provide critical
technology to a sanctioned CCP-controlled country poses a
threat to our national security? And if so, would you commit
today to getting YMTC, which is a real threat, sir, as you
know, putting that on the Entities List?
Secretary Blinken. First, just quickly on Taiwan, I welcome
working with you and other Members on this to make sure that we
can streamline the timelines, to make sure that they are
getting what they need to defend themselves.
Second, with regard to this specific case, I will commit
right now to look into it as soon as we are done, to figure out
what is going on, and if there are sanctionable activity, to
make sure that it is sanctioned.
Mr. McCaul. Well, we are providing the equipment that they
buy from the United States to make these advanced semiconductor
chips. And I think we need to work on this Entities List. I
think the Department of Commerce and DOD, we have got to
harmonize this, and we also need to look at outbound investment
streaming. With all the technology and capital flows going into
China, which you know they use--and we are the backbone--that
were made in America, but they also made their hypersonic
weapon.
And I sent a letter to Secretary Raimondo about this, as
you know as well. And I hope you would especially take a look
at this particular company.
And thank you, sir.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Tom Malinowski from New
Jersey, who is the vice chair of the full committee, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you for going to Kyiv.
Thank you for everything that you have done, and that President
Biden has done, to stand with Ukraine, and for showing the
world once again what principled American leadership in the
world can do. It has been absolutely extraordinary.
I have some questions that mostly will focus on sanctions,
the economic side of this war. Yesterday, as you know, the
House passed legislation that I led with Representative Joe
Wilson that was designed to encourage the use of frozen,
blocked Russian assets ultimately in the rebuilding of Ukraine.
And I was delighted to see today that the President, the
Administration, embraced this basic principle, that we should
be using the wealth that built the Putin regime to rebuild the
country that Putin is destroying.
Most of my questions about that have been answered just in
the last 24 hours. I did want to ask one question that I think,
as we work together on this, will probably be pretty crucial.
And that is, you know, we are talking about the oligarchs and
the yachts and the villas and bank accounts, and so forth. But
we accept that principle, do you think it might also apply to
State assets? For example, the much larger amount of money that
has been frozen around the world belonging to the Russian
Central Bank?
Secretary Blinken. In short, yes. And this is one of the
things that we have asked our own lawyers to look at, which is
what authorities would be needed, potentially, to seize those
assets, but not only to seize them, but to use them in exactly
the ways that you and Congressman Wilson have suggested in your
legislation.
Mr. Malinowski. Yes, thank you.
More broadly, it seems to me that this is a moment kind of
like 9/11, a moment when people and countries around the world
need to choose what side they are on. We have imposed
extraordinary sanctions with our allies, but I am concerned
that those sanctions may be undermined by other countries that
may view participation as optional, may be hedging their bets.
We have countries around the world continuing to purchase not
just Russian oil, but diamonds, for example. We have Roman
Abramovich's yacht sailing into a harbor in Turkey.
I am particularly concerned about countries in the Persian
Gulf. I am sure you have seen the reports of dozens of Russian
officials, business people close to Putin, owning property in
the United Arab Emirates, and in the last few weeks,
significant potential targets of sanctions moving assets into
the UAE, in particular. Clearly, they are doing this because
they believe that, if they are sanctioned, they will be safe in
these countries.
So, I guess what I want to ask you is, are they right? Will
they be safe?
Secretary Blinken. We are looking around the world at where
resources are moving, as well as where countries or
institutions may be trying to help evade the sanctions or in
any way undermine them.
Thanks to the colleagues in the Senate, we now have working
for us a sanctions coordinator who reports directly to me, Jim
O'Brien. This is one of his responsibilities, to look at
sanctions evasion, and to make sure that we are doing
everything we can to cutoff any such evasion.
We are working that as well with our G7 partners. And I
would just say, very quickly, two things. Look, it is much
better in the first instance if we can get any countries in
question to voluntarily make sure that they are joining us in
implementing the sanctions and not allowing them to be evaded.
But, if necessary to use authorities that we have to take
action against those that are not, that is certainly something
we are looking at.
The last thing is this: I mentioned this in my opening
remarks. A number of countries around the world are rethinking
their relationships, including their relationship with Russia,
going forward. And some of them have had relationships with
Russia going back decades, including at times when we couldn't
have the same kind of relationship with them, and now we can.
We also need to make sure that we are helping advance that
transition, and doing it in a way that, as a strategic matter,
moves things in the right direction. And that is something we
are factoring in as well.
Mr. Malinowski. Well, thank you. I hope we recognize who
has the power in our relationship with some of these countries,
and particularly, the Gulf countries, ask the question, are
they America's allies in the Gulf or Russia's allies in the
Gulf?
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Malinowski. And I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Ronny
Jackson of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Member
McCaul.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, it is hard to see any signs of success from
the Biden Administration over the past 15 months. Our
constituents are facing higher prices and lower supplies across
all industries, particularly at the gas pump. The world is
markedly less safe and many of our allies are in immediate
danger. And the Administration seems more worried about
catering to the socialist left and about virtue signaling than
about actually getting things done to help everyday Americans.
Since this Administration took office, our three main
global adversaries have become emboldened and strengthened.
In Europe, President Biden failed to deter Vladimir Putin
from invading Ukraine, despite ample evidence for months of
military buildup. And now, we all watch with horror at war
crimes and the violence that is unfolding.
In the Indo-Pacific, as I saw firsthand on a CODEL I
recently was on last week to Australia, Japan, and Taiwan,
China continues its attempts to disrupt the world order through
threatening its neighbors like Taiwan, through vaccine
diplomacy for a virus it both created and covered up, and
through its malicious Belt and Road Initiative.
And in the Middle East, according to reports from
negotiations in Vienna, Iran stands poised to receive enormous
gains without giving up its nuclear deployment.
Each concession by this Administration means more of our
servicemembers abroad and more of allies, particularly Israel,
are at imminent risk.
Mr. Secretary, I think many of us in this room are
concerned about the evolving crisis faced by Taiwan, and that
has been mentioned, and the economic and security risk of
nations around the world if China decides to invade Taiwan.
We have witnessed two enormous foreign policy failures, in
my opinion, between this Administration's withdrawal from
Afghanistan and its early concessions to Russia, as Putin
prepared for, and then, invaded Ukraine. It is clear from these
actions, and from what I learned during my meetings on this
recent CODEL, that we must reestablish confidence in our
allies.
Mr. Secretary, what steps are you taking to ensure allies
like Taiwan are confident in America's support, particularly
after our mistakes in Afghanistan and Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Look, I do not want to put words in allies' and partners'
mouths. That wouldn't be appropriate. But I think it is fair to
say, from what I am hearing around the world--and I would
certainly invite the chairman and the ranking member as well
who have been making the rounds--I would suggest to you that
the confidence of our allies and partners in the United States
right now is at a high point, precisely because of the
leadership that we have exerted through these many months with
regard to Ukraine, but also on many other issues.
Indeed, Congressman, one of the first instructions I had on
taking office from President Biden was to focus on re-
energizing and revitalizing these alliances and partnerships,
and that is exactly what we did. We are now in better standing
at NATO than we have been in as long as I can remember. We have
revitalized partnerships throughout the Asia Pacific, where you
were, including with Japan, with Korea, with Australia, with
New Zealand. We have energized the Quad that brings together
the United States, India, Australia, and Japan. As you know,
this is a vital institution. We have re-engaged with ASEAN.
Across the board--and I could down the list--I think our
standing with allies and partners is stronger than it has ever
been. And there is a good reason for it, and you are right to
focus on it. It is because most of the challenges we face are
most effectively dealt with when we are working together with
allies and partners, and that is exactly what you are seeing in
Ukraine right now. Because of all the countries that we have
brought together, the Ukrainians have what they need to repel
this Russian aggression.
And we have got to keep working on that. The Secretary of
Defense was just in Germany with 40 other defense ministers
from around the world to make sure that we could continue to
get the Ukrainians exactly what they need to continue to do the
job.
And on Taiwan, we are resolute in making sure that Taiwan
has what it needs to defend itself, as we have been for decades
across eight Administrations. And we will work with you and
work with other members of the committee to make sure that we
are doing that as effectively as possible.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I have another
question here, sir.
Outrageous gas prices are hurting my constituents. Yet, the
Administration continues to attack American oil and gas.
Chairman Meeks. Put your microphone on, Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Can you hear me, sir? How about that? No? OK.
Sir, outrageous gas prices are hurting my constituents.
Yet, the Administration continues to attack American oil and
gas. Biden's price-hike blame game is not only falling on deaf
ears, but it is also not believable. Gas prices have risen each
week since Biden took office, due to this disastrous and ill-
advised posture toward American energy company.
Beyond the failed domestic energy policies, it also seems
that your Department's policy toward our Gulf partners is
failing. I was disappointed to see that National Security
Advisor Sullivan approached the meeting with the Saudi Crown
Prince in a way that offended the Kingdom. This, in my opinion,
is not the way to handle such relationships during a global
energy crisis.
My constituents ask me each day what the government is
doing to lower their gas prices. So, I would like to turn that
question to you, Mr. Secretary. What is your strategy to work
with other countries, particularly our Gulf partners, to
increase access to energy and decrease the world's reliance on
Russian oil and gas?
Secretary Blinken. It is very important.
Chairman Meeks. You are going to have to do that in
writing. I have got to be strict on the 5-minute rule because
we have got so many folks that I want to make sure we get to.
Secretary Blinken. I will followup in writing for you.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Mr. McCaul. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to enter into the record the letter to
Secretary Blinken, dated December 3d, 2021, from both you and
myself on the weapon sales to Taiwan, and another to the
Honorable Gina Raimondo, Secretary of Commerce, dated July
12th, 2021.
Chairman Meeks. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

********* Information not available at press release
**********
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Andy Kim of
New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for coming here.
Just the other day, you mentioned that Ukraine won the
battle for Kyiv. And I guess I just wanted to ask you, do you
assess that they are winning the war as a whole?
Secretary Blinken. The Ukrainians, as things stand--well,
first of all, let's define winning. What is important is this:
first, on Putin's own terms, his objective going into Ukraine
was to erase its independence and sovereignty, to deny its
existence as an independent country.
And on that basis, thanks to the extraordinary courage of
the Ukrainians, he has already failed. I am very confident in
saying that a sovereign, independent Ukraine is going to be
around a lot longer than Vladimir Putin will be on the scene.
So, on that basis, they are succeeding and Russia is failing.
Now, ultimately, how this plays out and on what terms, that
has to be up to the Ukrainians, the Ukrainian people, the
government that represents them. We will support whatever they
want to do going forward. There is a ferocious battle taking
place right now across hundreds of miles in eastern and
southern Ukraine. And the Russians bring a lot of firepower to
that, but that is exactly why we and 40 or more countries
around the world are making sure that the Ukrainians have what
they need to deal with that.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. Yes, thank you for that, and I
appreciate that articulation.
The reason I ask this question is because I recently
conducted a town hall in my district and I was asked a question
about, how does the war in Ukraine affect us? How does it
affect the people in Burlington County, the New Jersey 3d
congressional District? And they asked the question just point
blank, why should we care? And I guess I just wanted to ask
you, if you were there at the town hall with me, what would you
say back to them?
Secretary Blinken. I guess I would say two things. First of
all, I think we should care because the brutalization of the
country and what is being done to the Ukrainian people by this
Russian aggression are horrific, and simply as fellow human
beings, we should care.
But, beyond that, this aggression is not only an aggression
against Ukraine; it is an aggression against the very basic
principles of the international order that were put in place to
try to keep peace and security after two world wars, both of
which drew the United States in. And those principles, like the
importance of sovereignty, of independence; principles like one
country cannot simply invade another, change its borders, and
assert that might makes right; cannot dictate to another
country its policies, its future, its decisions. That is what
Russia is committing aggression against.
And if we allow that to stand with impunity, it is going to
open a Pandora's box around the world, where other countries
may take note and take action. And we know from history that
draws us in.
Second, or third, I guess I should say, we are actually
seeing direct impacts of this aggression around the world way
beyond Europe, including rising food prices because of Russia's
aggression, energy prices that have gone up. They have gone up
more than a dollar at the pump since Putin began to put this
aggression together. So, it is having direct impacts as well.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. I agree with a lot of that. And I
think, as we are considering this budget and thinking this
through, I think it is really important--and I would like to
work with you--on how we define success to the American people.
Because we spend a lot of time talking about what we are trying
to do, but we do not always do as much as we need to to
articulate why we are doing it and what we are trying to
achieve.
And so, when I think through this, I very much agree with
you that we are feeling like we are in this new paradigm-shift
moment, where we are seeing these sacrosanct ideas and values
of sovereignty being challenged blatantly by authoritarian
governments around this world. And I think this is an
opportunity for us to reassert what American leadership is,
trying to signify what that is, and define what success can be.
Now a question, going back to Ukraine, is, one measure of
success, as you said, we won the battle for Kyiv. I know that
you announced that we are going to start having our diplomats
go back.
Secretary Blinken. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. I was wondering if you could commit
to us when we are to expect the embassy to open up and have
Americans come back into Kyiv.
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, we are working on that
right now. And I cannot give you a date certain because we want
to make sure, obviously, that it is done in a way that looks
out for their safety and their security. But we have diplomats
back on the ground in Ukraine literally as we speak working on
that. I would anticipate that this will play out over the next
several weeks, but we will be back in Kyiv and the American
flag will be flying over the embassy.
Mr. Kim of New Jersey. And when we understand the
challenges that we face with Russia, I think a lot of people
also recognize--and I think the chairman mentioned it--you
know, some of our bigger concerns in some ways are related to
China, about what comes next. I heard that there is going to be
a comprehensive Strategy being released sometime soon. I saw
the President will be doing some travel, most likely, out to
Korea and Japan.
I want to just ask, what would be the top thing that we
wanted to raise with the new President of Korea when the
President will go out there?
Secretary Blinken. The partnership that we have with Korea,
the alliance that we have with Korea----
Chairman Meeks. Again, unfortunately, Mr. Secretary, you
will have to do it in writing.
Secretary Blinken. I am happy to followup in writing.
Chairman Meeks. We have to be strict on this 5-minute rule.
So, I have to tell members, if you know a question, try to get
it out, so that the Secretary will have a chance to answer it.
I now recognize Representative August Pfluger from Texas
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am currently in San Antonio. What a momentous day this
is, Mr. Secretary. This will, undoubtedly, be the easiest
questioning that I offer in this session for sure. But what I
wanted to do today was tell you thank you. It is with great
pleasure that, just a few hours ago on the tarmac of an Air
Force Base in San Antonio, that we welcomed Trevor Reed back
home to the United States.
The very first time that I questioned you, I asked if you
would be committed to doing everything in your power to bring
him home, and you said yes. And every single time that we have
talked, I have mentioned his name to you, and you have kept it
at the forefront of your mind, I believe. And there are many
people on the committee--Colin Allred and Joaquin Castro and
other Texans, Sheila Jackson Lee, that have helped out on the
other side of the aisle--and I believe all 435 Representatives
and every one of the 100 Senators know Trevor Reed and knows
his story, understands the situation that he was in, and
brought awareness to this.
And I cannot thank you, the SPEHA team, and your entire
State Department for doing the right thing, and ultimately,
putting patriotism over politics. That is exactly what happened
today. The reunification with his family was just tremendous--
the joy on their face to see their son. Obviously, they are
very worried about his health, and it is going to take some
time to heal, to get back to good health, but his spirit is
strong. He is a fighter. He is a survivor. And I think it is an
important day in our country.
I am going to use this word again, patriotism over
politics. And there are many issues that I would like to bring
up today, but I am not going to do that. I am going to,
instead, tell you thank you. I would ask that you tell
President Biden thank you for putting patriotism over politics
and doing the right thing to bring Trevor home.
I cannot imagine the tough decision that had to be made,
but you made it; you did it, and he is home. And I just would
like to give you a couple of minutes to respond to that; and
also, to ask that we do not forget Paul Whelan, and that we do
not forget other people who are unlawfully incarcerated in
other countries. We should leave no American behind. And it
started with Trevor. I hope this momentum will continue.
So, Mr. Secretary, over to you.
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, first, let me just say,
right back at you. You and other colleagues have been
relentless in working on, advocating for, getting Trevor home.
And your voice, your action, your engagement on this has been
critical, too.
And I am so glad that you were there to take part in the
homecoming. And thank you for all of the engagement and effort
that you have made over this long, long period of time.
And it is gratifying to see that he is home. And I really,
also, have to join you in praising the extraordinary work of
Roger Carstens, who handles these issues for us and for the
President; the State Department; our Ambassador in Moscow, John
Sullivan, and many others who worked on this. But, finally, and
most importantly, President Biden, who made the decision to do
this.
But every American who remains arbitrarily detained
anywhere around the world, a hostage, remains on our minds and
in our hearts, starting with Paul Whelan. And I want to commit
to you, and to every member of this committee, that we will
continue to be relentless in bringing every single one of them
home.
This is at the very top of my priority list. I have, in my
judgment, a couple of almost sacred responsibilities. One is,
of course, to look out for the men and women of my Department,
but the other is to do everything I possibly can to bring home
Americans who, wherever they are around the world, may be
arbitrarily detained or held hostage. So, we will not relent in
this.
But, again, to you, Congressman, thank you. Thank you for
your partnership on this, but thank you for your leadership and
everything you have done to make sure that we could get to this
day.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, both of you have been
instrumental in this. I appreciate your leadership and your
voice. Trevor Reed is back on American soil. I am proud to
report that a Texan, a Marine, and a patriot has returned home.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Representative Sara Jacobs of California,
who is the vice chair of the Subcommittee on International
Development, International Organizations, and Global Corporate
Social Impact, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here with us today.
I, first, want to thank you and the Biden Administration
for your announcement of the Global Fragility Act countries. I
am looking forward to its implementation, particularly in
Mozambique and coastal West Africa. And I hope we can continue
to work together on that.
I also know that a lot of us will be asking you questions
about Ukraine, and it is our job to do oversight, but I think
it is, first, important to say that you and the Biden
Administration and President Biden have been masterful in how
you all have handled this crisis--making sure our allies are
and remain united; making sure that our approach is strategic
and thoughtful, and weighing all the different calculations,
including the risk of escalation. And I just want to say that I
go to sleep feeling better every night because I know that
President Biden and you all are leading the way here on this.
One of the things I know we are all concerned about--and I
am sure you saw on your trip to Kyiv--is this question of war
crimes and atrocities. And it is increasingly important that
the international community comes together to hold Putin
accountable. Thankfully, the ICC has announced an investigation
in Ukraine, which I am very supportive of, and I understand the
Biden Administration is currently undergoing a policy review of
the ICC and whether to provide material support to this
investigation.
So, Mr. Secretary, does the Biden Administration support
the ICC's investigation in Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. We do. And let me add very quickly that
we welcome it. We are looking to see how we can support it.
There are other critically important efforts at accountability
for these war crimes and other atrocities that have been
committed that we are also supporting.
The Ukrainian Prosecutor General, she is leading a major
effort to do this, to document; to collect the evidence; to
prepare prosecutions. We have our own experts working directly
with her and her team.
Second, because we got back on the Human Rights Council at
the United Nations, we were able to lead the effort to
establish a commission of inquiry at the Human Rights Council
to do the same thing. We are also supporting that.
So, along with the ICC and the Prosecutor General, the
Human Rights Council, and some other investigations that are
going forward, across the board, they will have our support.
Ms. Jacobs. That is really great to hear. And I think it is
important that we support all of them.
In terms of the ICC, we know that there are certain laws on
the books that seem to prohibit material support and funding.
Is that correct?
Secretary Blinken. There are laws on the books, but we have
found ways in the past--and we are not a State party to the
ICC; we do not intend to become one--but we have found ways in
the past to support investigations. In fact, there is a
prosecution going on right now, the Janjaweed from Darfur, that
is, in part, the result of information and support that we
provided.
Ms. Jacobs. OK. Would it be helpful for Congress to waive
some of these prohibitions for the purpose of an ICC
investigation for Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. To the extent that we find that anything
would be blocking useful support that we could provide, that is
something we should look at, yes.
Ms. Jacobs. OK. Great. Well, I look forward to working with
you on that, and I think you will find a lot of support here in
Congress to make sure we are doing everything we can to hold
Putin accountable.
I want to go to another part of the world. The last 2 years
have been particularly deadly across the Sahel with attacks
claiming more than 3200 victims in Burkina Faso, Mali, and
Niger, and an alarming trend of coups, many of which were
carried out by U.S.-trained personnel. And this is despite
United States and international investments, the vast majority
in the form of security assistance in the region for, roughly,
a decade.
And that is why I, along with my colleagues, including
Chairman Meeks, sent a letter to President Biden urging a new
strategy for the Sahel. And as part of this letter, we
requested an evaluation of security assistance and other
efforts in the Sahel over the last 15 years. Does the
Department have the adequate resources necessary to carry out
such a review?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you for putting a flag on that,
because I do think this is very important and I share your
concerns. We have seen mounting instability. We have seen the
coups that you have alluded to in Mali and Guinea and Burkina
Faso. And I think we have strongly felt the need for what you
have suggested, and others have suggested, is a more
comprehensive strategy to approach this. And that is exactly
what we have put in place.
And so, yes, security is, obviously, a critical component.
But, while it is necessary, it is insufficient. Getting at the
drivers of conflict; getting at the lack of effective
institutions, public services, the lack of inclusion for
minorities and the marginalized; human rights abuses; other
drivers, the strategy covers all of that. And it also makes
sure that, as we are moving forward, we are looking hard at the
programs that we have in place to make sure that they are
effective; they are operating as they are designed to be. I
believe we have the resources necessary in the budget to carry
out that mission.
Ms. Jacobs. That is great to hear. I know, in June 2020,
the State OIG report on the CT Bureau was concerned that it
would take 7 years to fully comply with the Department's
monitoring and evaluation standards. So, I would love to work
with you to make sure that we are giving you the resources that
you need to be able to do this, and that we are learning the
lessons that we need to from these investments and actually
reform our approach, so that we are promoting values, and not
only looking at short-term security, but our long-term
priorities as well.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey,
who is the ranking member of the Subcommittee on Africa, Global
Health, and Global Human Rights, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, as you know, the mass exodus of women and
children from Ukraine has left many vulnerable to human
traffickers. And we know that, even at some of the points as
they are coming across the border, people are saying, you know,
``I'll give you shelter. I'll give you food.'' And yet, it is
an engraved invitation, frankly, to another hell that they are
escaping, and that is human trafficking.
As you may know, I am the Special Representative for OSCE
Parliamentary Assembly for Human Trafficking. I am in almost
daily contact with NGO's, governments, stakeholders in the
region. There was an OSCE hearing a few weeks back, and the
collective sense was not enough is being done. But I do thank
you that there is efforts being made to help groups like IJM,
the International Justice Mission. I would respectfully--and
they haven't asked me to say this, but I will say it--
hopefully, they can get even more resources.
A lot of the money that is going to UNHCR I do not think is
getting into the trafficking fight. Even the representative for
the UNHCR recently testified at the Helsinki hearing that not
enough is being done, and that is from his lips. So, I think we
need to take that very seriously.
IJM, as you know, is really pushing hard for protection
officers who can really help weed out where the threats are.
And I would ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, to put
these flyers, or at least a few of these flyers, which are
really good, into the record. And they are from Poland. They
are from Hungary, from Romania, and they are in Romania.
[The information referred to follows:]

********* Information not available at press release
**********
Mr. Smith. So, I would ask, if you could, to take back to
try to step up a regional effort, similar to what IJM is doing
in Romania. What they are doing is very efficacious, cost-
effective, and I think it just needs to be done. So, if you
could bring that back, and perhaps comment on it, if you would
like?
Second, on March 8th, I chaired a hearing on the importance
of declaring Putin, and others, war criminals, but Putin
especially. Now I know the ICC has initiated an investigation.
You know, I won't hold my breath, how long it will take. They
want to be thorough, and that is all important.
But David Crane testified at the hearing that I had, and he
was our Special Prosecutor for Sierra Leone who put Charles
Taylor behind bars for 50 years. And he said that there is
another avenue, another route available to us, and that would
be using the General Assembly, not the Security Council where
there is veto power, as you know so well, but the General
Assembly to stand up a tribunal and immediately indict Putin.
People around him, including Lukashenko and others, may be
harder-pressed to be following and doing in a subservient way
what he tells them to do, but he is a war criminal, and he is
an indicted one at that.
And finally, if you could, on April 18th, Congresswoman
Salazar and I did send you a letter expressing concern at
reports that our Embassy in Guatemala and U.S. Department of
State officials have been interfering in the appointment
process for the next Prosecutor General for Guatemala, and
whether our Embassy is complying with Article 41 of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
I asked Deputy Secretary Sherman about this on April 6th. I
haven't heard back.
But I want to point out that Prosecutor General Porras has
been extremely helpful when it comes to extraditing criminals
from Guatemala, 63 in 2021, including 54 drug dealers. Now
Guatemalan social media is abuzz, and there appears to be a
memorandum circulating that is entitled, quote, ``Engagement
Plan on the Guatemalan Attorney General Selection Process,''
close quote, reportedly from the U.S. Government. And I wonder
if you could confirm whether or not that is authentic, and I
certainly hope it is not.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Secretary Blinken. And can I just start quickly by
applauding your long-time effective leadership on dealing with
human trafficking. It is something that I very much appreciate
and I also share the concerns that you have expressed about
this. This is something that we have been looking at and that
we have real concern about.
And in these situations, wherever they take place, but here
in Ukraine as well, we have, as you know, 5 million people who
are refugees. There are another 7 million who are internally
displaced inside Ukraine.
I want to take the suggestion back and look at it. I think
trying to make sure that we have a regional focus on this makes
good sense to me. And I would love to come to you on that, if I
could.
Mr. Smith. Great. Thank you.
Secretary Blinken. Second, with regard to accountability,
let say this: we will look at anything and everything to make
sure that we get there. Whether it is tomorrow, next month,
next year, 10 years, it will happen. You are right, sometimes
this takes a while. But here is the most important point: those
who committed atrocities and those who ordered them need to be
held to account, and we will look at ways to do that.
I am not aware, but I will come back to you, if I can, on
the question of Guatemala. I can say, as a general matter, we
are very focused everywhere on making sure that there are
independent prosecutors, judiciary, et cetera, to make sure
that countries can deal with corruption, can deal with crime in
an appropriate way. So, that is the direction that we always
take. But let me, if I can, look into this and come back to
you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Kathy Manning of North
Carolina, who is the vice chair of the Subcommittee on the
Middle East, North Africa and Global Counterterrorism, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Chairman Meeks.
And thank you, Secretary Blinken, for your service and for
being with us again today.
I appreciate the Administration's extraordinary efforts to
help Ukraine, including intelligence-sharing and unprecedented
coordination among our allies that have led to crippling
sanctions, humanitarian assistance, and for providing Ukraine
with $3.7 billion in U.S. military aid.
However, I am very concerned by the prospect that Putin may
try to widen the war, in light of recent events, including
explosions in Moldova's breakaway region of Transnistria, which
I have visited, and I recall very vividly having to go from
Moldova through passport control, as if we were entering a
Russian country.
My State of North Carolina and my community in Greensboro
have long had strong partnerships with Moldova. So, this is of
particular concern to me.
So, Mr. Secretary, what is your assessment of the potential
for Russian escalation into Moldova, and what are we doing to
prepare and protect Moldova, and to prevent a wider conflict?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much, and I appreciate
your engagement on this very, very much.
Simply put, we are watching this like a hawk. I was in
Moldova myself some weeks ago. Another senior official from the
Department was just there, our Assistant Secretary for
Population Migration and Refugees. We have done a number of
things, and we are very focused on this.
First, because there is a tremendous strain, as you know,
on Moldova as a result of the many refugees it has taken in, we
want to make sure that it has the resources necessary to deal
with that. The Moldovan people have been remarkable. When I was
there, I saw the yellow and blue all over Moldova.
We just joined a pledging conference that Germany led. We
have committed $100 million in additional resources out of the
existing funds to Moldova to help it deal with a number of
things, but, in particular, the humanitarian challenge that it
faces now.
Second, we have programs, including in this budget, to do
things like help Moldova bolster its cybersecurity, because
this is one of the ways it is under threat; economic
stabilization and resilience, so that it can stand up
effectively; programs to counter disinformation, which, as you
know, it is on the receiving end of, and also, critically, one
of the good things that happened is there is now an opportunity
to fully integrate Moldova's energy system with Europe's. And
that is moving forward. We have programs in place that are also
in the budget to work on that.
Finally, we have been working with the U.N. and
international agencies to make sure that they are dedicating
the appropriate resources to help Moldova deal with the
potential influx of even more refugees from Ukraine, as this
goes forward.
But the budget includes all of this and more: judicial
reform programs; independent media support programs; energy
security; infrastructure. In many ways, we are doing that, but,
of course, we are also making sure that our European allies and
partners are focused on challenges and threats to Moldova.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Those are all things that Moldova
will need.
So, I want to turn to a different aspect of this conflict.
How is the Administration working with non-NATO countries to
work with us to repel the Russia regression and to get them to
agree that this destruction of another country, the resulting
fuel and food shortages, the instability this is creating, and
the use of force to redraw borders sets a dangerous precedent
that creates instability and leaves the world worse off? In
particular, how can we get China to be part of the solution?
Secretary Blinken. This has very much been our message
around the world. And when Russia's aggression was mounting, we
made the case to countries around the world, well beyond
Europe, well beyond NATO, or, for that matter, our allies in
Asia, that this actually directly affected them because it was
a direct challenge to the international order that they depend
on--these principles that I talked about earlier that uphold
peace and security; that say one country cannot simply attack
another or try to change its borders by force; take it over;
assert that might makes right; dictate its policies and
approach. That is not only relevant to Ukraine; it is relevant
to countries around the world. And if this goes forward with
impunity, others will take note and may act on it in ways that
will be immediately detrimental to those countries.
Part of the reason that 141 countries stood up at the
United Nations against the Russian aggression and for Ukraine
is because they realized that their own interests were
potentially at stake. And we've seen that manifest itself again
and again.
In the OAS recently, the Organization of American States,
we led the effort to suspend Russia from its observer status.
Countries there recognized the importance of standing clearly
against Russian aggression.
The U.N. Human Rights Council, we led the effort to suspend
Russia from its seat, and that vote succeeded in a dramatic
fashion--again, countries well beyond Europe and our NATO
allies. So, I think countries are getting the message.
The last thing that I will say very quickly--and we want to
work on this with you--is we are seeing the effects, though, on
other countries of Russian aggression--food security, in
particular. And one of the things that we have to do is make
clear that the reason that is happening is because of Russia,
not because of our sanctions, and to address the problem.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. The chair recognizes
Representative Steve Chabot, the ranking member of the Asia
Subcommittee.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I am one of the co-chairs of the
congressional Taiwan Caucus, and have been for many years. And
I was actually in Columbus just last week, where the State
legislature in Ohio, up in Columbus, formed their version of
our congressional Taiwan Caucus. It is a Taiwan Friendship
Caucus with them. They do a lot of business with Taiwan; have
probably met with the Ambassador herself five or six times in
the last month or 2 months, or so.
And so, I wanted to followup with some of the questions
that Ranking Member McCaul had relative to Taiwan defending
itself, and specifically, the fact that the supply chain issues
are one of the major holdups for arms deliveries to Taiwan.
With some of the weapons systems that they need, I understand
they may not be expected to be delivered for a decade or so,
and, you know, that could be far beyond the time.
We know that the PRC has been more and more active, more
and more confrontational, more and more provocative. So, we
really do need to get them these weapons systems, so it can
actually, potentially, be a deterrence. We do not want war, you
know. We want to arm them, but we do not want those weapons to
be used. We want peace.
That being said, what specific action--and I know that the
ranking member asked a question--what specific actions is the
Administration doing now, or intends to do, to deal with these
supply chain issues which have been so frustrating?
Secretary Blinken. Well, thank you very much, and I
appreciate your focus on this. I think it is very important.
We, of course, have, generically, many supply chain
challenges that are affecting people in their daily lives. I
will be, in the next few weeks, actually, helping to lead a
summit with the Secretary of Conference, Gina Raimondo, on
internationally dealing with breaking through logjams in supply
chains, both in the near term as well as for the long term.
And, of course, I think there is a tremendous adaptation
that is going on now, as we realize the importance--COVID-19
shows this to us--of building resilient and more self-reliant
supply chains. That is going to take time, but it is something
that we are intensely focused on.
With regard to Taiwan, in particular, look, I think there
are two things going on.
First, there has been, as you know, sustained effort over
many Administrations to make sure that we are making good on
our commitments to help Taiwan defend itself. There has been
about $18 billion in foreign military sales since 2017, another
$2.5 billion of direct commercial sales that Administrations
have approved. I approve these things on a regular basis. We
are looking to see how, specifically, we can streamline this to
deal with some of the problems that you pointed to, to make
delivery timelines shorter.
But, at the same time, there is another thing I want to
emphasize. And I know you know this very well because you are
so focused on it. It is also vital that Taiwan strengthen its
asymmetric capabilities to deter potential aggression from
Beijing: reserve force reform, cost-efficient, mobile, lethal,
and resilient systems. And all of this would go to deterrence.
And the reason that it is particularly interesting now is
because I think Beijing is watching very carefully what is
happening in Ukraine, and they have seen what Ukrainians have
been able to do to repel the Russian aggression. They have also
seen the dramatic response of the world in terms of sanctions
on Russia that have resulted from this. They have seen the
flight of hundreds of--by my count, 800--companies from Russia.
All of this is factoring in. But, in a sense, the somewhat
asymmetric response of Ukrainians to Russia is something that
other countries are looking at.
We would welcome working with you on this and making sure
that we can do this even more effectively going forward.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. And I have a whole slew of
other Taiwan questions to ask you, but I am already running out
of time. So, let me shift over to an unrelated topic at this
point.
Mr. Secretary, I have been involved with the issue of
international child abduction for--well, this is my 26th year
in Congress--so, quite a few of them over the years. One, in
particular, is a Cincinnati case. The country was Austria. And
we had worked with the late Madeleine Albright on this one, and
she was very, very helpful in this.
And I was just approached this last week in Cincinnati by a
constituent whose granddaughter--he is trying to get his
granddaughter home to the United States. They have custody,
but, unfortunately, the child was taken to another country. I
do not want to go into the specifics of this.
But I just wanted to say that my staff and I have already
been in touch with the State Department, and I just wanted to
commend your people for being exceedingly professional, very
cooperative. And I want to thank you and appreciate the State
Department's cooperation on this matter, and I look forward to
working with them in the near future.
Because, as you know, these cases can be heartbreaking, and
unfortunately, you know, we have had quite a few cases where
American children have been taken to other countries. And I
have been to the Hague and the Hague Convention, and all that.
I have only got a little time left. So, I will just turn it
over to you, whatever you would like to say.
Secretary Blinken. Just to say thank you for raising that.
This is something that is very near and dear to my heart.
It has been for a long time. It is being reinforced even more,
as a relatively recent father with young children.
I have gone directly to the leadership of countries,
including as recently as a month ago, where we have a parental
child abduction case, and spent time and focus on trying to get
countries to do the right thing. In many cases, countries are
not part of the Hague Convention. Even so, they need to do the
right thing.
And in the most recent case that I dealt with directly with
a leader of that country, its own courts had actually ruled in
favor of asserting the rights of an American parent, but the
decision was not implemented. We pressed them to implement it.
I welcome working with you on this. This is, again,
something that I feel very strongly on a personal level.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot. I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you.
We will go to Representative Schneider of Illinois next for
5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for joining us today. It is
always wonderful seeing you.
I want to thank you and your team for your outreach and
direct engagement as we navigate complex issues around the
world, especially the Russian invasion of Ukraine, as well as
developments in the Middle East; in particular, the discussions
with Iran and the advancement of the Abraham Accords.
With respect to Ukraine, I am grateful for the leadership
of this Administration, as well as the leadership of Congress,
and notably, this committee. It is imperative that we continue
to do all we can to deliver any and all necessary security,
economic, and humanitarian assistance. And your diplomacy is
clearly yielding results. We must demonstrate to Putin that the
world is, and will remain, united in not just stopping Russia's
unprovoked and illegal invasion, but reversing it and securing
Ukraine's independence and sovereignty, and helping Ukrainians
rebuild their country.
Turning to Iran, as we have personally discussed many
times, I firmly believe the only way to peacefully end Iran's
nuclear ambitions is through diplomacy. But I also
fundamentally believe that successful diplomacy requires a very
real and fully appreciated commitment and capability to stop
Iran from acquiring nuclear arms by any means necessary. And
that clearly means that Iran and our allies must know that we
would use our military force, if all else failed. I think
strong deterrence enhances our likelihood of diplomatic
success.
I would also like to express my grave concern about the
possible lifting of the IRGC's foreign terrorist organization
designation and the role such a move may play in ongoing
nuclear negotiations. The IRGC is, without a doubt, a terrorist
organization. The IRGC's malign influence extends beyond its
borders to Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Gaza, and beyond. They
are responsible for suffering, violence, and death, including
the loss of many American lives. I sincerely hope you will not
lift this designation.
And, of course, it is not just Iran's nuclear program, but
the entirety of Iran's malign activities in the region and
around the world that concerns me, and threatens the United
States and our allies. We must not forget about the Iranian
regime's human rights abuses, ballistic missile program, and
support for terrorist proxies outside its borders.
Specifically, for our ally Israel, Iran may be on the one-
yard line with its nuclear enrichment program, but they are
also knocking at the door through proxies in Lebanon, Syria,
and Gaza. I trust that the Administration appreciates this
reality, and as it assesses ways to thwart Iran's nuclear
activities, we do not trade lessening one threat for
dangerously expanding another.
Counterbalancing the threats posed by Iran are the positive
impacts and limited potential created by the Abraham Accords.
Mr. Secretary, I know I do not need to tell you that American
engagement in this region is crucial, and there is no better
demonstration of the American leadership than the role we have
played in supporting peace agreements between Israel and her
neighbors--first, with Egypt and Jordan, and more recently, the
peace and normalization agreements with UAE, Bahrain, Sudan,
and Morocco.
In an otherwise dark world, normalization of relations
between Israel and these countries is a very bright spot,
lifting the lives of the citizens of these countries and the
region. These agreements have brought hope to everyone in the
Middle East and North Africa and illuminate a path to peace and
cooperation in the region. These agreements have already
enhanced security, cooperation, economic development, religious
tolerance, and cultural exchanges, and we must continue to
support and buildupon this historic cooperation, as you did
when you were at the Negev Summit.
I am proud to have authored the Israel Relations
Normalization Act, and I am grateful President Biden signed it
into law. We must keep working on expanding these agreements,
not only to create a more secure and prosperous Middle East,
but, also, since it is an important tool in preventing Iran's
malign endeavors.
So, with not much time left, I would like to ask or give
you the opportunity to expand on how the Administration is
addressing concerns about Iran, Iran's nuclear programs, and
Iran's nuclear other activities, but also the prospects for
expanding the peace and prosperity of the Abraham Accords.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much, Congressman, and I
appreciate your leadership on the Abraham Accords.
Let me just say, very quickly, we strongly support them. We
want to deepen them. We want to expand them. And that is one of
the reasons that I was just in Israel, and as you mentioned in
the Negev, and it was extraordinary. We had around the same
table the foreign ministers from Israel, Bahrain, the United
Arab Emirates, Morocco, and Egypt--Egypt, of course, the first
to make peace with Israel, but, then, more recent countries
that have normalized their relationships with Israel.
And there is a strong and deep agenda to pursue cooperation
across a whole wide variety of fronts among these countries. It
is incredibly exciting to see. We have been working to
accelerate that from almost day one of our Administration,
including bringing Israel, UAE, and India together to do joint
infrastructure projects, including working directly with Israel
and the UAE on religious coexistence, on water and energy
projects. All of this because these agreements have allowed
relationships to change.
And I am happy to come back to you on Iran because I see
our time is up.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you. I look forward to the
conversation.
I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you.
The chair recognizes Representative Perry of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. It is good to see you. Thank you.
Do you know the value of U.S. intellectual property theft
annually by the CCP?
Secretary Blinken. Billions of dollars.
Mr. Perry. OK. So, according to NBC--or correction--CNN,
$300 to $600 billion annually.
How about do you know how many Chinese students are
studying in the United States versus U.S. students studying in
China?
Secretary Blinken. It is dramatically disproportionate.
Mr. Perry. Three hundred and forty thousand in the United
States, according to NBC; 2500 U.S. citizens studying in China.
Mr. Secretary, knowing that multiple members of your firm
WestExec were being considered by the incoming Biden
Administration just prior to then-Mr. Biden accepting the
nomination at the Democrat National Convention, your website at
your company, WestExec, had this Statement: ``and continue to
provide capability to and remain a trusted partner of the U.S.
Government, while pursuing commercial activities in China, and
remain a trusted partner for DOD-sponsored research grants,
while expanding foreign research collaboration, accepting
foreign donations, and welcoming foreign students in key STEM
programs.''
Mr. Secretary, this isn't meant to be, just because there
are multiple people that worked at your firm--Avril Haines,
Michele Flournoy, Jen Psaki--is that a potential conflict of
interest? Because that was taken off your website literally
just within a week or so of President Biden accepting the
nomination. Is that potentially a conflict of interest?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, what I can tell you is, of
course, like any nominee for a position in government, you go
through intense----
Mr. Perry. I know. I am just wondering about taking down
that information off the website.
Secretary Blinken. I have no recollection of what was done
or not done with----
Mr. Perry. You did not order that to be taken down?
Secretary Blinken. Absolutely not.
Mr. Perry. Somebody just did it on their own?
Let me ask you this: would it be a conflict if Hunter Biden
traveled to China on a taxpayer-funded plane to set up Bohai
Harvest, as you know--I am sure you are aware of it--which,
then, poured money into a CCP surveillance company, Megvii? And
if you are not familiar with that, it is a company whose
equipment is used in East Turkestan, and it was also sanctioned
by OFAC regarding their biometric surveillance and tracking of
ethnic and religious minorities in China.
And furthermore, Bohai Harvest, under Hunter Biden, also
facilitated a $3.8 billion deal that transferred 80 percent of
the world's most lucrative cobalt mines in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to a Chinese firm that uses children as
young as 4 years old to mine cobalt.
And furthermore, under Hunter Biden, Bohai Harvest has also
invested in the CCP-owned China General Nuclear Power Group,
which was blacklisted in 2019 for allegedly trying to acquire
U.S. nuclear technology for the Chinese military.
I am wondering if you view that, traveling on that airplane
which is funded by taxpayers, and is, of course, official
business--would that be viewed as a conflict? Would you view
that as a conflict of interest?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, I am here to address the
State Department budget----
Mr. Perry. I know what you are here--yes.
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. And to address our foreign
policy. That is a political question. You are welcome to take
that up in any appropriate----
Mr. Perry. So, you cannot answer whether you think it is--I
am not saying it even happened. But if it did, would it be a
conflict----
Secretary Blinken. I'm not, I'm not, I'm not going to
address--I'm not going to address a hypothetical.
Mr. Perry. OK. Well, if it did----
Secretary Blinken. I am here to talk about the budget. I am
here to talk about our foreign policy. I am happy----
Mr. Perry. Since it did happen, at least the investments,
is it a conflict of interest?
Secretary Blinken. Again, I am not----
Mr. Perry. Is it morally--would it be morally wrong?
Secretary Blinken. I am here to address the State
Department budget. I am here to address our foreign policy. I
am happy to----
Mr. Perry. Would any of those things that I outlined for
you, would any of them--would you say they enhanced U.S.
national security or Chinese national security?
Secretary Blinken. Again, I am not going to entertain
hypotheticals. I am not----
Mr. Perry. No, this isn't hypothetical. These investments
were made.
Secretary Blinken. I have no--I have no basis----
Mr. Perry. So, let's take Hunter Biden and Bo Biden capital
out of it----
Secretary Blinken. I have no----
Mr. Perry [continuing]. And just say, if these investments
were made, would they enhance U.S. national security or Chinese
national security?
Secretary Blinken. Again, I'm here to talk about our
budget. I'm here to talk about our foreign policy. I am happy
to address----
Mr. Perry. Is this not foreign policy? U.S. investors
helping the Communist Party of China beat the United States
industrially--you know, the Administration, the Administration
that you work for--God bless them--they say that we should all
be driving an electric vehicle, 80 percent of the contents of
which are produced in China. This goes directly to that. Does
it help China or does it help the United States of America,
sir?
Secretary Blinken. Again, Congressman, you are asking
political questions. You are welcome to ask those in the
appropriate fora for that. I am here to talk about our budget,
and I'm here to talk about our foreign policy.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Sometimes I
wonder if anyone will ever ask the question about Members of
Congress who are personally invested in Chinese companies
engaged in surveillance activities.
Let me, with that side comment, call on Representative Andy
Levin of Michigan.
Mr. Levin. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, thank you so much for your tremendous
work on Ukraine and so many other fronts. I'm going to get back
to the talking about the actual policy of the State Department
and the budget.
The President's budget calls for $275 million in support
for Haiti, which is 46 percent more than last year's request,
including funding to strengthen the capacity of the Haitian
National Police, combating corruption, and strengthening the
capacity of civil society.
But as someone who's closely observed Haiti for 40 years,
my concern is that these investments will do little to change
the reality on the ground for the Haitian people if we're not
seriously invested in supporting their aspirations for a real
democratic transition.
The biggest obstacle to this in my view is the entrenchment
of U.S. support for the de facto regime of Prime Minister Ariel
Henry and the corruption and gangsterization his rule
represents. Further, it seems to me that U.S. support is
disincentivizing Henry from participating in good faith
negotiations toward a transitional government.
Do you believe the assistance I mentioned will create
sustainable change and development in Haiti if the de facto
Prime Minister has credible links with criminal gangs and
corrupt actors and the Haitian National Police has been
credibly accused of violence, such as the latest incident of
firing at protesters who are demanding higher wages?
And does the State Department believe its support for Henry
is making political dialog among Haitian actors more likely
somehow?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, thank you. Thank you for
your focus on this issue and for raising it.
Let me say first that we have deep concern about the
security situation writ large in Haiti, the lack of political
accord for elections, gang violence, kidnappings, homicides on
the rise despite efforts being made by the Haitian National
Police that we're supporting.
We are working with a large number of allies with the
Organization of American States to address these issues, to
press for more resources. For example, for the police, to try
to deal with the gang violence.
When it comes to the political situation, we are not taking
sides in the political dialog. We're working with the
government that's in place on an inclusive Haitian-led process
toward elections. That's the goal, and that's what we're
supporting.
Mr. Levin. Well, can I respectively submit we have taken
sides. It was the U.S. that said that Henry should be there
he--when there--we basically are what's--are the reason he's in
power.
And I just, I would love it if you would be open to having
a dialog about supporting the unbelievably robust and broad
agreement in Haitian civil society, something I consider
historic, sir, I've never seen anything like it in the post-
Duvalier era. And yet we say it's one among contending views.
And you know, I'd love to have a further dialog with you
about this, because I really think we're--we're not on the
right road here. If you'd be open to that.
Secretary Blinken. I'd welcome--I'd welcome pursuing that.
Mr. Levin. OK, thanks. Let me then turn to another
important country, Colombia. There were reports of a--of a
massacre of civilians in Putumayo, Colombia, by security forces
that received U.S. security assistance. And this is very
concerning.
So if U.S-trained security forces are found to have been
involved, in my view they have to be cutoff from the U.S.
assistance and the Colombian Government has to be urged to hold
units accountable for these violations.
Is the State Department committed to investigating these
allegations and cutting off units from assistance from the U.S.
if there is credible evidence of their abuses? And how will the
State Department adjust future U.S. security assistance to
Colombia, given these allegations?
As you know, there's a long history of this kind of
problems there.
Secretary Blinken. We take this very seriously, and of
course we'll look into allegations. We're very serious about
the Leahy Vetting Process that we have committed resources to
again in our budget to make sure that we have the means to
always carry those forward.
And if they're credible allegations, we will look into
them. And if we find that the allegations have substance, we'll
take action.
Mr. Levin. All right, well, I look forward to seeing the
results of your investigation, and I appreciate that very, very
much. I--and I appreciate your commitment to human rights.
Let me turn to climate change quickly. I'm glad to see that
the President's request prioritizes addressing the climate
crisis and proposes an integrated approach to tackling its
effects across our foreign assistance.
I think the scale of the climate crisis demands a massive
U.S. response, both to demonstrate our potential to lead in the
region and compete with other actors like China, but also to
signal our resolve to addressing the legacy of U.S. emissions.
One region that seems right for U.S. investments is the
Northern Triangle, where we're trying to deal with migration
issues anyway and where we know the effects of climate change
are contributing to that migration and insecurity.
And so my question is how does proposed assistance for the
Northern Triangle integrate climate concerns, and what are the
State Department's priorities for that region?
Secretary Blinken. Well, thank you. And first let me just
say more broadly, because I very much agree with you, the
budget in total provides $11 billion, in fact a little bit more
than $11 billion, to help countries implement targets, but also
to help them adapt and to build resilience.
And this is very critical in our own hemisphere, including
in the Northern Triangle. We've engaged with many of these
countries at COP26 and before that and since then. And so these
resources, if approved by Congress, will go a long way to
helping countries do this, including the Northern Triangle
countries.
At the same time, as we're looking at making infrastructure
investments and bringing others together, including using the
Development Finance Corporation, working through the program
that the President established at the G7 that we've been
calling Build Back Better World, one of the focuses of that
program is to support projects that strengthen infrastructure
but do it in a way that also addresses climate change
challenges. And that too can be a focus of the work that we're
doing.
Finally, I'd say that there are many other things that
we're doing of course in the Northern Triangle countries,
partly to deal with migration challenges.
But part of dealing with migration challenges is making
sure that we get at the root causes of what it is that is
causing people to give up everything they know and leave their
countries and try to come to the United States or go elsewhere
in the hemisphere. And a big part of that of course is trying
to create greater economic opportunity for them.
We've been working on that and these kinds of investments
that are made to create economic opportunity and also have a
lens on them that looks at energy, climate infrastructure in
ways that advance both agendas.
Mr. Levin. Precisely. You know, excuse me, as I--as I yield
back, I just--just imagine if we helped the Northern Triangle
countries leapfrog straight to renewable energy generation and
electricity for everybody. It would do so much to transform the
root causes of migration, as you say.
I do not know----
Mr. Malinowski. The Chair----
Mr. Levin. Who I'm yielding back to, but whoever it is----
Mr. Malinowski. The Chair recognizes--the Chair recognizes
Representative Issa of California.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, good to see you again. I wish we were seeing
each other at a better time. The world is clearly in chaos.
I do not mean to be glib, but one of the series of
questions that I'll have today, really any part of the
questions related to JCPOA really will by definition include
Russia.
So trying not to be too cynical, how are the--how are those
maneuvers in Belarus going with the Russian military? Have they
accidentally strayed into Ukraine? In other words, how is it
that we can accept anything that involves Russia as an
important verifier and interlocutor at this time?
Secretary Blinken. No, I appreciate the question. And when
it comes, for example, to the JCPOA, this is not a--and
Russia's participation in that, along with China, along with
the European Union, along with the United Kingdom, Germany and
France, Russia----
Mr. Issa. The other countries I'm comparatively OK with.
Secretary Blinken. I agree with you. They do not have a
role in verification. They--and the agreement that we pulled
out of, had Iran been found to be in violation of the
agreement, under the terms of the agreement, the United States,
together with the European Union and our European partners, had
the rights under that agreement without Russia or without China
to hold Iran to account.
Any agreement that we might include would have the same
thing.
Mr. Issa. Well, to that end, the State Department has just
published a report that's titled Arms Control Non-
Proliferation, the Disarmament Agreements and Commitments. The
report States that the United States has concluded that serious
concerns remain outstanding regarding possible undeclared
nuclear material and activities in Iran as of the end of the
reporting period.
I read that pretty straightforward: Iran cheated. Iran has,
as we speak, unreported nuclear materials, correct?
Secretary Blinken. Here's what Iran has, Congressman, as we
speak. Iran has a nuclear program that is galloping forward as
a result of us pulling out of the nuclear agreement. Under the
nuclear agreement, Iran had a breakout time of about----
Mr. Issa. Mr. Secretary, I know--I know we pulled out of
the nuclear agreement, but Europe did not, correct?
Secretary Blinken. Europe, did not, but Iran--Iran----
Mr. Issa. Iran--Iran was bound by an agreement with Europe,
and Iran had--had at that time undeclared materials, has it as
of right now, correct?
Secretary Blinken. The IAEA has been investigating and
looking at any aspects of Iran's nuclear program that remain in
question. We fully support those efforts. And they are separate
and apart from any nuclear agreement.
Mr. Issa. Have you, as of today, have you clarified where
those nuclear materials are located in Iran?
Secretary Blinken. The IAEA has identified places that it--
--
Mr. Issa. They'd like to look at.
Secretary Blinken. They want--they want to look at. And
part of the--part of the result of the agreement in the first
place was Iran taking on the additional protocol, which
enhances inspection rights, including for the IAEA.
And I would also note that the inspections regime under the
agreement was the most intrusive inspections regime of any arms
controls agreement ever adapted. It gave us great visibility
into----
Mr. Issa. Yes. Mr. Secretary, the last agreement was not
brought to Congress under the treaty requirements. Will you
commit to bring this one as a treaty?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, we will commit to following
the law, including INARA.
Mr. Issa. OK, so it's fair to say you're not going to bring
this for ratification as a treaty.
Secretary Blinken. Again, we'll follow the law. INARA has
requirements, we'll meet whatever requirements INARA has. This
is the law that the----
Mr. Issa. No, I understand. The reason I ask is the
American people really do not know every acronym. They do
understand that Senate ratifies treaties and that under that
law, there will not be a Senate-ratified treaty.
Secretary Blinken. The vast majority of multilateral
agreements in the arms controls non-proliferation space are not
codified as treaties. It actually gives us much greater
flexibility if there is any kind of cheating or reneging on
those agreements if they're not.
Mr. Issa. Pursuant to the renewal of the--this JCPOA, one
of the portions of it would be that Russia would receive a $10
billion contract to produce a nuclear facility, basically.
Will you commit that Russia will have no part, and you will
not lift any sanctions against Iran or Russia, until the
Ukrainian conflict has been satisfactorily resolved? In other
words, this agreement would give Russia $10 billion from an
Iran that has access to the money to give them.
Will you commit not to do that, for that not to take effect
until after a satisfactory resolution for the people of
Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. Any actions that Russia would be called
upon to take pursuant to the agreement would not be in
contravention of the sanctions that are being imposed on Russia
before----
Mr. Issa. But those particular $10 billion, I cannot say
whether they're covered. I know, I just need a second to finish
as the previous one did. I just want to know would this be
under those sanctions in your opinion?
Secretary Blinken. And we of course will make sure that
lawyers look at everything, but the actions that Russia would
take pursuant to the agreement, if there's a return to the
agreement, would not be in contravention of the sanctions
imposed on Russia for its action in Ukraine.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you. The Chair now calls on
Representative Vargas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, thank you very much for being here, we
appreciate it. I do want to congratulate you because I do think
that our standing with our allies and our friends around the
world is very high now, not only because of what you've done
and what the President, but I'd also throw in Secretary Austin,
I do not think he's been mentioned here enough. I think he's
done an outstanding job. So I want to congratulate you.
I have a very quick question, and then a series of
questions. A quick question is I represent the area of San
Diego, and we've had a number of Ukrainians that have been able
to come through Tijuana to San Diego. And we've done everything
we can to receive them. And I think that the Federal
authorities have done a pretty good job.
But now since you've changed the rules, which is good and
we're all in favor of that, there are some people that are
stuck now in Tijuana, Ukrainians that flew to Mexico City and
are now in Tijuana.
What can you do to help these poor people make sure that
they can reunite with their families in the United States?
Secretary Blinken. A couple things on that, Congressman.
Thank you for flying in first. Yes, we have had a number of
Ukrainians who've come through Latin America into the United
States. They've been paroled in for the most part.
The overwhelming majority of Ukrainians who've had to flee
the country are of course in Europe. They are mostly intent on
remaining close by because they want to go home. And as soon as
they're able to, many of them have left sons, husbands, fathers
there to fight. As soon as they're able to, they want to go
home.
For any remaining Ukrainians, the President's made a couple
of commitments. He's committed that we will welcome 100,000
Ukrainians into the United States. We've just, as you've noted,
established a new program to facilitate that.
Along with the refugee program, along with the asylum
program, we now have a program that allows for sponsorship of
Ukrainians by any American. They can, Ukrainians can apply for
that from any of our embassies in Europe and around the world.
If there are any remaining individuals in this situation of
course we'll make sure that we're working to address that.
Mr. Vargas. OK, those are the ones I'm concerned about.
Now, I do not normally agree with my good friend, Mr. Issa,
but I do agree with him on this JCPOA. I have great concerns,
and one of the things that you just said concerns me
significantly, and that is that Iran is now galloping toward a
nuclear bomb or nuclear program.
Secretary Blinken. Let me be specific.
Mr. Vargas. Yes, please do.
Secretary Blinken. Toward having the capacity to produce
fissile material on short notice or a nuclear weapon. The
agreement put that ability to--to break out, in other words to
produce fissile material or weapon, at beyond 1 year.
As a result of the actions that they've taken since we
pulled out of the agreement, that breakout time, as we call it,
is down to a matter of weeks, that's what I meant.
Mr. Vargas. Right, and that's very concerning of course to
all of us. Now, the JCPOA was very concerning to me, and I did
not support it because of the timelines. They weren't permanent
restrictions, things rolled off.
Now that we're negotiating them again and you say that it's
going to be stronger and better, could you give us some
information on where this is and what means?
Secretary Blinken. What we inherited was a failure, a
failure to actually curb Iran's nuclear program, a failure to
curb its malicious activities throughout the region.
As I noted, while the agreement itself put the nuclear
program in a box and pushed the breakout time to beyond a year,
in the absence of that agreement, Iran has taken steps to cut
that breakout time down to a matter of weeks.
At the same time, despite the maximum pressure being
exerted against Iran, which were told could cause them to curb
their malicious activities in the region, we've seen them
accelerate.
To give you one example of this, during the time the
agreement was first negotiated back in 2012 through 2018, when
we pulled out of the agreement, attacks on Americans, our
diplomats, our forces in the region, had gone down to virtually
zero.
Since we pulled out of the agreement, the IRGC was
designated as a foreign terrorist organization, Soleimani, who
no one is shedding a tear, was killed. Those attacks have gone
up 400 percent. Our ability to, under the previous policy, to
deter Iran clearly was not succeeding.
So we're focused on how we can be most effective, both in
dealing with the nuclear program and our commitment to ensure
that Iran never acquires a nuclear weapon. But also to dealing
with the malicious actions of this engagement throughout the
region, including support for terrorist groups, various proxies
that are threatening allies and partners, etc.
That's what we're focused on, and we want to make sure that
unlike what we inherited, we're able to do that more
effectively.
Mr. Vargas. And I guess my concern is that we do have to
refocus once again. Because I remember what happened in North
Korea when we said that because of the deal that we had, they'd
never have a nuclear weapon. We woke up 1 day and they had one.
And so, again, my concern is that that's going to happen
and Iran. So again, I think you and I hope we remain vigilant.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. We'll go to Representative Adam Kinzinger
of Illinois next.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. I know it's a
little bit going on out there, and I appreciate your time.
Just a quick thing on the JCPOA since it's been discussed.
I think it is worth noting there are provisions of the JCPOA
that would be expiring now had we stayed in it. And I think
it's important when we talk about the future, in foreign policy
time, like 10 years actually is pretty quick.
And so that one's--I want to pivot a little to Ukraine from
that perspective. First off, I want to say thank you to the
Administration for changing your tone.
I think it's become clear over the next few weeks that the
Administration is clear-eyed about the seriousness of this
threat. I was concerned with some of the--some of the wording
early on. But it does appear that we've doubled down on our
commitment.
I mean, it's very clear to me that Ukraine, and I think
you've said this too, sir, Ukraine is fighting for all of us.
They happen--we have to arm them because they are fighting for
all of us. And I think it's important for people to remember,
if Ukraine falls--and I think we're doing the right thing by
stressing our commitment to NATO territory.
And I actually really do believe that if Vladimir Putin
moves in on NATO territory, he would be met with a devastating
response.
But I think it's important for people to remember, there's
a lot of real eState still that's not in Ukraine that's not
part of NATO. And that's why it's important right now for us to
make sure that Vladimir Putin can go no further. I hope he
loses some of us occupied territories.
Just a couple of legitimate questions that I want to know
the answer to, believe it or not. I want to ask first off,
about a month ago it was reported that there might be have been
a use of chemical weapons in Ukraine. I wondered if you had an
update on that in terms of what we know.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. And some of this may be more
appropriate to take on in a different setting. But having said
that, this is something we're looking at very, very carefully.
I do not believe that we've been able to verify that use. But I
want to come back to you.
There are different kinds of chemical agents that could be
in play, including riot control agents that would be
prohibited, that kind of thing. But in terms of the use of a
chemical weapon, I think what I can say here is that we've not
yet verified the use, but it's something that we're very, very
much focused on.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. Next question is the use of, you
know, for American aid, to the extent we can answer this in
this setting, what is the prohibition, what is the reason for
not basically flying American aid directly into Ukraine versus
through proxies? Is it an international law issues, is it a
safety issue, is it infrastructure? I'm curious if you can
answer that.
Secretary Blinken. I think first the most important thing
is the aid is getting in.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right.
Secretary Blinken. Getting in in record time. It used to
be, for example, under Presidential draw downs, it would often
be weeks between the time the President made a draw-down
decision and the aid got into the hands of those who needed it.
I was just there, as you know, including at the staging
site for where some of this aid is getting in. And it's down to
in some cases 72 hours. That's how rapidly it's getting in. So
I do not think we have an issue right now with the assistance
not only being provided, but actually getting to where it needs
to get.
Once it gets to the border and it's handed over to
Ukrainians, they're the ones of course who are getting it where
it needs to go. They know this a lot better than we do, and
they've been extremely effective in making sure that these
supplies could get where it needs to get.
Mr. Kinzinger. Let me ask you about the air force side of
things. One of the, I believe one of the programs we used to do
through the Air National Guard, I'm a member of the Air
National Guard, we would pair with Ukrainian Air Force. We'd do
fake fights, train each other, we'd train them to fly.
Has there been any consideration to restoring those
programs, bringing Ukrainian pilots potentially to American air
force bases to learn to fly?
Because I mean, yes, it takes a long time to train a pilot,
it does, because we're so good. But it takes a long time to
train a pilot, but there's no time like now to start. So I
wanted to ask you about that.
Secretary Blinken. I agree with the general proposition,
and indeed, we are moving forward on training. Because here's
one of the challenges: the--some of the systems that Ukrainians
would like to have that could be effective in repelling the
Russian aggression and defending the country are systems that
they're not trained on, and it does take some time.
The Pentagon, and I think Secretary Austin referred to this
the other day, is engaged in some training. So are other allies
and partners in Europe. I cannot address that specific program,
the Pentagon would have to address that. But generically, yes,
we're engaged in training.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I'll just say to wrap up, I think, you
know, it takes a lot to change an army from Warsaw equipment
basically to NATO equipment. I think with what we're seeing
with our allies and donating some of the old Soviet equipment
is actually helping to accelerate that process to switch over
to NATO standards.
So thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I'll yield back.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you so much. The Chair now recognizes
Representative Jim Costa of California.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary, I want to thank you. Generally I think we've
detected a good bipartisan effort taking place in terms of
supporting our efforts in Ukraine, and we want to see that
continue.
Your mission with Secretary Austin was by all accounts
successful. And the President's announcement today in terms of
additional funding I think really underlines that incredible
strong commitment we're making to Ukraine and really providing
the leadership as it relates to NATO.
Tell me, how did your discussions, if you drill down a bit
deeper, go with our NATO allies for the longer term commitment?
And certainly the President's Statement today I think provides
that leadership. But I think eyes clearly wide open, we're
going to be in here for the long haul, and I wish you'd give a
little more descriptive on that.
Secretary Blinken. I appreciate that, and I agree with you
that this is likely to be a long haul proposition. That's
exactly why we have been relentlessly focused on working every
single day with allies and partners on every aspect of this,
making sure the Ukrainians have what they need to defend
themselves, making sure that we continue to impose massive
consequences on Russia for this aggression.
Making sure that we're also shoring up our alliance, NATO,
so that it is properly postured to deal with any Russian
aggression directed at it. And this is being done, Congressman,
literally day in, day out.
On the specifics of security assistance to Ukraine, I think
I may have mentioned this early. After Secretary Austin and I
visited with the Ukrainian Government, with President Zelensky
in Kyiv over the weekend, Secretary Austin then went on to
Germany to chair a conference that he had convened that
involved ministers of defense from 40 different countries to
make sure that we are moving forward on coordinating and
providing the security assistance that Ukraine needs.
Mr. Costa. Well, I think that's a very important point, and
obviously one that needs to continue. I participated in the
past with NATO parliamentary assemblies as recently as in
February, and frankly it's only gotten I think better. But it's
the strongest I've seen NATO react since the cold war time
period.
Speaking of which, the world's changed in the last 2 months
in ways that we could never anticipate 2 months ago. Can you
give us a status on the update of Finland and Sweden becoming a
part of NATO?
Secretary Blinken. You're right, the world has changed
pretty dramatically. And one of the ways it's changed is in the
very strong interest in both countries to become members of
NATO. We of course look to them to make that decision. If
that's what they decide, we will strongly support it, and we
will work, and including working with----
Mr. Costa. Any idea on a timeline?
Secretary Blinken. I cannot give you a timeline. I think
it's under--let me put it this way: it's under very active
consideration by both countries. There's a NATO summit, as you
know very well coming up soon, so I would anticipate that we'll
hear more about that by the time of the summit.
Mr. Costa. Let me move on. It's in the neighborhood but a
separate matter. The situation with Armenia and Azerbaijan has
been very frustrating. And I do not believe Azerbaijan has
lived up to their agreements.
And certainly we've learned a lot of things in the last 2
months, but Russia clearly is not good at keeping their word
with the war criminal who is heading the country today.
What can we expect for additional support for Armenia and
trying to hold Azerbaijan to the commitments they made in the
truce settlement?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, this is something that I've
been very engaged on, including throughout the Ukraine
situation. I've spoken repeatedly with Prime Minister Pashinyan
from Armenia, as well as President Aliyev from Azerbaijan,
trying first of all to make sure that no one takes any steps
that would potentially revert to conflict.
But also to try to advance and support a long-term
political settlement. And by the way, we still have our status
as the Minsk Group co-chair. We've been developing and
promoting confidence-building measures. And again, I've spoken
repeatedly to both leaders, as well the foreign ministers.
Our budget has $45 million of assistance in it for Armenia.
Two million of that is----
Mr. Costa. Forgive me, that ain't right, and we need to do
more.
Secretary Blinken. And we're happy to work with you on all
of that.
Mr. Costa. OK, my time has just about expired, but I was
wondering about after the last Administration hollowed out much
of the State Department's capacity, how it's going in terms of
rebuilding your ability to do the diplomatic missions you have
around the world.
Secretary Blinken. Well, thanks to the support that we've
gotten from Congress, including in the last budget, we're
making very good progress on that. The budget that we put
forward now would allow us to keep doing that and to
strengthening the Department, including by bringing in new
personnel, including by strengthening our missions abroad in a
variety of ways.
So we very much hope that Members of Congress will support
the budget, take a hard look at it. Because it does go a long
way to enable us to modernize the Department and to make it
stronger, more agile, more agile, more effective in advancing
our diplomacy going forward.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Secretary, stay with it, my friend. We're
all in this together.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. Mr. Secretary, the staff have informed me
that we may need to place another microphone in front of you
for better pickup. So we're going to take just a few seconds to
do that, and that way you can--yes. No, you do not have to do
anything. This way you can continue to speak softly while we
carry a big stick, so. A great progressive and Republican.
I will now call on Representative Zeldin of New York.
Mr. Zeldin. Mr. Secretary, thank you for--for being here. I
wanted to followup on some of the questions and comments
brought up earlier related to the Iran nuclear deal and the
JCPOA.
When Secretary of State John Kerry was here sitting where
you are nearly 7 years ago, he was asked about why it wasn't
submitted to JCPOA, why the JCPOA wasn't submitted to Congress
as a treaty. And he essentially was stating that the reason why
it wasn't submitted was because of difficulty getting it
passed.
Now this is relevant again as the Biden Administration may
be entering into a nuclear deal with Iran. Why wouldn't this be
a treaty?
Secretary Blinken. As I think--thank you, Congressman. I
think, as I noted a short while ago, many in fact most, arms
control non-proliferation agreements that are multilateral in
nature, as this one is, are actually not submitted to--as
treaties. If you go back through the long history of that, many
are not. The question is----
Mr. Zeldin. Yes, I'm asking why not. I'm asking why
wouldn't a nuclear deal similar to the JCPOA, why would that
not be a treaty?
Secretary Blinken. Because in many instances, doing it in
the way that we would do it gives us much greater flexibility
to make sure that if, for example, there's a violation of the
agreement by the Iranians, we can act quickly to deal with that
and----
Mr. Zeldin. Why wouldn't it be a treaty----
Secretary Blinken. Again----
Mr. Zeldin. Legally. What the--do know what a treaty is?
What's a treaty?
Secretary Blinken. So the legally required obligations
undertaken by both parties to an agreement.
Mr. Zeldin. So how would this not be a treaty? Under the
definition you just provided--see, the thing is that you would
then have to submit to Congress, and then it would have to
ratified. And then it's non-binding if that does not happen.
But the definition that you just provided, which is one
that I would agree with, means that this is a treaty that under
the United States Constitution would then get submitted to
Congress for ratification.
OK, Mr. Vargas was asking you about the sunset provisions.
That was a good question, good point, I share his concern. Are
you going to agree to a nuclear--is it possible you would agree
to a nuclear agreement that does not change the sunset
provision dates?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, the situation that we
inherited is such that, as I mentioned, Iran is moving
vigorously forward on its nuclear program to the point that its
breakout time----
Mr. Zeldin. I heard your answer.
Secretary Blinken. So--so----
Mr. Zeldin. But the question is would you agree to a
nuclear deal that does not change the sunset provision dates?
Secretary Blinken. We are looking at getting back into
mutual compliance with the agreement. That includes the various
provisions that were in the agreement from the start, including
the sunsets.
The most important sunsets in the agreement, that is on the
stockpile that Iran is allowed to have of material and the
processing speed of the centrifuges and enrichment capacity,
those provisions remain in place for almost another decade.
The history of arms control agreements in the past----
Mr. Zeldin. I do not want the history of arm control
agreements. I want to know if you would agree to a nuclear deal
that does not change the sunset provision dates.
Secretary Blinken. We, without getting into the
discussion----
Mr. Zeldin. I mean, it's a yes or no. Is the answer yes,
you are willing to enter into a nuclear agreement that does
change the sunset provision date?
Secretary Blinken. The answer is quite simply that what we
are seeking to do is to get back into mutual compliance with
the agreement, with the agreement that was reached 7 years
ago----
Mr. Zeldin. We're looking for some straight answers here.
Secretary Blinken. And including the provisions that are in
that agreement, and those include the sunset agreements.
Mr. Zeldin. But would be willing to enter into an agreement
that does not change the sunset provisions? And if you're not
able to say yes or not that, we're not going to assume that
you're there fighting for a change to the sunset provisions
because you're not even telling us that.
Why would we expect that you're drawing a tougher stance on
the Iranians than you're willing to say to Congress and to the
American people?
You said that you're going to follow INARA. Does that mean
that you would submit the entire agreement?
Secretary Blinken. The lawyers will look at that, are
looking at that. If they make a determination that under INARA,
there are requirements that we have, of course, we will follow
those.
Mr. Zeldin. So you cannot make a commitment that you would
submit the entire agreement.
Secretary Blinken. I can tell you again that we will follow
the law and we will follow INARA. And whatever it--whatever it
requires----
Mr. Zeldin. Are you saying that--OK, whatever it--let's say
your attorneys tell you that you do not have to submit the
entire agreement. Would you commit to us that you would submit
the entire agreement to Congress anyway?
Secretary Blinken. We will follow the law.
Mr. Zeldin. You're not willing to make a commitment that
you'll submit the entire agreement.
Secretary Blinken. My commitment is to follow the law.
Mr. Zeldin. Now, under INARA, the clock starts once the
entire agreement is submitted. So the clock for reviewing it
then wouldn't start, correct?
Secretary Blinken. Again, what I can tell you and what I
can commit to, as always is we will follow the law, including
of course INARA.
Mr. Zeldin. OK. I do not know, and this is not the right
setting to get into the reports of added security for your
predecessor and other issues. We are very concerned about that.
And especially with regards to negotiations with Iran and how
that relates.
Just know that there's a massive concern with negotiating
with Iran while that may be ongoing to the extent of a
conversation that we can have here. I yield back.
Secretary Blinken. I appreciate that and I'm happy to
followup in a different setting with you.
Mr. Malinowski. Representative Gerry Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Secretary, welcome. Thank you for all you're doing
for the Ukrainian people. It was a pleasure and a privilege to
meet with you when I was in Poland and Ukraine. And I have been
so proud of our government in its very strong response, and I
know the Ukrainian people understand that and appreciate it as
well.
Since so many want to talk about the JCPOA, let me ask you,
you were in the Obama Administration as well, is that not true,
Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Blinken. It is.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be a fair Statement to say that
between 2011 and 2015, the Obama Administration exercised
maximum sanctions pressure on Iran that almost led to its
economic collapse? Would that be a fair Statement?
Secretary Blinken. I do not know if I'd go as far as to say
economic collapse, but I can certainly say that yes, they
exerted maximum economic pressure. And significantly----
Mr. Connolly. And during that----
Secretary Blinken. We had already, the United States had
been engaged in that. We brought other countries along----
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Secretary Blinken. To do exactly that.
Mr. Connolly. And during that time period, did we succeed
in cutting Iranian oil exports by 50 percent?
Secretary Blinken. We did.
Mr. Connolly. And would it be fair to say that perhaps,
some causation, because of that 4 years' sustained effort by
the U.S. Government under the Obama Administration, Iran might
have been motivated to come to the negotiating table that
ultimately led to the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. That would be my judgment.
Mr. Connolly. That would be a fair thing. So once we did a
agree with a U.S.-led set of negotiations, and kind of an
extraordinary thing, with China, Iran, Russia, and the
Europeans, plus us at a table, our--we led it, and we get an
agreement for the first time.
Iran says yes, we'll do this, understanding that it pushes
them further away from the development of a nuclear weapon. Is
that correct?
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be fair to say, for example, let's
look at the elements of the JCPOA. They were required to cover
up--stop the functionality of the plutonium production reactor,
is that correct?
Secretary Blinken. That's correct.
Mr. Connolly. And did they?
Secretary Blinken. They did.
Mr. Connolly. They did. And did the IAEA and the U.S.
Government certify as such?
Secretary Blinken. Both did.
Mr. Connolly. Were they required to reduce the enrichment
of uranium to 3.67 percent?
Secretary Blinken. They were and they did.
Mr. Connolly. And did--well, do not jump on my line.
Secretary Blinken. Sorry.
Mr. Connolly. They--and they did that, is that correct, Mr.
Secretary?
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. And were they required to ship out any
enriched or stockpiles of enriched uranium that went beyond
that?
Secretary Blinken. They were.
Mr. Connolly. And did they do that?
Secretary Blinken. They did.
Mr. Connolly. Did they allow inspections, including
unannounced inspections of facilities that the monitoring group
felt they needed to inspect?
Secretary Blinken. They did.
Mr. Connolly. They did. Is there any metric contained in
the JCPOA they violated?
Secretary Blinken. To the best of my knowledge, they
adhered to their obligations under the agreement. To the extent
that those were called into question and the agreement had in
it provisions when there was a concern that they were not in--
--
Mr. Connolly. And we heard----
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. The agreement.
Mr. Connolly. And Mr. Secretary, we heard that this body,
before JCPOA went into effect, all kinds of predictions about
Iran would cheat and so forth. As a matter of fact, they did
not. They did not, that's a fact. They met the terms of the
agreement, and by doing so, did they push back their ability to
develop a nuclear weapon?
Secretary Blinken. They did.
Mr. Connolly. By how much?
Secretary Blinken. The breakout time, that is the time
needed to produce enough fissile material for one nuclear
weapon, was pushed back to beyond a year.
Mr. Connolly. And where are they now, Mr. Secretary, that
we walked away from that agreement that was working?
Secretary Blinken. By public accounts, a few weeks.
Mr. Connolly. So that's not progress.
Secretary Blinken. It's the reverse of progress.
Mr. Connolly. So maybe one could say people who say they do
not want a nuclear Iran but are opposing the revival of a
nuclear agreement based on JCPOA but with other provisions
might actually unwitting, I'll assume unwittingly, actually be
achieving the very opposite is what is desired.
Secretary Blinken. I would just say this isn't a
theoretical exercise. We've seen the world with the JCPOA,
we've seen the world without the JCPOA. With the JCPOA, the
nuclear program was put in a box, without it, it's escaped from
the box.
Mr. Connolly. And you and I would agree that, you know,
Iran's a bad actor.
Secretary Blinken. There is no doubt about that.
Mr. Connolly. Do we--is it our habit when we have weapons
agreements, including especially nuclear weapons agreements,
that it's all-encompassing in terms of behavior? That it
includes all malign behavior, not just nuclear. That's what we
did with the Soviet Union, for example, isn't that what we did?
Secretary Blinken. This agreement was focused exclusively
on Iran's nuclear activities. And it in no way took away our
ability or the ability of anyone else to push back hard against
their other malicious----
Mr. Connolly. And my only point is and that's precisely
what we did with the Soviet Union.
Secretary Blinken. It's what we did with the Soviet Union,
and indeed, it's what we continued to do with Iran. Even when
the agreement was in force, we continued to take actions in
coordination with others to deal with the other malicious
activities----
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, my time is up. I
appreciate it.
Mr. Malinowski. The Chair now recognizes Representative Ann
Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank the Chair.
And I also want to thank Secretary Blinken for his time
today and certainly for his service. And for meeting
extensively with our Foreign Affairs delegation, sir, when we
were in Poland some weeks ago.
On a different topic, Mr. Secretary, I co-chair the
congressional Caucus on ASEAN. It's the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. And one of--and one fear I have heard
time and again from Southeast Asian leaders is that the United
States is ceding the Indo-Pacific to China.
Our partners are desperate for the United States to
demonstrate strength and leadership in the region. And they are
deeply concerned that without robust U.S. engagement, Indo-
Pacific countries will grow ever more reliant on the People's
Republic of China.
My Southeast Asia Strategy Act, which is now law, will send
an unmistakable message of American resolve and leadership to
the region. In the meantime, we have an opportunity to make our
case that we must remain the region's partner of choice.
And I hope that the U.S.-led Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework announced this past October will serve as a roadmap
for the future of free and open Indo-Pacific region.
I worry, however, that the Administration is letting this--
this moment slip away by refusing to offer our partners
transparency, and frankly, candor regarding who and what will
be included in the--in the framework.
Mr. Secretary, I am particularly concerned that Taiwan is
being shut out of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework. Even
though the Administration may try to kind of hide this by never
formally closing the door, so to speak, to participation,
Taiwan's offer to become a full member is not being accepted.
When our countries' top trade negotiators met last week,
this was Taiwan's No. 1 and top request. But the Biden
Administration did not allow Taiwan to join the framework. This
policy is self-defeating and dangerous, frankly. Taiwan was our
eighth largest trading partner last year and one of our largest
certainly in--in Asia.
Present size--the Administration has even changed Taiwan's
domestic law in hopes of starting free trade negotiations,
which the Administration is also refusing.
As a rule-of-law democracy and a top local trading partner,
Taiwan should be certainly a top priority for the framework.
But instead this Administration is marginalizing Taiwan and
showing the Chinese Communist Party that the United States is
deterred from working with a critical partner.
Can you explain, Mr. Secretary, how the Administration
arrived at this policy? Because it truly does not make--make
any sense.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. First, let me just say it was
great to be with you in Poland, and very important that you
were there with--with other colleagues.
On this question of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework,
there is no such policy, in the sense that this agreement is
going to be open, it's going to be inclusive.
And we're just in the process of launching it, including
beginning conversations with a number of countries as potential
partners. And there is nothing that is closing the door on
anyone, including--including Taiwan. We're just getting this
off the ground.
It has a number of important I think opportunities that
will bring us together and assert our economic leadership in
the region, trade facilitation, working on standards for the
digital economy, and technology supply chain resilience,
infrastructure investments, worker standards, etc.
So we're just at the starting point. And again, it's going
to be open, it's going to be inclusive. And I imagine we're
going to be engaging virtually every country in the region.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I'm very glad to hear that. And I
certainly--I hope that we can send something more reaffirming
to our Taiwanese partners, given their trade status and our
relationship there.
It is certainly their top request and something that I am
deeply involved and concerned about. And hearing from the
leaders in the Indo-Pacific that they have real concerns about
this. So I hope we can work together on it.
Let me to--in my brief amount of time, I'll just say that,
you know, I am concerned about the disastrous Iran nuclear deal
also. Mr. Secretary, I think it is a deeply flawed agreement.
And certainly a windfall for the world's top supporter of
State-sponsored terrorism.
So I hope that I can submit some of these questions,
especially vis-a-vis Iranian oil, today and some of the
sanctions that are--are not being enforced for--for the record,
and see if I can get some response from you and your team. I'd
be grateful.
Secretary Blinken. Certainly, certainly.
Mr. Malinowski. The Chair--the Chair recognizes
Representative Deutch from Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, nice to see you. Thank you for being here,
thank you for your service. Thank you for you and the
Administration's leadership, especially on standing up to
Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine.
It's that unjust and illegal invasion that has dramatically
shifted the international landscape with our allies and
partners around the world. And we have coalesced in opposition
to Russia's aggression and support of the people of Ukraine.
We've implemented unprecedented sanctions packages against
Russia, increased the supply of weapons to the courageous and
resilient fighters in Ukraine.
And while many were surprised Putin went ahead with the
invasion, we shouldn't have been. His desire to force Ukraine
under Russian control to spread counterfactual narratives and
delegitimize Ukrainian history is longstanding.
His consistent and public declaration of this desire
resulted now--has now resulted in another land war in Europe
with a nuclear power in Russia attempting to impose its will
against the people of Ukraine in response to their desire for
democracy, rule of law, alignment with the West.
Unfortunately, Mr. Secretary, I feel that we're witnessing
a similar pattern with Iran, and I want to explain. Iran is the
largest State sponsor of terrorism. Regularly calls for the
destruction of Israel. Launched attacks against U.S. military
forces and U.S. partners in the region from Saudi Arabia to the
UAE.
It also takes Americans and other foreign nationals
hostage, like my constituent Bob Levinson, as well as Emad
Shargi, the Mazanis and others. Iran and the IRGC support
terror groups in Syria and Lebanon and Gaza and Iraq and Yemen,
just to name a few.
The regime has made its intentions to destabilize the
region and expand its empire clear since the Islamic Revolution
of 1979. Its nuclear program now enriches to 60 percent, which
as the IAEA Director General has said, is done only by
countries who are developing or intend to develop nuclear
weapons.
Now, it sometimes seems that our policy toward Iran, and
we've seen this here in this committee even today, that our
policy toward Iran is entirely the JCPOA. The conversations
we've had here have focused on the JCPOA and whether or not to
reenter the nuclear deal. But that's not obviously a policy to
address everything that Iran represents.
And just as we have led our European allies in confronting
Russia, we should lead our partners in the region, Israel, the
Abraham Accords nations, our other partners in confronting Iran
to address all of Iran's actions.
So my first question to you, Mr. Secretary, is can you--can
you tell us--and by the way, one last thing on this. Whether
there is JCPOA or not, whether there is a deal that's struck or
not, everything that I described will continue.
So let's start by asking if you could just define what our
policy is with respect to Iran, the country whose mullahs have
taken all of these actions consistently now for decades.
Secretary Blinken. You're exactly right. Whether or not
there is a JCPOA, all of the actions and activities that you've
described will continue.
Now, one fundamental question for us is an Iran with a
nuclear weapon or the capacity to get one on short order is
likely to act with even greater impunity in doing all of these
things, which is one of the reasons we want to do everything we
can do to deny it the capability to have weapons.
But having said that, your point is a very important one.
Which is why, irrespective of an agreement or not, we are
working with allies and partners, with our Arab partners, with
Israel and others to make sure that we are putting in place the
means necessary to deal with all of these other challenges.
Hardening defenses, long-range bomber overflights, deepening
cooperation to indict, sanctioning relevant Iranian actors,
boosting the capacity of our partners.
Again, all of these things to confront and contend with
everything you've just described, irrespective of whether
there's a nuclear agreement.
Mr. Deutch. And it is our position still, as you referred
to earlier, imagine Iran with a nuclear weapon, that JCPOA or
no, it is our policy that Iran will not acquire a nuclear
weapon.
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Deutch. And we heard multiple times in--during the
negotiation of the original JCPOA that all options were--that
all options remained on the table. I want to reconfirm that
that continues to be true today.
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate it, Mr. Secretary. As we go
forward, instead of talking about plan B, if there is no JCPOA,
I would just respectfully suggest that plan A always be and
continue to be exactly what you described just now. And I yield
back the balance of my time.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you. I now recognize Representative
Brian Mast of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, over here. Robust sanctions on Russia. You
called them massive consequences. I want to speak a little bit
about those. At minimum, would there have to be an agreed-upon
cease-fire to lift, for the United States of America to lift
any of those sanctions?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, we're not, we're certainly
not talking about lifting sanctions. We're talking about----
Mr. Mast. Would there have to be a cease-fire for America
to lift our sanctions?
Secretary Blinken. Well, at a minimum. Any movement on any
sanctions----
Mr. Mast. Ceasefire at minimum?
Secretary Blinken. Would need to require something like
that.
Mr. Mast. Would they have to remove forces from Ukraine to
lift any sanctions?
Secretary Blinken. Again, all of this, first, most
important thing is we will support whatever it is the
democratically elected government of Ukraine wants to do.
Mr. Mast. These are our sanctions, American sanctions----
Secretary Blinken. They're our sanctions, but they're----
Mr. Mast. Commerce, America's commerce with Russia,
America's determination on who we are going to get energy from,
everything else, decisions that affect Americans. So for
America and our sanctions and our commerce resuming, does
Russia have to be out of the Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, the Ukrainians that we are
supporting in every way that we can, it's vital that they
determine the actions that would be most effective in----
Mr. Mast. So you're saying Ukraine will determine----
Secretary Blinken. No, I'm saying we want to hear----
Mr. Mast. How the United States of America----
Secretary Blinken. We want to hear from them----
Mr. Mast. And their sanctions.
Secretary Blinken. We want to hear from them and allies and
partners and what would be most effective and when. So----
Mr. Mast. We want to hear from them, they want to hear from
us. We're the United States of America. Zelensky came to the
United States of America, said we're the leader of freedom, we
have to be the leader of peace. He addressed the House of
Representatives, the Senate. So let's be America and lead. And
as the Secretary of State----
Secretary Blinken. It's what we've been doing.
Mr. Mast. A great honor. Do they have to have a cease-fire,
do they have to be out of Ukraine in order for United States of
America to regain commerce, any type of commerce, or lift
sanctions?
Secretary Blinken. Again, what I'm--what I'm not going to
do is lay out or engage or negotiate in public on something
that we will work in close coordination with Ukrainians and
with----
Mr. Mast. I think what you mean is you won't answer clearly
to the American people. This our country, these are our
sanctions, this what we're doing. We are providing arms, we are
doing cyber warfare, we are doing economic warfare.
We are in situation on the global stage where nobody can
say there's zero percent chance of nuclear war. That's a tough
situation to be in.
Secretary Blinken. We're doing all of this----
Mr. Mast. So answer to the Americans.
Secretary Blinken. No, we're doing all of this in service
of ensuring that Ukraine remains sovereign, remains
independent. And we are looking at what actions are required to
make sure that we can keep doing that, as well as making sure--
--
Mr. Mast. We're doing stuff for Americans too----
Secretary Blinken. As well as making sure----
Mr. Mast. We're doing it for Ukrainians, we're doing it for
Americans as well. There's a lot that's going on that's hurting
Americans. What's going on with energy very specifically,
that's an easy one to talk about. Let's go back.
Does there have to be a war tribe--a war crime tribunal for
Putin before we will lift any sanctions or allow for any
commerce?
Secretary Blinken. There has to be accountability and there
will be accountability.
Mr. Mast. War crime tribunal?
Secretary Blinken. But again, I'm not--I'm going to get
into spelling out a roadmap of when or if sanctions will be
lifted. We will determine that----
Mr. Mast. That's sad that we won't lay out a roadmap for
what has to happen. That's very weak negotiation.
Secretary Blinken. Not--not----
Mr. Mast. Negotiate from strength, not from weakness.
Secretary Blinken. Not--not in public, not at this time.
Mr. Mast. Will they have to repay damages for everything
that they've destroyed in the Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. We want to make sure that not only is
there accountability for war crimes that have been committed,
but there is accountability for the fact that they committed
these acts of destruction----
Mr. Mast. Be reparations, reparations for everybody----
Secretary Blinken. So we will look----
Mr. Mast. That's been killed?
Secretary Blinken. We will look at making sure that the
damage that was done to Ukraine is assumed by those who
committed it.
Mr. Mast. I hope that these are bare minimum things that
take place before the United States of American consider
resuming any commerce with Russia, Putin, whatsoever, before we
consider lifting any sanctions whatsoever. And that we begin
starting to speak to them from these positions of strength.
I want to yield a couple of moments to my colleague, Mr.
Zeldin, to address some of the lies that you told us earlier.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you. In response to Mr. Connolly, you
said that prior to the U.S. withdrawal, that Iran did not
violate the letter of the JCPOA. Is that your position?
Secretary Blinken. That prior--I'm sorry, can you repeat?
Mr. Zeldin. Prior to the U.S. withdrawal from the JCPOA,
that Iran did not violate the letter of the JCPOA, is that your
position?
Secretary Blinken. At various points we had concerns that
they were in violation. We brought that to the dispute
resolution mechanism that was built into the agreement, and
those concerns were resolved.
Mr. Zeldin. So twice IAEA found Iran in violation of heavy
water. They found that they had assembled more IR-6s, that they
had acquired more IR-8 rotor assemblies. That they attempted to
acquire carbon fiber that they're not allowed to. All in
violation of the letter of the JCPOA.
Now, you all know this, but you come here anyway and you
gaslight us so we're forced to call you out on it. Next time
you come here, please make do not make believe like they
haven't violated the letter of the JCPOA before----
Mr. Malinowski. The gentleman's time has expired. And let
me remind all members, that tough questioning, challenging
questioning is perfectly appropriate. But accusing the
Secretary of State of lying is in my view a violation of the
decorum that we have, on a bipartisan basis tried to maintain--
--
Mr. Zeldin. Don't lie and we won't make the accusation,
it's that simple.
Mr. Malinowski. I will now yield to Representative Brad
Sherman of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. There's some that will hold you to an
impossible standard that somehow the Administration has failed
if we do not get absolutely total justice in Ukraine and Iran
does not change its regime and everything. We live in a real
world, and it is not a failure of the Administration that the
world will be imperfect, even when you lead it, lead the
Administration.
I want to commend you, Mr. Secretary, for talking about how
important it is that we have an international vaccination
program. Not only is that moral, but every infection leads to
replication. Every replication is an opportunity for mutation.
And if you're on team human, we've got to immunize every
human on the planet, or another variant is coming back to the
United States.
In Pakistan you see the most internally contentious and
unpredictable politics of any nuclear power. And Congress has
directed the Voice of America to reach out to the people of
Pakistan in the Sindhi language as well as Urdu.
The VOA has ignored that. We even gave them money for it,
they ignored that. I hope that they hear from you how important
it is that we reach the people of Pakistan and southern
Pakistan in the Sindhi language.
In Syria we still have a huge humanitarian problem. It's
important that our humanitarian aid not go through Assad. And
as we have it in our interest to weaken Russia, we might want
to take a look at those who are standing up to Assad, to
Tehran, and to Russia in Syria.
Some of us have been urging lethal weapons go to Ukraine
for many, many years. We faced a lot of headwinds from the last
Administration. Thank you for what you're doing.
The world focuses on Ukraine, but 500,000 people have died
in Tigray. I commend you for your visit to Ukraine. I hope that
we pay if not equal, at least more attention to Tigray. The
Ethiopian and Eritrean governments are using starvation as a
weapon. And the World Food Program says that 90 percent of the
people there need assistance.
Your Deputy Secretary came us to very late last year and
said that a decision had been made to refrain from making a--a
public determination on atrocities and to whether this is
genocide. Do you want to, I mean, you got to call them as you
see them.
Can I count on the State Department for making a public
determination? Are there gross human rights abuses and is there
genocide in Tigray?
Secretary Blinken. First, there have clearly been
atrocities committed by every party in Ethiopia. There is no
doubt about that. In terms of an actual legal determination of
what they are and their nature, we will make that
determination.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. We have provided substantial
defense systems to Israel. Forty-three thousand rockets have
been launched by Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Thank God the
casualties have been modest, and that is because of Iron Dome.
But keep in mind, that was 4,300 attempts to kill as many
Israeli civilians as possible. Every one of those rockets was a
war crime. Not a single one had any real prospect of hitting a
strategic target.
As you know, the Obama-Biden Administration agreed to a
comprehensive memorandum of understanding on our minimum level
of aid. You and President Biden have indicated opposition to
imposing new political conditions or restrictions on this
assistance. Do you continue to oppose new political
restrictions on our defense assistance to Israel?
Secretary Blinken. We do.
Mr. Sherman. Good. And turning to the caucuses, should the
Administration not waive Section 907, at least until the POWs
are released and those of Armenian ethnicity are able to go
back to their homes from which they've been cleansed.
Secretary Blinken. First, we're working very assiduously on
any POWs. This is something that I've engaged the most senior
leadership in Azerbaijan. Second, 907, as it is annually, under
review; and as soon we have the results of that review,
obviously we'll make those known to you.
Mr. Sherman. Hopefully, you will not waive it. I yield
back.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you. I now yield 5 minutes to
Representative Fitzpatrick of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for
being here. Before I get to Ukraine, and if this question has
already been posed, I apologize. But CNN reported yesterday
that over $7 billion in military equipment was left behind in
Afghanistan, to include aircraft, which is, literally, twice
the amount of defensive equipment that we just authorized for
Ukraine a few weeks back. I just wanted to give you an
opportunity to comment on that.
Secretary Blinken. I haven't seen that specific report, but
you're correct. Over 20 years, a huge amount of military
equipment was provided to the Afghan Security Forces, which,
unfortunately, as we know collapsed in extremis; and much of
that equipment, 20 years later, remained; and, in turn, much of
that equipment was taken by the Taliban.
So I do not know about the specific report, but that
certainly sounds possible.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. If you could take that for the record and
get a response----
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I will.
Mr. Fitzpatrick [continuing]. That would be great. Back to
Ukraine, there's two different paradigms that I hear from all
sorts of people whether this is Ukraine's fight between them
and Russia versus is this the world's fight, is this democracy
versus dictatorship? What's your view on this?
Secretary Blinken. It is both. In the first instance, of
course Ukraine's fight because they are under horrific assault
by Russia. We're standing with them on that. But you're also
correct that I believe this should be the world's fight and,
indeed, we've worked to make it that because, as we were
discussing a little bit earlier, the aggression that Russia is
committing is not only against Ukraine, it's against some of
the basic principles of the international order that should be
important to countries around the world because, if those
principles are violated with impunity and we let that go, then
we open a Pandora's box for more of this to happen in other
parts of the world. So it's both.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Is there any Rubicon that would be
crossed, any red line, that can or will be determined which
will change this NATO/non-NATO distinction? Because a lot of
people are having a hard time reconciling how we could assist
on the periphery through sanctions, through defensive military
equipment, but never going in, and watch tens of thousands,
perhaps hundreds of thousands Ukrainians get slaughtered. And,
yet, if one step is taken over the Romanian border and one
Romanian is killed, that the full force of 30 nations'
militaries will come to bear.
Is a Romanian life worth that much more than Ukrainian
life? All life is equal, and we should care about all life. Why
the cliff effect of this NATO/non-NATO distinction? Because,
yes, the NATO addresses the legal obligations we have under
Article 5, but there's a second prong to this analysis: what's
our moral obligation?
Secretary Blinken. It is a good question and an important
question. And as you know, we have an alliance with obligations
and commitments with the NATO countries that includes Article
5. That does not hold for Ukraine and a number of other
countries in Europe; and, for that matter, it does not hold for
other countries around the world.
We are doing, through the security systems we're providing,
the economic support we're giving, the humanitarian aid we're
making available. We are going through extraordinary lengths to
help the Ukrainian people deal with this aggression, deal with
it effectively, and they have been. There's no doubt that,
you're right, horrific death, destruction has happened and
continues in Southern and Eastern Ukraine, which is exactly why
we are doubling down on everything that we can do to make sure
that they have the means in their own hands to deal with this
aggression.
There are, of course, many places around the world; and
Congressman Sherman just referred, for example, to Ethiopia
where we're seeing horrific things happening. I could point to
20 or 30 different places, and the question for us in each
instance is what can we do and what are we responsible for
doing to try to deal with the situation. There is not a one-
size-fits-all approach to this. And with regard to Ukraine, I
think it's fair to say that we've taken exceptional steps in
advance of and now during this aggression to help the
Ukrainians defeat it.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Sure, you'd acknowledge this is a very
unique situation. Three-quarters of Ukrainian children have
been displaced, having bombs dropped on their head, pediatric
cancer hospital being bombed, maternity wards being bombed, war
crimes unlike we've ever seen in our lifetime. So, yes,
genocide occurs everywhere and it's wrong everywhere and we
should help everywhere we can. This is a very unique
circumstance, and I think it's important that Ukrainians know
that.
And what I think is puzzling and concerning to so many of
us in this body is this Administration's seeming propensity to
tell people what they are not going to do, signal to Vladimir
Putin what we're not willing to do, taking options off the
table. Even if that decision has been made internally, why
telegraph that?
Secretary Blinken. It is also important to be clear about a
few things. And, first, I would say I think we have been
extremely clear not only in what we have said but in what we
have actually done to make sure that the Ukrainians have in
their hands the means to deal with and ultimately defeat this
Russian aggression. And when I saw President Zelensky a few
days ago with Secretary Austin, he expressed directly to me his
deep appreciation for the support this Congress has given to
Ukraine and for President Biden's leadership, and he said the
United States was its number-one supporter around the world.
And he said something akin to that publicly after the meeting.
But, again, I do not want to put words in his mouth.
So it is very clear not what we're not doing but what we
are doing, and I think that's manifesting itself in Ukraine on
the battlefield.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. My time is expired. I yield back.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you. The Chair recognizes
Representative Bill Keating of Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, thank you
for your extraordinary work and thank you for the work you've
done in bringing home Trevor Reed. I've spoken with the Reed
family. I know and have followed that very closely, and I know
the extraordinary effort that went into that.
I also want to thank you for the effort you're giving with
trying to bring home Paul Whelan, who has been illegally
imprisoned for 1,200 days and I've pledged to do anything I
could do, and I'm not alone in Congress saying that, to try and
bring him home as soon as possible.
And the other thing I want to thank you for, not from the
perspective, not only from the perspective as a Member of
Congress here in the U.S., but I do not think it's fully
appreciated just the extraordinary work at putting together and
holding together and moving forward the Transatlantic coalition
that we have in place. We would not be talking about a Ukraine
victory, we would not be even talking about what we could do as
a country if we acted alone. We know that we cannot do it
alone. But I just want to share with you the perspective which
I have regularly with foreign leaders, European leaders in
particular, those are their comments, those are their thoughts.
And it is terrific to have them talk about a U.S. Government
from State, from Defense, from so many different areas of our
government, that are stepping up at a time of crisis the world
has never seen.
One of the people I spoke with recently, I spoke to the
Ambassador from Poland and also the mayor from Warsaw recently,
too. What they're doing there is nothing short of astounding
either. Just the absorption of school children. Just in several
weeks 20,000 children are now in school in Warsaw alone. Over
180,000 students from Ukraine are now in school in Poland right
now. These are just extraordinary achievements.
They are strained, and I know in the supplemental budgets
we have given some funds. But with the plans for the long-term
funding that we released today, will there be areas of
assistance we can continue to give countries like Poland that
are just doing these almost Herculean things at a time of great
humanitarian need?
Secretary Blinken. I appreciate you pointing that out. Let
me just say, first of all, when it comes to Paul Whelan, I am
determined that we bring him home, as well. We are not letting
up in that effort in the least.
Second, with regard to Poland and other countries, we have
seen extraordinary generosity by the Polish people, Moldovans
we talked about earlier, others in taking in Ukrainians
refugees and supporting them. Europe as a whole has done
something remarkable in making sure that Ukrainians who wind up
as refugees in Europe can be there for 2 years and get support
that they need. But this is obviously placing a burden on other
countries.
So we have been ourselves working to provide appropriate
assistance, including to alleviate some of the burden that
these countries are facing, to help them provide humanitarian
support to Ukrainians who need it, and that includes Poland.
Mr. Keating. The other thing, we had a subcommittee hearing
this morning dealing with Northern Ireland, the Good Friday
Agreement, and the fragile nature of circumstances there. We
had some extraordinarily young people that testified, and
there's great hope that change will occur through that
generation, as well.
I spoke after that with the Minister of Foreign Affairs
Simon Coveney, and we were discussing a letter I led, the
bipartisan letter to the State Department calling for a special
envoy for Northern Ireland so that we can become more involved.
I am very concerned. And so many other things going on in the
world, but there remains a real crisis brewing there. And the
elections are coming just in the next few days in Northern
Ireland, and we do not know the ramifications of what that
might be. But could you give me an update on any progress with
the special envoy?
Secretary Blinken. In short, I anticipate that we'll be
moving forward soon on naming an envoy.
Mr. Keating. Great. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you. And I would just like to briefly
note that we have a delegation of parliamentarians from
Ukrainians who just joined us.
(Applause.)
Mr. Malinowski. It is our great hope that you will soon be
able to meet, as we do here, without any fear of violence being
done to your beautiful capital and that your democracy will
long endure.
And with that, let me call on Representative Buck of
Colorado for 5 minutes.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank you
for being here. A little different concern. I want to move away
from Ukraine for just a moment, if we can.
I am concerned about the fentanyl that is coming to this
country that is largely manufactured in China. Just a few
statistics: Fiscal Year 2021, Border Patrol seized 11,201
pounds of fentanyl at the southern border, which was more than
double what they seized in Fiscal Year 2020 and five times what
they seized in Fiscal Year 2019. To put that in perspective,
the amount seized, the amount of fentanyl seized by Border
Patrol in 2021 is enough to kill the entire U.S. population
more than seven times over.
The leading cause of death in America of adults between the
ages of 18 and 45 is fentanyl overdose. Recently, in Colorado
and Colorado Springs, we had three high school students die of
fentanyl overdose, one actually collapsing in class from that
use. It is terrible.
I am wondering if you have had conversations with Chinese
leadership about the production of fentanyl and what those
conversations, whether they are productive or not.
Secretary Blinken. In short, yes to the conversations.
Productive remains to be seen. First of all, can I just applaud
your leadership on trying to deal with the opioid crisis that
we have in this country, and I very much share your concerns
about this and, in particular, share the concerns about the
fentanyl that is originating in China and is making its way
into the United States, including through Mexico.
So two things. We've been working on this in three ways.
The President has raised this directly with President Xi
Jinping of China. Second, we've gotten some of the fentanyl
precursors that were not on prohibited lists added to those
lists so that we were able to get others to police this more
effectively. Third, we're working with the Mexican government
on seeing about it having technology necessary to better detect
efforts to smuggle fentanyl or precursors into the United
States. We are working across all of those lines of effort.
But to your point, it is very important that the Chinese
government take action to do something effective about this,
and it is something that we're on.
Mr. Buck. My understanding, Mr. Secretary, is there is not
much of a fentanyl problem in China.
Secretary Blinken. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Buck. And the Chinese government, I think we would all
agree, is an authoritarian regime and knows just about
everything its citizens are doing. And if fentanyl is coming
into this country from China, they probably know about it.
And I do not want to propose a conspiracy theory, but I do
ask whether you believe that this is a long-term strategy by an
adversary to undermine this country and the youth in this
country? Drugs tear at the fabric of our country, particularly
younger people. And it would not surprise me if an adversary
like China had a strategy to introduce drugs into this country
knowing that it would sap our strength.
Secretary Blinken. I do not want to speculate about any
strategies or not. All I can focus on is what's actually
happening and what can be done about it, and there's no doubt
in my mind that the Chinese government could act much more
effectively in working to prevent the fentanyl from leaving
China and getting eventually into the United States.
Mr. Buck. And why wouldn't they?
Secretary Blinken. Good question.
Mr. Buck. I'm asking.
Secretary Blinken. No, I do not--again, nothing that I can
speculate on. There may be economic motivations, there may be
other motivations. They may claim that this is something that
they cannot deal with as effectively as we believe they can.
All of those things are possible, but the bottom line is, like
you, we want to see results and we want to see concrete actions
taken that result in fentanyl or precursors getting into the
country.
Mr. Buck. A country like Colombia will allow American DEA
agents and others in, allow our military to help train. I know
I've been to Guatemala, I have seen our Navy Seals working with
their marines. I am assuming that China isn't quite as open to
our military being in their country. Is this----
Secretary Blinken. I think that is a fair Statement.
Mr. Buck. And, again, it just raises the issue of why not.
I appreciate your efforts on this; and anything we can do in
Congress to help, we would greatly like to do that.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch. Will the gentleman yield? Will the gentleman
yield?
Mr. Buck. Yes, I will.
Mr. Deutch. Mr. Chairman, thanks. I just want to take a
moment to both thank the gentleman from Colorado and thank the
Secretary of State. This is--Mr. Buck is right. This is a
crisis that affects every community in our country. And in the
case of my nephew who died of accidental fentanyl ingestion,
this is not a question of overdose. This is a question of
actions taken, whether by the government, whether by drug
dealers, the government in China or drug dealers or others, to
murder our kids. I'm grateful to you. Thank you.
Mr. Buck. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you both. I yield 5 minutes to
Representative Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here, and I want to really begin by
thanking you and the President for the enormous amount of work
that I know it took to both build and keep strong an
international coalition, not only NATO but our European
partners, to respond to Vladimir Putin's aggression in Ukraine.
And it wasn't that long ago, sadly, that we had a president of
the United States advocating for the abolition of NATO or at
least undermining it in very significant ways. That's why I
think we take for granted sometimes what it took for President
Biden and you to both build and keep intact this extraordinary
coalition that's absolutely essential for the Ukrainians to win
this fight. So I want to begin by saying thank you for that and
for all the work that you're doing to restore American
leadership around the world on so many important issues.
I think it's also important to remember that Secretary
Kerry told us at the time we originally considered the JCPOA
that the mission was to keep Iran from becoming a nuclear
power, which remains the commitment of this Administration,
because then we can, in fact, push back in a variety of
different ways. It's much more difficult to do that when
someone has nuclear weapons, and we are learning that as we
think about responding to Russia's aggression. So I hope
everyone remembers that lesson.
I want to ask you specifically as it relates to Ukraine and
the impact it is having on food and security globally. We just
returned from a visit with the head of the World Food
Programme, Governor Beasley, and with Ambassador McCain who
runs, as you know, the U.N. Mission. And, you know, the
disruption of the supply chain is obviously a piece of it, but
we also learned about the efforts that the Chinese are engaging
to kind of increase their efforts in responding to the food and
security around the world.
And so how is the State Department coordinating our food
security efforts, the food security efforts of our allies, to
help counter, be effective in responding to this crisis but
also to think about it as a way to counter the malign influence
of China and others. And in particular, we learned about the
Gulf countries to play a meaningful role in responding food
insecurity. I wonder kind of what's the status of those
discussions.
Secretary Blinken. I very much appreciate you putting a
spotlight on that and the work that you are doing on that,
including with David Beasley, with Ambassador McCain. This is
vitally important because one of the horrific consequences of
the Russian aggression against Ukraine is an accentuation of
what was already a significant food security challenge around
the world, and we probably have an additional 40 million people
as a result of the aggression. And the inability because of
Russia of the Ukrainians to export effectively the wheat that
they're producing, blockades of the Black Sea ports, literally
attacking farms and farmers. This has, of course, contributed
to difficulty in countries getting wheat that they had
contracted for. There's actually a huge amount that's been
produced this year, but it cannot get out of the country
because of the Russian blockade, among other things.
So we're seeing the effects literally around the world, as
you know. And we're operating on a number of lines of effort to
address this directly. First, let me just say that next month
we're going to chair the Security Council at the United
Nations. I'm putting the focus on our month-long presidency on
food security and taking concrete steps to address it.
We have a plan before Congress for dealing with feeding the
future that includes $11 billion over 5 years to address this
both in the immediate but also long term. We are pressing
countries to make contributions to the World Food Programme, to
the Food and Agriculture Organization, which are underfunded,
given the needs that they have now. We are urging countries
that have stockpiles of food to release those stockpiles and
also not to put in place export controls that restrict their
ability to get food to where to where it is needed.
Our President has incentivized our own producers of
fertilizer to produce more and get more out. We've done
emergency assistance to a number of countries that most acutely
need it for food security: Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, about $100
million.
So across all of these lines, we're trying to address the
problem in the immediate but also longer-term sustainability.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. Thank you, and we look forward to
being sure that we are doing our part in supporting those
efforts in any way that we can.
My final question, Mr. Secretary, is there is a letter that
I led with 150 colleagues requesting an increase in funds which
support LGBTQIA rights around the world through the Global Fund
and the European Democracy Resilience Initiative. As you know,
LGBTQIA around the world are facing really unprecedented
violence and repression, and I just hope that you will commit
to streamlining democracy and human rights funding to include
gender equity, empowerment, and inclusive LGBTQIA people, and
support increased funding for our community, which is really in
tremendous need.
Secretary Blinken. We do, and I welcome working with you on
that.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you much, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative Mark Green of Tennessee, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere
Civilian Security, Migration, and International Economic
Policy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and
I want to let the Secretary know that the nearshoring bill that
your team reviewed has finally been dropped, so thank you for
the input from Secretary Zuniga and the others who helped with
that. Also, thanks for being here today.
I want to thank you, too, for, I think I understood
correctly we're going to send some State Department people back
in to Ukraine. I think that's a good decision. I thought taking
everyone out was a bad decision, I'll be completely honest with
you. I remember from my study of history the State Department
stayed all through the bombing of London in World War II; yet
we kind of ran away on this one, we shouldn't have, and I'm
glad to hear that you're moving folks back in.
I want to jump back a few months to Afghanistan. You know
where I am on this, and you know my criticisms of both your
department and the DoD and the Administration. What I want to
ask today is how many American citizens are still in
Afghanistan.
Secretary Blinken. So let me say two things on that. First
of all, I appreciate the other points that you mentioned.
There are, at present, 126, as of a few days ago, American
citizens remaining, of whom 37 seek to leave and that we are
assisting. Since we left Afghanistan on August 31st, we
directly assisted the departure of, again, as of a few days
ago, 636 American citizens and many LPRs, as well.
Mr. Green. The 37, but you all are working a plan to get
the 37----
Secretary Blinken. That's correct.
Mr. Green. Very good. Mr. Secretary, I assume and I think
it was talked about a little earlier, you're familiar with the
company Rosatom or----
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Green. So it looks like they're a State-owned
enterprise for Russia, and it looks also that they will be the
ones that build the $10 billion reactor for Iran; is that
correct?
Secretary Blinken. Under the Bushehr plan, yes, I believe
that's correct.
Mr. Green. And my question to you is how much sense does it
make, when we have these sanctions on Russia, to allow a State-
owned enterprise of Russia to build a $10 billion nuclear
reactor in Iran?
Secretary Blinken. So the tradeoff is this: the reactor
that they and others would take part in building would be a
proliferation-resistant reactor, which means that whatever is
produced by it or through it could not be effectively used to
build a nuclear weapon or produce material for a weapon, and
that's a very important security concern for the United States.
I think----
Mr. Green. Can anybody else build that reactor?
Secretary Blinken. Well----
Mr. Green. I mean, why give the profits to the very guys
who we are trying to keep from funding a war in Ukraine?
Secretary Blinken. The question is, if there's an effective
alternative, we can certainly look at that but----
Mr. Green. Yes, I'd ask you to that, and I think most
Americans, if they were to apply just some common logic to
this, that we're doing sanctions here to keep the--we stopped
buying their oil so they wouldn't continue to fund the assault
on Ukraine, and why would we give them $10 billion or allow
them to get $10 billion to build a nuclear reactor?
So what I'm hearing you say is that you guys are looking
for an alternative; is that correct?
Secretary Blinken. If there is an effective alternative.
Now, of course, it would require Iran to accept that
alternative, so that is part of the equation, as well.
Mr. Green. OK. Mr. Secretary, the families of American
hostages in Venezuela, such as the Marine in Tennessee and
Matthew Heath, were told that exchanges were off the table;
yet, the Administration did make an exchange for Trevor Reed. I
am glad to see Trevor Reed home. I was on the phone with Mr.
Pfluger late into the night, making sure that he could see his
family on the tarmac.
Can you explain the discrepancy between those two?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, around the world, wherever
there is an American arbitrarily detained, including in
Venezuela, we are looking at everything possible we can do to
bring them home. Each situation is different. As you know,
recently----
Mr. Green. I do.
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. We sent a delegation to
Venezuela for the purpose of trying to get our Americans back
home, and we were able to get two of them back. But as you
know, half a dozen remain. We are working on that every single
day.
Mr. Green. I appreciate the efforts there. As I understood
it, too, though, that trip was designed to find a solution for
the $500 billion of oil we were buying from Russia as an
alternative, potentially using Venezuela. So it was more than
just to negotiate those guys. I mean, but I appreciate the
fact, and I think you got two of them home.
Secretary Blinken. We got two of them home but six remain.
Mr. Green. Six remain. I appreciate it. Very quickly, and
I'm going to ask this to be sent to me because I'm going to run
out of time here very quickly, leadership in Guatemala have
told me that your department is putting pressure on them to
pick a certain candidate for an attorney general, and I'd like
for someone to send a letter to me or, you know, offline call,
I want to find out why we're putting pressure on another
country to pick a certain attorney general and what criteria
you are using or what is justifying that bullying, what I
believe is bullying.
Secretary Blinken. I am happy to followup. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time is expired. I now
recognize Representative Ted Lieu of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, for holding this
hearing; and thank you, Secretary of State Blinken, for your
distinguished public service. I want to first thank you for the
action you took on assignment restrictions, announcing that you
had left over half of them. I think that is a great first step,
so thank you for doing that.
I would like to now turn to Ukraine. And the U.S. hasn't
just been helping Ukraine this year. We've been helping them
pretty essentially since 2014; is that correct?
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Lieu. And from 2014 until January 20th of last year, we
provided a little over a billion dollars in funding; is that
correct?
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Lieu. But then under the Biden Administration, we
significantly ramped up the military aid to Ukraine, and my
understanding is that we provided up to now over $4.6 billion
to----
Secretary Blinken. That is correct.
Mr. Lieu [continuing]. To Ukraine. Without that military
assistance, Russia would have rode in and taken over Kyiv. That
is how the world viewed it. I just want to emphasize what an
amazing accomplishment that is that Ukraine will remain a free,
sovereign, independent nation. That was not something that
people thought was going to happen. It would not have happened
but for the involvement of you and others and the President of
the United States and NATO countries. So I just want to make
sure we emphasize that.
We are now in a second phase of the war, which is how do we
help Ukraine push back against Russian forces in the south and
in the east. That requires a different set, in my opinion, of
weapons, more advanced weapons. And you were right in pushing
for MiGs to go to Ukraine. And just based on public reporting,
I commend you for trying to do that. I believe that air power
and air dominance is a critical component of modern warfare,
and I continue to urge you to push to do that.
I would like to now turn to State sponsors of terrorism;
and, under State Department policy, you get to designate
countries as State sponsors of terrorism. If a country is so
designated, then that gives us certain options. One of them is,
for example, it would allow us to ban dual use exports to that
country; is that correct?
Another is it would allow the U.S. to take economic action
against countries that continue to do business with that
designated country, correct?
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. It could also freeze that country's assets in the
U.S., including real eState.
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. And it would cause a U.S. to veto efforts of that
country to secure, for example, World Bank loans or other loans
such as that.
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. In order for you to designate that, you need two
instances, at least, of that country sponsoring terrorism. So
when we talk about Russia, it is true, right, that Russia
provides sanctuary to a U.S.-designated terrorist group known
as the Russian Imperial Movement?
Secretary Blinken. Let me say this, Congressman. I
appreciate the question and the issue. We have the office of
our legal advisor looking at this question about whether, under
the law, the criteria exists to consider Russia a State sponsor
of terrorism in the case of Ukraine. That is under review as we
speak.
The only other thing I would add is all of the measures
that you rightly point out that we would be able to apply on
the basis of that law, of course many of them we can and are
already applying under other types of designations.
So two things are important, I think. First, of course, is
making sure that we are adhering to the law, meeting the law,
meeting its requirements. The second is making sure that we are
effective by whatever tools we have available to us to be
effective in doing a number of things that you pointed to.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. On April 22d, ten members of the
Foreign Affairs Committee sent you a letter about designating
Russia as a State sponsor of terrorism, and we laid out all the
various examples of how Russia, in fact, was a State sponsor of
terrorism.
I just want to urge you to look at the standard. So the
standard is not whether we have to prove this beyond a
reasonable doubt. It is not whether an academic professor
somewhere could say, hey, maybe Russia does not technically
meet these requirements, and we believe Russia does meet these
requirements. I think we have to supply a common sense
standard. The American people will not understand if we do not
designate Russia as a State sponsor of terrorism. They are
watching horrific images on their TV day after day after day,
so I just urge you to apply the common sense standard, go
through your process.
And with that, I yield back.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Joe Wilson of South Carolina, who is the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on the Middle East, North Africa,
and Global Counterterrorism, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Secretary,
thank you and Secretary Austin for visiting in Kyiv with
Volodymyr Zelensky. Gosh, what an inspiration President
Zelensky is to the world, as we are in a worldwide conflict and
it is authoritarianism by rule of gun with democracy by rule of
law. And with a worldwide conflict, your leadership is so
important.
In fact, this week, sadly, war criminal Putin is
threatening our appreciated allies of Poland and Bulgaria by
cutting off LNG. What is America doing to help these great
allies?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you for your engagement and
leadership on this, as well. Second, with regard to this
cutoff, I'd say a few things. First, there is an element of
Russia shooting itself in the foot by doing this because, of
course, the revenues and resources that it would get from the
sale, it will be denied.
Second, we have seen other European countries already jump
in to make sure that these countries can get the resources they
need to make up for what they might lose from Russia.
Third, we have directed a significant amount of LNG to
Europe over the last few months. We have doubled the amount of
American LNG going to Europe since February to help compensate
for any shortfalls, including those that may result from Russia
trying to use this as a tool of blackmail.
Mr. Wilson. And I hope, again, LNG will be promoted and,
indeed, the floating terminals that can be provided----
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Wilson [continuing]. Whatever, to deny the war criminal
Putin his ability to conduct mass murder.
In regard to Syria, why isn't the Administration applying
the mandatory sanctions of the Caesar Act to the Assad regime
and its backers?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, I am happy to work with you
on that. We, of course, are working to use all the authorities
that we have. If there are places where you believe we are not
effectively using them, I would welcome knowing about it.
Mr. Wilson. Well, again, the opportunity we have to help
the people of Syria overcome the oppression they are facing,
whatever could be done.
Another issue to me that I'm concerned about are foreign
military sales. It appears to me that they have been
handicapped with unnecessary red tape. What can we do to cut
through the red tape to help and work with our allies, such as
Turkey and India?
Secretary Blinken. I agree with you. I think we can and
should do better in sales, particularly in the rapidity with
which we are able to do things, review things. That is on, I
think that is on us in the executive branch. It is also on
Congress. So I think, together, we need to look at ways; and we
are, in fact, looking at that.
You make an important point, too, because a number of
countries, as I said earlier, are rethinking their
relationships, including with Russia, including countries that
have had longstanding defense relationships with Russia. If
we're in a position to be a partner to them in ways that maybe
we couldn't be some decades ago, I think that is something we
need to be able to act on. And because, of course, if we do
not, we know who is likely to do it in our place.
So I agree with you, and it is something we are working on
and welcome working with Congress, as well, to look at how we
can do this more efficiently.
Mr. Wilson. And in line with that, I am really grateful
that, with the leadership of Chairman Greg Meeks and Ranking
Member Mike McCaul, that we just had a very overwhelming vote
to provide Lend-Lease for the people of Ukraine. I particularly
love the irony of this. In 2005, I had an opportunity to lead
an American delegation to show our affection and appreciation
of the people of Russia to place a wreath at the cemetery there
in Saint Petersburg the half a million people killed in an open
grave with the Siege of Leningrad.
While I was there, I was so pleasantly surprised to find
out that the reason for that success was American aid provided
through Lend-Lease, and now we will be providing Lend-Lease
aid, thanks to the Chairman, to the people of Kyiv, to the
people of Ukraine, to stop an invasion by a war criminal. And
so you had the war criminal Hitler, the war criminal Putin, and
now we are going to be there, as we provided Lend-Lease for 30
different countries.
So how is this going to be expedited?
Secretary Blinken. I very much look forward to looking at
that. We have a number of important tools and possibly to
include what you have now put forward. The supplemental that I
think is before you as of this morning has a number of very
important and immediate ways that we can get assistance and
sustained assistance to Ukraine, including more resources for
foreign military financing, which is vital; replenishing the
draw-down account, which has been used so effectively in order
to get security assistance to the Ukrainians. We've done eight
draw-downs to date.
But I'm happy to pursue this with you.
Mr. Wilson. And, ironically----
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time is expired. I now
recognize Representative Dina Titus of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Secretary. Last
week, the President announced that Prime Minister Mitsotakis
was coming. I know you do not want to step on any of his news
or get ahead of the President, but I wonder, in kind of
reference to your answer to Mr. Wilson's question about other
countries stepping up and trying to help countries who have had
oil cutoff, Greece has stepped up and said they would help
Bulgaria.
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Ms. Titus. What is the State Department doing with our
partners along kind of the southern plank of NATO to assist
them or increase trade or work on the pipeline, whatever?
Secretary Blinken. Greece has stepped up, you're right, in
a big way, not only in assisting the countries in question that
Congressman Wilson just referenced but also, as well, in
supporting Ukraine directly, and we deeply appreciate that. I
just was on the phone with the prime minister and others, and
that is, I think, a very important effort that Greece has
really stepped up on.
We are working in a variety of ways to support efforts to
promote cooperation, regional stability, energy security
throughout the Eastern Med. There are a number of projects that
are underway or could be underway soon, particularly with
regard to energy, where Greece would be a critical partner. We
are looking among other things also are very, I think,
compelling projects on electricity interconnectors in the
region that would involve, for example, Egypt to Cyprus and
Greece, as well as Israel, Cyprus, and Greece.
So there are a number of ongoing things where I think we
can strengthen both the regional security but also strengthen
energy security and strengthen partnerships among countries in
the region.
Ms. Titus. Well, that is encouraging. I'm glad to hear
that, and I am sure they will be, too.
Just really shifting gears, I want to ask you about the
disability rights, International Disability Rights. We passed
as part of the NDAA guidance for establishing a permanent
office within the State Department, and then, in the omnibus
last year we had $750,000 set aside for a special advisor. I
just wonder why the budget does not include funding for a
special advisor and why the department hadn't moved forward or
made the decision to permanently establish this Office of
International Disability Rights?
Secretary Blinken. I am happy to come back to you on that
to make sure that we do have the resources that we need to
carry out this vital mission, but we have a very strong leader
for the team. We have the office, I believe, that the funding
is appropriate and necessary, but I am happy to look at whether
something else needs to be done to support that mission.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you. The U.S. has a good reputation
internally, and I think we should lead around the world. And I
think having this office with the resources it needs to do that
will be commendable and recognized as such by our friends and
allies.
So thank you, and I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Andy Barr of Kentucky for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you and welcome back to the Committee, Mr.
Secretary. Under the previous JCPOA, Russia was allowed to
undertake civil nuclear projects in Iran worth billions of
dollars. I think Mr. Green was asking you----
Secretary Blinken. Yes, he addressed that.
Mr. Barr [continuing]. About this, as well. Now, in the
midst of this Russian invasion of Ukraine, Russia is sitting at
the negotiating table in Vienna seeking to revive this deal,
setting up an escape valve through Tehran to get relief from
international sanctions. A revived Iran deal would run directly
counter to the sanctions that have been imposed.
Can you commit, Mr. Secretary, to the Congress that any
renegotiated JCPOA would not enable Russia to profit off of
Iran?
Secretary Blinken. What I can commit to is that any renewed
JCPOA would not, in any way, be in contravention of the
sanctions----
Mr. Barr. No, I understand that, and I understand that is
your testimony. That is not exactly the question I am asking.
And I think the fact that you cannot answer that question is
troubling.
I think a renegotiated JCPOA needs to address that issue.
We do not want to give a financial lifeline to Russia at this
time.
Sir, in the Russian buildup before the invasion, it was the
Administration'/Space National Guard position that imposing
sanctions and arming the Ukrainians before invasion would have
been provocative. This proved to be spectacularly wrong, and we
learned that inadequate deterrence invites aggression. Has the
Administration learned its lesson and will it accelerate
military assistance to Taiwan to enhance deterrence?
Secretary Blinken. With respect to--that's not accurate. In
fact, before the aggression, well before the aggression, we
made sure that the Ukrainians had in their hands the weapons
that they needed to deal with it. There was a Presidential
draw-down of $60 million Labor Day, there was another one of
$200 million in December before Christmas.
Now, to your point----
Mr. Barr. Well, let's get to Taiwan. We can have that
debate about pre-invasion of Ukraine, but I do want to
emphasize what Ranking Member McCaul, the point he was making,
which is that Taiwan and Twin Oaks has asked us for these
foreign military sales to be delivered. We haven't seen
delivery, and these are years in the making. Some of these
orders have come in and approved long previous to now.
Where are we on actually delivering that to establish that
deterrence?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I agree that there is a need to
further streamline the process of actually getting this
equipment, in many cases, made because really this goes to
supply chain issues, as you know, as well as delivery. There
has been about $18 billion in foreign military financing to
Taiwan since 2017. That has continued at the same pace. Another
$2.5 billion in direct commercial sales. But there are supply
chain issues that we need to work on----
Mr. Barr. Well, I would love to work with you on that.
Let's get those resolved. Let's get more lethal military
assistance to Taiwan as soon as possible.
The weakness, in my view, the weakness in the sanctions
regime against Russia right now is the general license for
energy-related transactions. I recognize that our European
allies' over-dependence on Russian energy has been an issue,
but I have a bill to close this loophole. I have raised this in
the Financial Services Committee with Secretary Yellen, with
Wally Adeyemo. They are open to this. Now we see Germany open
to the idea of a ban on crude oil imports. So I think our
European allies are coming around.
What is the Department of State's position on closing this
energy loophole, this general license, in our sanctions?
Secretary Blinken. We are working to do everything we can
to help the Europeans move off of Russian energy of one kind or
another as soon as possible, to include oil and ultimately to
include gas. I think, as we speak, the European Union is
looking very closely at this question of oil. I would
anticipate that they will take action on that in the weeks
ahead.
Gas is a slightly longer-term challenge because, as you
know, the reliance is built up over many decades.
Mr. Barr. Understand. My bill would allow for special
approval, specific waivers or licenses, special licenses but
not a general license on the gas, and escrow that and create a
carrot, not just a stick but a carrot for Putin that he would
get the proceeds of those sales only when he withdrew.
So I want you to take a look at that.
Secretary Blinken. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Barr. We passed the AXIS Act yesterday. That would
require your department to report to Congress on China support
to Russia on sanctions evasion. I ask for your commitment to
meet those statutorily imposed reports.
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. Finally, I represent a nonprofit in my
district for the last 56 years. The International Book Project
has shipped nearly 8 million books overseas to schools,
libraries, and community organizations in every country on the
globe. I will be submitting a question for the record to
inquire how States can increase awareness of the International
Book Project to embassies around the world----
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Blinken. Sounds like a wonderful project.
Mr. Barr. Yes. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. And let me just say at this juncture,
because of the hard stop that the Secretary has, we are going
to just have one pair of witnesses, one Democrat and one
Republican, and then we will be out of time. So I now will
recognize Representative Joaquin Castro of Texas who is the
chair of the Subcommittee on International Development and
International Organizations and Global Corporate Impact for 5
minutes, and then the Republican will be Representative Greg
Steube.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Secretary, for
your testimony today. I want to start with a question about
Mexico and our relationship with Mexico. The new U.S.-Mexico
Bicentennial Framework offers an opportunity to revitalize
security cooperation between our two nations with a focus on
human rights, public health, and accountability after the
failure of the drug war model of the Merida Initiative. In
fact, today, Mexico is facing record-high levels of homicides,
increased violence against women and journalists,
disappearances which are worsening because of corruption. They
are being done with impunity, and there seems to be negligence
in all aspects or many aspects of these from government.
What specific accountability mechanisms is the State
Department implementing in the framework to ensure that
Mexico's security forces and prosecutors' offices are
respecting human rights, investigating corruption, and holding
bad actors accountable?
Secretary Blinken. So, Congressman, thank you for that. We
have deepened our cooperation with Mexico across the board, and
we want to make sure that our cooperation, including in the
security sphere, is generally comprehensive and, of course,
works in both directions. And we also have within the State
Department but also DHS and other actors that are engaged with
the Mexican security services clear accountability measures to
make sure that any assistance that is provided is being
provided in the appropriate way and is being used in the
appropriate way. And if we see that that is not the case, we
will take action to correct it.
I am happy to come back to you, in the interest of time,
with more detail on how we are doing that, as well as also
refer you to some of the other agencies that are involved in
supporting and working with Mexico on security.
Mr. Castro. And I appreciate that. And one reason I think
that it is particularly important to focus on accountability
for security forces that we partner with in Mexico and
elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere is the potential for our
security assistance to end up feeding illicit arms trafficking
if we do not have the appropriate safeguards in place. And in
my view, this problem has worsened since the authority to
review many exports of small arms was shifted from the State
Department to the Commerce Department.
I was glad to see President Biden promise to reverse that
change during his campaign, and I just wanted to ask you that,
as we continue our work, will you work with me to fulfill the
President's promise to return oversight of small arms sales to
the State Department and pursue other measures to crack down on
arms trafficking in the Western Hemisphere?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. And I do not want to get
ahead of it, but we should have an arms sales policy coming out
shortly, and we have put, among other things, human rights very
much front and center in that policy, as well as making sure
that we can act efficiently to use these authorities.
So happy to talk to you offline about this, but we should
be coming forward with that shortly.
Mr. Castro. I will truncate my second question, which is on
the issue of diversity. I remain concerned by the under-
representation, for example, of Latino Americans at the State
Department, especially at the senior ranks. State's own data
show that only 3.8 of the Senior Executive Service and 6.8
percent of the Senior Foreign Service identified as Hispanic in
September. I led the effort, along with Barbara Lee, on the
Appropriations Committee to fund interns at the State
Department, which we now, of course, have successfully done.
And others, of course, helped, as well. But that was meant to
build the pipeline so that there are more people who can afford
to take on internships at the State Department.
So I want to ask you, that's an important piece of helping
to diversify, how is the implementation of that program going?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, first of all, thank you for
everything that you have done for a long time leading on this
effort. The paid internship piece is critical, and we are
grateful that we now have the authority to do that and funds to
do that. We are starting with about 200 paid internships. I
hope that we can build that up over the next few years. It is
just getting off the ground, but what I can tell you is this:
we have had thousands of applications since we have been able
to advertise the paid internships.
Mr. Castro. Wonderful. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And I
yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back, and now I yield
to Representative Greg Steube of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steube. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not going to
belabor the Afghanistan issue, but I just want to make clear,
because I came in as Representative Green was asking you the
question, so there is 126 American citizens that are still left
in Afghanistan, 37 of which want to return; is that correct?
Secretary Blinken. That's correct.
Mr. Steube. I have made my position on the disastrous
withdrawal of the Biden Administration and the State
Department. We are now over 6 months, and we still have
Americans stuck behind enemy lines with the Taliban. I have
made my positions clear on that.
I want to go and move to the Iran Revolutionary Guard----
Secretary Blinken. Could I just mention one thing----
Mr. Steube. No, because I only have four and a half minutes
and I am yielding a minute to Rep. Kim because you are only
here until 4:30.
You commented before the Senate on your position that the
foreign terrorist organization designation on the Iran
Revolutionary Guard will not be lifted unless the Revolutionary
Guard changes its behavior and ceases support for terrorism; is
that correct?
Secretary Blinken. That's correct.
Mr. Steube. Did Iran or the Revolutionary Guard stop their
support for terrorism after the JCPOA was reached?
Secretary Blinken. Iran's support for terrorism has
continued----
Mr. Steube. So that's a yes.
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. For a long time.
Mr. Steube. No, it continued. Did Iran detain 11 U.S. Navy
sailors during the period of U.S. participation in the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. It did for a brief period of time.
Mr. Steube. Did Iran illegally and unjustly detail
Americans during the period of U.S. participation in the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. It did and it continues to.
Mr. Steube. Did Iran's financial support for Hezbollah,
Hamas, and Palestinian Islamic Jihad increase during the period
of U.S. participation in the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. I cannot tell you if it increased, but
it was certainly sustained.
Mr. Steube. Did Iran's support for the Assad regime
increase during the period of U.S. participation in the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. I cannot tell you if it increased, but
it was sustained.
Mr. Steube. It was sustained. Did Iran's support for the
Houthis in Yemen increase during the period of remain the same
during the period of U.S. participation in the JCPOA?
Secretary Blinken. I would say it actually increased for
that period.
Mr. Steube. Recently, a group of 900 Gold Star family
members and wounded veterans who have been victims of the
Revolutionary Guard's terrorist activities sent President Biden
a letter asking him not to lift the FTO designation. Are you
familiar with that letter?
Secretary Blinken. I am familiar with the letter.
Mr. Steube. Do you have a copy of it?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I have seen it.
Mr. Steube. So what is the Administration's response to
those families?
Secretary Blinken. Again, Iran knows what it would have to
do in order to have that designation lifted. I would also say
that, over this period, including since the designation of the
IRGC with the FTO, it is a tax on Americans have gone up 400
percent.
Mr. Steube. So then there would be no anticipation then
that in any deal with them that you would release the FTO
designation on the Revolutionary Guard?
Secretary Blinken. Only if Iran takes necessary actions to
merit the lifting of the designation, and I would also note,
Congressman, that, were such a designation to be lifted under
whatever circumstances, it can always be reimposed if Iran
engages in actions that merit the imposition.
Mr. Steube. Well, I do not know why, given the litany list
of things that I just went through, when we were in the JCPOA,
when they were not supposed to be engaging in terrorist
activity where you just confirmed every single one of those
incidents where they did engage in terrorist activity, that
this Administration would even be considering to remove the
terrorist designation for the Revolutionary Guard. I certainly
do not support that. Those 900 Gold Star family members do not
support that. And with all the force that I have as a Member of
Congress and as a servicemember who served in Iraq and saw his
servicemember brothers and sisters attacked by Revolutionary
Guards, 15 percent of which U.S. combat fatalities in the Iraq
War were attributed to the Revolutionary Guard's activities, I
think it would be abysmal for this Administration to even
consider lifting that foreign terrorist designation. And I
would encourage you, and I know I am a Republican and you are a
Democrat and you are in a Democratic Administration, but
whatever encouragement I could give you to stay strong on that
and fight against terrorism. And if it is lifted, I will do
everything within my power to fight against any lifting of the
Iran Revolutionary Guard as a terrorist organization, and I
hope that this Administration will think very strongly about
any attempt to do that in any deal that they would be
negotiating with the Iranians.
With that, I will yield the remainder of my time to Rep.
Kim.
Secretary Blinken. And I am happy to go a little bit over.
I just want to say to you, Congressman, first of all, that I
appreciate what you said and we are both, of course, Americans
and we want the same things for our country. I am pleased to be
able to work with you and every member of this committee to
achieve them. Sometimes, we have differences of view on the
best way to achieve them, but we have the same objectives.
Certainly, when it comes to Iran, we very much, I know, share
the objective that it never acquire a nuclear weapon and that
it cease the egregious actions that it is undertaking,
including targeting Americans, including supporting proxies
that do the same thing, including going after our partners and
allies.
The question is really one for all of us to make with our
best judgment as to how can we be most effective doing that?
And, unfortunately, what we have seen over the last few years
is that the policy we inherited is not working. It has been a
failure. Iran's nuclear program is moving forward. Its tax,
including, notably, against Americans have increased, not
decreased, despite the maximum pressure.
So what I commit to very much is working with you, working
with every other member. And I particularly appreciate your
patriotism, your service, the Gold Star families. It's
extraordinary. But I commit to work with you to make sure
whatever we are doing is effective as possible in dealing with
the challenges that you rightfully point out.
Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. So put 1 minute on the clock of
Representative Kim. That was not Mr. Steube's turn.
Secretary Blinken. Good to see you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you very much. Congressman
Steube, I want to thank you for yielding.
A point of clarification, Secretary, are you willing to
stay a little more than just a minute that was allotted to me?
Secretary Blinken. Please, go ahead.
Mrs. Kim of California. Will that be OK, Chairman?
Chairman Meeks. Well, are we going to give the Secretary a
chance to ask a question----
Mrs. Kim of California. I just have a couple of areas that
I wanted to----
Secretary Blinken. Please go ahead.
Mrs. Kim of California [continuing]. So thank you very
much. Mr. Secretary, first of all, on Uyghur issues, your
budget request says that scaling up international climate
programs is a top priority for your department. So can you
commit to us that any international climate programs that you
approve will completely eliminate ties to the CCP's genocide
against Uyghurs, particularly to industries tied to Xinjiang
Province in the CCP's nationwide scheme of Uyghur forced labor,
such as the solar panel and lithium battery industries?
Secretary Blinken. We want to make sure two things,
Congresswoman. We want to make sure, first of all, that our
companies and others are not exporting to China tools that
could be used for the repression of Uyghurs. Similarly, we want
to make sure that we are not importing products that are made
with forced labor, including by Uyghurs. Sometimes, this takes
time to put into effect, but that is our determination.
Mrs. Kim of California. Sure.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Secretary Blinken. And I welcome receiving any further
questions from you. We can take them up on the record.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much.
Chairman Meeks. And, Mr. Secretary, you have indicated
previously under the question of Mr. Steube that there was a
question you wanted to answer in regards to Afghanistan. If
you----
Secretary Blinken. I think we have addressed that. Thank
you very much.
Chairman Meeks. So in closing, I would like to again thank
you, Mr. Secretary, for being our esteemed witness today, for
your insightful testimony and participation today. In the past
year, State Department has made tangible progress in helping to
diversify the Department staff and internships, modernize our
systems for passport processing, information technology,
payroll, and other processes, and launched the workplace
flexibilities, training, and other resources for our diplomats.
While this progress has been a great step in the right
direction, we know, of course, we always have more work to do.
But this budget request underscores the importance of diplomacy
and development and of the robust foreign assistance to foster
key alliances and partnerships to confront the gravest
challenges of our time.
So building deeper relationships and helping other
countries strengthen their democracies and defend themselves
against outside aggression, much like the Department and
broader U.S. Government is doing every day for Ukraine, it's
not just a matter of foreign policy. It makes Americans more
secure, it serves American's interest by ensuring a more
prosperous, stable world in which we all live. It shows that
unity is important. I think that the camera of history will
show that we are where we are now because of the unity of the
State Department and the Administration. Thirty nations of NATO
stayed together. Before, no one would have predicted that. It
is the work of the Administration and the State Department.
Diplomacy at work because we had to utilize that diplomacy to
keep those 30 nations together. We could have gone off by
ourselves, but we did not. Diplomacy means working with others,
not us by ourselves.
Our allies in Asia, in Africa, others on the Western
Hemisphere, all staying together, that is the work of
diplomacy. That is why it is so important to have our
Ambassadors and diplomats in various places around the world.
We were handcuffed for a while by not having Ambassadors in
certain key places. We have seen when they are there, diplomacy
works. It works in one way or the other. It works in the way
that if someone does decide to go off and be their own
aggressive self, diplomacy will surround them. And it works
also to prevent when we do not have someone with evil intent
from war from taking place.
So I want to thank you, and I am grateful for the
Department's strong requests for funding to continue to
modernize the Department and advance its foreign policy
objectives. Again, thank you, Mr. Secretary, for always being
receptive to me and Mr. McCaul in a bipartisan way in working,
and I look forward to continue to work with you and seeing the
result of your work to reform and lead the State in its vital
work.
So thank you, and this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, the above-entitled matter went off the record
at 4:42 p.m.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
