- MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-85

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-851PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      DARRELL ISSA, California
AMI BERA, California      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      LEE ZELDIN, New York
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California      BRIAN MAST, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      MARK GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      GREG STEUBE, Florida
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
SARA JACOBS, California          PETER MEIJER, Michigan
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina      NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
JIM COSTA, California      RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California      YOUNG KIM, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas       MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Information submitted for the record.............................     3

BILLS, RESOLUTIONS EN BLOC

H.R. 5497........................................................    10
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 5497 offered by
Mr. Meeks of New York..........................................    69
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
5497 offered by Mr. Perry of Pennsylvania......................   125
H. Res. 569......................................................   126
H. Res. 445......................................................   132
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H. Res. 445 offered by
Ms. Bass of California.........................................   147
H. Res. 720......................................................   157
H.R. 4914........................................................   187
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 4914 offered by
Mr. McCaul of Texas............................................   202
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
4914 offered by Mr. Perry of Pennsylvania......................   224
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
4914 offered by Mr. Perry of Pennsylvania......................   228

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................   232
Hearing Minutes..................................................   234
Hearing Attendance...............................................   235

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

Statement for the record submitted from Representative Jacobs....   236

INFORMATION SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Information submitted for the record.............................   237

MARKUP SUMMARY

Markup Summary...................................................   251

MARKUP OF VARIOUS MEASURES

Thursday, October 21, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:15 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gregory Meeks
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Meeks [presiding]. The Committee on Foreign
Affairs will come to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 4, the chair may postpone
further proceedings on approving any measure or matter or
adopting an amendment.
Without objection, all members will have 5 days to submit
statements or extraneous materials on today's business.
To insert statements into the record, please have your
staff email the previously circulated address or contact full
committee staff.
As a reminder to members joining remotely, please keep your
video function on at all times, even when not recognized by the
chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves.
Consistent with House rules, staff will only mute members, as
appropriate, when they are not under recognitions, to eliminate
background noise.
I see that we have a quorum.
We are, first, going to do a quick unanimous consent
agreement between me and the ranking member.
And I now recognize the ranking member.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a unanimous consent request.
Chairman Meeks. The ranking member is recognized for the
unanimous consent request.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For purposes of Section 4820(h)(2)(B) of Title 50 0f the
United States Code, and premised upon the National Interest
Determination described therein, I ask unanimous consent that
the committee authorize the disclosure of some non-business
confidential aggregate data derived from documents provided to
the committee by the Department of Commerce on May 18, 2021,
regarding export licensing decisions concerning entities on the
Entity List. Such authorization does not include the disclosure
of the applicants' names, trademarks, or brand names, item
descriptions, or ECCN or license numbers. And the Department of
Commerce will provide additional context on the export control
licensing process which will be included with the aggregate
data being authorized for disclosure.
Chairman Meeks. So ordered.
And the chairman and ranking member have reached an
agreement that the aggregate data contained in these two
documents are to be released, consistent with 50 U.S.C.
4820(h)(2)(B)(ii). And I'm placing these documents into the
record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. I want to thank the ranking member for his
UC request and for working together to get a mutually agreed-
upon arrangement.
Now let's move on to the markup.
As members were notified yesterday, we intend to, first,
consider four measures and their amendment en bloc. We will,
then, move to consider one measure and its amendments
separately. Any roll call votes will be postponed until the end
of the markup.
Pursuant to notice, for purposes of markup, I now call up
the measures and their amendments that were previously
circulated to members' offices.
Without objection, they will be considered en bloc, and
each measure is considered as read and the amendments to each
are considered as read and are agreed to.
And without objection, after remarks, the committee will
vote to order the measures favorably reported en bloc, as
amended, if amended, and any amendment or amendments to each
bill shall be reported as a single amendment in the nature of a
substitute.
The measures in the en bloc package are:
H.R. 5497, the BURMA Act of 2021, with a Perry Amendment
No. 138.
H.Res. 569, Expressing continued solidarity with the
Lebanese people after the devastating explosions at the Port of
Beirut on August 4, 2020, and the continued efforts to form a
secure, independent, and democratic Lebanon.
H.Res. 445, Condemning all violence and human rights abuses
in Ethiopia, and calling on the government of Ethiopia and the
government of the State of Eritrea to remove all Eritrean
troops from Ethiopia, and for all belligerents in the conflict,
including the Ethiopian National Defense Forces, the Tigray
People's Liberation Front, and Amhara regional forces, and
other armed groups, to cease all hostilities, protect human
rights, allow unfettered humanitarian access, and cooperate
with independent investigations of credible atrocity
allegations.
H.Res. 720, Calling for stability and the cessation of
violence and condemning ISIS-affiliated terrorist activity in
northern Mozambique, including the Cabo Delgado Province, and
for other purposes.
And H.R. 5497, the BURMA Act of 2021 with the Perry
Amendment No. 369.
[The bill, resolutions, and associated amendments en bloc
follow:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. I now recognize myself to speak on the en
block package.
I support all of these bipartisan measures. As chair of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, I take seriously this
committee's responsibility to identify and respond to human
rights abuses taking place around the world. From day one, this
committee has worked tirelessly to do just that, whether it be
on behalf of the Uyghurs, who face genocide in China; the
women, youth, and minority groups of Afghanistan whose futures
are at risk under the Taliban; the people who facing crises on
multiple fronts throughout Ethiopia or in Cambodia, in Haiti,
in Iran, El Salvador, in Russia, in Belarus. You name it, time
and again, this committee has, and will continue, to work
vigorously to respond to human rights abuses in a swift,
forceful, and responsible manner.
The measures being considered today continue this
committee's important responsibility for helping those in need
of our country's help and support.
I was proud to introduce H.R. 5497, the BURMA Act of 2021,
along with Ranking Member McCaul and Representatives Bera and
Chabot, chair and ranking member of the Subcommittee on Asia,
the Pacific, Central Asia, and Nonproliferation, respectively.
And my thanks to Mr. Chabot and Mr. McCaul, in particular,
for working with me
[audible malfunction] bipartisan.
Democracy is under threat around the world, and Congress
cannot, and must not, stand idly by when a thuggish military
blatantly disregards the will of citizens, as happened in Burma
in February. This legislation imposes targeted sanctions in
response to the illegal and illegitimate coup and the ensuing
human rights abuses, which has cost the lives of over a
thousand people and displaced thousands more.
We need to support the Burmese people in their struggle for
human rights and a path toward democracy. My bill authorizes
State and USAID to provide greater civil society and
humanitarian support in Burma and surrounding countries. It
calls on the State Department to finally make a determination
as to whether the repression of the Rohingya constitutes war
crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide; position the
United States to step up diplomatic pressure on Burma, and
calls for the United Nations to take more decisive action
against the military, to send a powerful message.
This bill has been endorsed by over 240 Burmese diaspora
and civil society organizations, as well as the National Unity
Government. There is overwhelming support for this bill from
those fighting for freedom in Burma. Let's show them that we
stand in solidarity with the people of Burma.
H.Res. 445, by Representative Bass, chair of the
Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and Global Human Rights,
condemns all violence and human rights abuses throughout
Ethiopia, and calls on all combatants to cease hostilities,
protect human rights, allow unfettered humanitarian access, and
cooperate with independent investigations of atrocities carried
out by all sides.
The crisis in northern Ethiopia threatens the fabric and
stability of the country and the Greater Horn of Africa. And
this resolution comes at a time when the government of Ethiopia
has lost a fresh offensive and airstrikes in recent days.
The United States and the international community continue
to implore all parties to the conflict to consider the
economic, political, and humanitarian consequences of a
conflict that is spiraling out of control. This committee
remains deeply troubled by ongoing reports of rampant human
abuse, human rights abuses, excessive and targeted ethnic
violence, and humanitarian blockages that have caused the death
and displacement of so many innocent people.
This important resolution lays out specific steps all
stakeholders should take, including the government of Ethiopia,
the United States, and other members of the international
community, to encourage an end to the conflict, establish a
meaningful and inclusive national dialog, and provide
humanitarian support for the most vulnerable populations
throughout the country.
This resolution is another measure that demonstrates the
United States' commitment to bringing an end to this violent
and devastating conflict. The humanitarian crisis in northern
Ethiopia remains the subject of great attention by this
committee, and I'm grateful to my colleague for her work on
this resolution.
A resolution by Congresswoman Sara Jacobs condemns the
violence targeting of civilians and terrorist attacks carried
out by ISIS in Mozambique, in the northern Mozambican Province
of Cabo Delgado. I am deeply concerned about the ongoing
humanitarian crisis created by relentless and brutal attacks on
innocent people, including young children in Cabo Delgado
Province, but I am encouraged by the work regional partners,
such as Rwanda and South Africa, have done to help quell some
of the violent attacks and retake territory from ISIS.
The government of Mozambique must continue to work with the
international community to address the widespread displacement,
food and security, and economic devastation brought about by
the years of long violence in the north. The United States has
demonstrated its commitment to support the Mozambican
government in this regard, as well as through security sector
assistance provided by the Department of State and the
Department of Defense.
This resolution calls on the Mozambican government to work
with us and the broader international community to help bring
an end to the conflict, provide humanitarian support to the
vulnerable and displaced populations in Cabo Delgado, and
promote human rights and the rule of law, as they work to
address instability in the north.
The committee will continue to watch these developments
closely, and I am heartened to see colleagues' hard work and
dedication to moving this resolution forward.
And finally, H.Res. 569 expresses solidarity for the
Lebanese following the devastating explosions at the Port of
Beirut on August 4th, 2020, and causing the Lebanese government
to investigate the blast, boot out corruption, and work closely
with international organizations, like the IMF and the World
Bank, to stabilize the economy.
Lebanon continues to struggle with prolonged fiscal
challenges and humanitarian needs. And I, along with a number
of Members, have called for a continued U.S. engagement and
support to address these crises.
Finally, as tensions on the investigation into the blast
rise, it is imperative that we make clear we support the right
of the Lebanese people to engage in peaceful demonstration and
assembly in order to achieve accountability, democratic
political representation, increased civil rights, anti-
corruption reforms.
I strongly support all the measures that we are considering
today in the en bloc, and I urge all members to do the same.
I now recognize our ranking member, Mr. McCaul of Texas,
for his remarks.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
markup. And I also want to thank you for including my Havana
Syndrome Attacks Response Act. I really appreciate you working
with me on this important bill, and our updated text will be
reflected in the ANS I will offer today.
I would also like to thank Mr. LaHood and Mr. Issa for
their work on a bipartisan resolution, continued solidarity
with the Lebanese people after the devastating explosions at
the Port of Beirut last August. Their resolution also
highlights Iran's and Hezbollah's destructive, destabilizing
activities in Lebanon. And it's important to show bipartisan
support for their continued efforts to form a secure,
independent, and democratic Lebanon.
I'm proud to be the lead cosponsor on several measures of
today's markup: Chairman Meeks' BURMA Act; Representative
Jacobs' resolution calling for stability in northern Mozambique
and condemning ISIS-affiliated terrorists, and Representative
Bass' resolution condemning all violence and human rights
abuses in Ethiopia.
Just within the last few days, the fighting in northern
Ethiopia has intensified. The humanitarian need is
catastrophic. The people are dying of starvation, going days
without food, and some have resorted to eating leaves.
The Ethiopian government must allow food, trucks, fuel, and
medical supplies to enter Tigray, and response efforts need to
expand into the Afar and the Amhara regions. In my assessment,
the horrific reports that have emerged, including the discovery
of mass graves and the use of rape and starvation as weapons of
war, are just the tip of the iceberg of the atrocities that
have been committed. Innocent civilians are paying the price of
this brutal war, and all sides are guilty. The fighting must
stop immediately.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I want to talk about one measure
that is not on today's markup. Our members requested that this
committee consider House Resolution 701, a resolution of
inquiry to seek specific information on the Biden
Administration's withdrawal from Afghanistan. Since mid-August,
I have sent the Administration seven letters seeking specific
facts and information about the Afghanistan withdrawal and its
aftermath. I still have not received any satisfactory responses
to my questions.
And as you know, Mr. Chairman, resolutions of inquiry have
been a privileged oversight tool for over 200 years. According
to the House rule in place since 1879, once filed, they are
entitled to a prompt committee markup, and they are a tool
regularly used by the minority, including by many House
Democrats during the prior Administration.
So, I was disappointed to learn that Democrat leaders
quietly threw this centuries-old precedent out the window,
protecting the Biden Administration from answering basic
questions about their many self-inflicting crises. They did
this by burying in a rule that they have quietly and repeatedly
extended.
This committee has a long history of prioritizing national
security over politics, of working together in a bipartisan
fashion. There is bipartisan support for a full and vigorous
investigation into what caused the botched withdrawal from
Afghanistan.
I appreciate the hearing we had with Secretary Blinken and
your request for his dissent cable, Mr. Chairman, and I hope we
can do more on this. I wish this resolution could have been
included in today's markup. I hope we may be able to consider
it in the future.
I ask unanimous consent to submit for today's record the
text of the resolution of inquiry introduced by 23 members of
this committee on October the 5th.
Chairman Meeks. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

********* COMMITTEE INSERT 3 **********
Mr. McCaul. And thank you, Mr. Chairman. And with that, I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Let me just quickly respond to the ranking member. I note
that the ranking member is raising his resolution of inquiry in
his opening remarks, and I really appreciate his desire to
conduct oversight on Afghanistan and, in particular, on the
withdrawal that unfolded in August 2021.
And this committee will certainly continue to assess those
20 days. But I also hope that we can also acknowledge the
strategic failure in Afghanistan wasn't simply about those 20
days in August, but, rather, about the past 20 years of our
involvement in the country. And any honest or credible review
of the withdrawal and evacuation efforts must also include a
broader look at the years of Afghanistan policy.
And I just also want to be clear that this committee will
continue its oversight work, work that we began even prior to
the President's announcement this past April that the United
States would follow through on withdrawal of troops from
Afghanistan.
Last, I also think it is important for the record to show
that, in this Congress alone, House leadership and this
committee have held more than 30 Member or staff-level
briefings and hearings, unclassified and classified, with
current and former Administration officials, with international
organizations and outside experts on Afghanistan. And there are
more to come.
And I am compelled to point out to the ranking member's,
you know, that I wish it had not happened in the past. It was a
failure of Republican leadership to conduct rigorous oversight
during the previous Administration, including the deal the
former President had with the Taliban.
Let me, also, say that oversight is at the heart of this
committee's activities, and moving forward, we will continue
our critical oversight function.
So, with that, I now recognize members of the committee by
seniority, alternating between Democrats and Republicans, for
the purpose of speaking on the en bloc package. If you miss
your turn, please let our staff know, and we will come back to
you.
I now recognize Representative Brad Sherman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
I support all four of the bills in the en bloc.
Briefly, I commend Mr. LaHood for bringing forth the
resolution, so that we can support and stand in solidarity with
the Lebanese people and for a secure, independent, and
democratic Lebanon.
Chairman Meeks. You're on mute, Mr. Sherman. You're on
mute.
Mr. Sherman. Can I be heard?
Mr. Levin. Mr. Chairman, I hear him.
Mr. Sherman. Can I be heard?
Mr. Levin. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Chairman, can you hear me?
Chairman Meeks. We cannot hear you, Mr. Sherman. We will
come back to you.
We will come back to Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Chairman, the issue may be in the committee
room.
Chairman Meeks. I yield now to Representative Ted Deutch of
Florida, the chair of the Subcommittee on the Middle East,
North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Chair, we can all hear him.
Mr. Sherman. Can I be heard?
Mr. Levin. I do not think he can hear any of us.
Chairman Meeks. As we try to resolve the problems of audio,
we will go to Representative Karen Bass, who is here, of
California, who is the chair of the Subcommittee on Africa,
Global Health, and Global Human Rights.
Ms. Bass. The benefits of being here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member McCaul, and African
Subcommittee Ranking Member Chris Smith, for helping to lead
this bipartisan ANS to H.Res. 445, Condemning all violence and
human rights abuses in Ethiopia, and calling for all combatants
in the conflict in northern Ethiopia to cease all hostilities,
respect human rights, allow unfettered humanitarian access, and
cooperate with independent investigations of credible atrocity
allegations on all sides.
I recently led a quick trip to Ethiopia, where
Representative Jacobs and I met with Prime Minister Abiy and
other government officials and civil society, to see how the
international community can assist in helping to stop the
violence that has killed thousands and left more fleeing their
homes. I want to reiterate that I do not believe that there is
a military solution to this conflict, and I am concerned the
country is fracturing and will only get worse without a
national dialog.
I am also concerned that Ethiopia is in danger of sanctions
from the Administration, as well as compromising its ability to
participate in AGOA, if the violence continues.
While in Ethiopia, I met not only with the Prime Minister
and members of the cabinet, but also with the Ethiopia Human
Rights Commission, the U.N. Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa, and the Ethiopian Parliament, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, YALI Fellows, and the Chamber of
Commerce.
Representative Jacobs and I wanted to hear all sides on the
issue on the ground and articulate that the only way forward is
negotiated peace. No one ethnic group or party can say that
they are winning during this conflict. It is bad for people's
welfare and the country overall.
This conflict is also hurting the country's economy and
negatively affecting the ability to conduct business. It is
also having a post-traumatic effect on young people and people
in general that are deeply disturbed by the conflict and
violence and just want their country to return to peace.
The conflict in the Tigray region alone has forced 60,000
Ethiopians to seek safety in Sudan; 24 million across the
country are suffering from food insecurity. Ethiopia has always
been a pillar of the continent and a key contributor to
advancing peace and security across the region.
While visiting the country, I also urged the government to
allow humanitarian assistance into the country, particularly in
Tigray, and let workers do their jobs without harassment or
threat of violence.
Like some of my colleagues on this committee, I have a
large Ethiopian diaspora in my district in California, and I
have tried to hear all sides of the situation. And I am fully
aware that all stakeholders have a part in contributing to the
conflict in the country.
I want to lead this resolution because I want to see a
peaceful resolution to this multifaceted conflict that is
complicated by ethnicity, politics, history, and a desire for
power.
The resolution calls for the immediate cessation of the
violence between all combatants in the conflict in Ethiopia. It
denounces the harassment and intimidation of journalists and
AID workers and the expulsion of senior U.N. officials
responsible for supporting humanitarian response efforts. It
urges the government of Ethiopia to cooperate with independent
and transparent investigations of all human rights abuses and
atrocities committed by all sides in the course of the conflict
in northern Ethiopia, and immediately granting full and
unfettered humanitarian access for personnel and supplies,
including necessary commodities like fuel and medicine into
areas affected by the conflict.
It is reported that there needs to be as many as 100 trucks
a day going into the Tigray region. What we learned while we
were there is that less than 10 trucks a day go, but, also,
many of the trucks are not returned. And so, the trucks need to
be returned from the Tigray region as well.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to speak on another
bipartisan resolution led by my friend from California,
Representative Jacobs, H.Res. 720, Calling for stability and
the cessation of violence, and condemning the ISIS-affiliated
terrorist activity in northern Mozambique. The resolution,
among other things, encourages the government of Mozambique to
ensure humanitarian workers have access to vulnerable
populations where the violence is constant.
And I ask my colleagues to support this resolution and all
the other resolutions en bloc.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey,
who is the ranking member of the Subcommittee on Africa, Global
Health, and Global Human Rights, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of years ago, August 2018, Karen Bass and I
traveled to Ethiopia together; met with Prime Minister Abiy,
who was in the beginning of his term. And we were greatly
impressed with the leadership he was showing. Obviously, he got
the Nobel Peace Prize. And what a difference a couple of years
have made.
There are serious problems now in Ethiopia, as we all know,
and H.Res. 445, offered by Karen, condemns all violence and
human rights abuses in Ethiopia and seeks accountability and,
hopefully, reconciliation.
Ethiopia, as we all know, is a great nation dating back
thousands of years. Ethiopia is ethnically and religiously
diverse, and its diaspora has deeply enriched life in the
United States.
It is also of great
[audio malfunction] in the Horn of Africa and as a gateway
to eastern and central Africa. It is the source of the Blue
Nile, which has brought it into conflict with Egypt. Because of
its location and outside significance, it is being targeted by
radical Islamists and the Chinese Communist Party. As we speak,
Ethiopia is a country on the verge of implosion.
Today's resolution, which has been worked on meticulously
by Chairwoman Bass, Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member McCaul, and
me, reflects changes that have taken place in Ethiopia since
the conflict began in Tigray province in November of last year.
This urgent resolution strives to be evenhanded and
recognizes the fact that much of Ethiopia is currently in a
profound state of unrest, not simply Tigray. It recognizes all
bad actors, not simply singling out the Ethiopian government
and the Amhara regional government, but also the Oromo
Liberation Army and the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front, or
TPLF. The TPLF, of course, governed Ethiopia with a very heavy
hand for decades under the strong-arm rule of Prime Minister
Meles, and bears an enormous responsibility for the unrest we
see unfolding now.
First, because it created a system of ethnic federalism
which created regional States divided upon ethnic lines. That
has inevitably led to discord and ethnic cleansing.
Second, because the TPLF precipitated the immediate crisis,
as the resolution acknowledges, by leading an attack on the
northern command of the Ethiopian National Defense Forces.
And third, after the Ethiopian government had declared a
unilateral cease-fire, by ignoring it and taking the conflict
into Amhara and Afar States.
I would note, parenthetically, back in 2005, I visited with
President Meles after he had an egregiously flawed election,
and then, introduced the human rights bill to hold him and his
government accountable. Don Payne, who was then my ranking
member, joined me in that. And we did, together, get the bill
passed in the House. Unfortunately, it died in the Senate.
The resolution also recognizes that, just as each group in
Ethiopia has its share of victimizers, each group does have its
share of victims, whether from Tigray, Amhara, Oromia, Ogaden,
or Afar--the list goes on. This is one of the great tragedies
of Ethiopia, inter-ethnic violence as well as intra-ethnic
violence. It threatens to shatter this great diverse nation.
Mr. Chairman, according to the World Food Program report
issued this month, there are now 1.7 million people facing
emergency levels of hunger in the Afar and Amhara regions and
over 700,000 in Amhara and 140,000 in Afar being displaced.
H.Res. 445 calls for the cessation of all hostilities,
unfettered humanitarian access, and respect of human rights,
and calls for independent investigations of credible atrocity
allegations.
I also want to express, briefly, my strong support for
H.Res. 569, authored by Mr. LaHood, Expressing continued
solidarity with the Lebanese people after the devastating
explosions in the Port of Beirut on August 4th, 2020, which
also resulted in the death of 218 individuals and wounded an
estimated 7,000. Some estimates say that one-half of the city
of Beirut was damaged.
Accordingly, H.Res. 569 calls on Lebanon to perform a
thorough and transparent investigation into the tragedy and
hold those responsible accountable. It presses Lebanon to
continue efforts to build the rule of law and respect
fundamental rights, and it calls for combating terrorist groups
like Hezbollah, ISIS, and Al Qaeda. In particular, the
resolution is important because it does condemn Hezbollah,
which, backed by Iran, is responsible for so much of what
afflicts Lebanon and also threatens our good friend and ally,
Israel.
I yield back the balance of my time, and I thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Brad Sherman of California
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I rise in support of the en bloc and all four
measures included in it.
I commend Mr. LaHood for bringing forward the resolution in
support of our solidarity with the Lebanese people and a
secure, independent, and democratic Lebanon.
I commend Sara Jacobs for her resolution condemning the
ISIS-affiliated terrorist activities in norther Mozambique.
I commend the chairman for so many things, but including
his BURMA Act, an act that I have cosponsored not only today,
but in prior Congresses. It is tragic to see what is happening
in Burma, what the government there calls Myanmar. And we do
need to react to twin tragedies. One is the loss of democracy
with the Tatmadaw taking over, and it is entirely appropriate,
as this resolution provides or as this bill provides, that we
stop the importation of precious and semiprecious gemstones;
that we create a special coordinator for Burmese democracy;
that we work multinationally to impose sanctions on the
Myanmar-Burma regime.
But we cannot speak of Burma or Myanmar without also
focusing on the Rohingya people. And that is why this bill also
calls for the State Department to issue a genocide
determination. The government of Myanmar-Burma must, if it
wishes to continue to have international support in exercising
sovereignty on the Rakhine State, show that it is willing to
defend the people who live there, and have a right to live
there. And that certainly includes the Rohingya. It starts by
giving them full citizenship documentation and protecting them,
rather than exposing them to violence.
And finally, we have the resolution on Ethiopia, on Tigray.
What we see there is tragic so far. We see 70 or 80 thousand
Tigrayans who have fled to Sudan, and we have to do everything
we can to help them. But we see millions of Tigrayans who face
death from starvation and attendant diseases. And we see a
blockade of Tigray, not even allowing in U.N. food and
medicine. The bodies we see in the river are just the tip of
the iceberg. We could be seeing millions of deaths.
That is why this bill calls, also, for the State Department
to determine whether we are witnesses a genocide in Tigray.
This is why the United States must provide the diplomatic tools
to move toward a cease-fire, and why we must encourage the
African Union and other regional partners to play a role in
mediating this crisis.
But first and foremost is the urgent delivery of
humanitarian aid. And nothing is more outrageous than the
blockade of the trucks trying to get in. We do need to explore
bringing in humanitarian by air, whether it be by landing the
planes or dropping the aid. But we can only bring in a small
portion of the aid that is necessary. We need the trucks.
What is perhaps most outrageous is the Eritrean blockade of
the border between Tigray and Sudan. I am reluctant to expose
American Armed Forces to risk of their safety at anytime, but
the American Navy could interrupt Eritrean commerce on the high
seas at anytime, and it would certainly be just to do so, as
long as Eritrea blockades humanitarian aid to the people of
Tigray.
So, we need to pass this bill now, but we need to look at
more forceful actions as well, to make sure that, while we deal
with the politics of northern Ethiopia, we at least make sure
that we are not witnessing another Rwanda, another near-
genocide or genocide, or a mass starvation event.
And for the cross-border terrorism or cross-border
interdiction of critically needed humanitarian assistance to be
carried out by Eritrean forces is simply outrageous, and there
is something we can do about it without undue risk to our
forces. I know that.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Votes have been called on the House floor. I believe we
have two votes on the House floor.
So, the committee will stand in recess until after House
votes.
[Recess.]
Chairman Meeks. Committee will now come in session. I now
recognize Representative Steve Chabot of Ohio, who's the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific,
Central Asia, and Nonproliferation for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And it has already been mentioned that we have a number of
very good bills before us today, including Mr. Issa and Mr.
LaHood's resolution on the worsening situation in Lebanon, and
Ranking Member McCaul's bill on Havana Syndrome and a number of
others.
But in the interest of time I'm going to focus my remarks
on H.R. 5497, the Burma Act, legislation which you, Mr.
Chairman, and I introduced in response to the worsening
situation in Burma.
Let me begin with some history about this legislation. Back
in September 2017, the Burmese military began a genocidal
campaign to permanently drive the Rohingya out of Burma, which
resulted in over 700,000 Rohingya refugees fleeing from Rakhine
State, Burma, into neighboring Bangladesh. They remain there
today without any realistic or meaningful hope at this point at
least of returning home.
This campaign consisted of widespread systematic and
premeditated human rights abuses, horrific stuff, including
barbaric killings, gang rapes, and the burning of around 400
Rohingya villages. According to a partial State Department
report on these atrocities, about half of the Rohingya surveyed
said that they had personally witnesses a rape, while about 80
percent had witnessed personally killings and the destruction
of villages.
In response to these atrocities, then-Ranking Member Eliot
Engel and I crafted the predecessor of this legislation, which
would have imposed sanctions on the military and deployed
several other tools to address longstanding concerns about
Burma. While the legislation passed in the House several times,
the Senate failed to take it up.
Fast-forward to February 1 of this year, and as everyone
here knows, the Burmese military seized control in a coup and
detained Aung San Suu Kyi and President (inaudible) several
other NLD elected officials, and a significant number of
innocent civilians.
The generals have seized power before. But this time, the
response has been different. The people of Burma, who come from
all walks of life, from students, to doctors, to government
workers, to farmers have courageously stood up against the
military with peaceful protest and mass strikes and other civil
disobedience.
The military's response has been predictably brutal. The
crackdown has thus far killed over 1,000 people and left over
7,000 in prison. This repression has pushed the country toward
civil war as the generals stubbornly refuse to restore
democracy. This coup is a blatant violation of the rights of
the Burmese people.
Self-government is not some sort of temporary arrangement
or gift from the military, it's a right that's owed to the
people of Burma. The generals cannot simply back out of
democracy when it no longer serves their purposes.
We updated the Burma Act to provide some measure of
accountability for both the genocide back in 2017 and this
year's coup, and to reflect the sanctions the Biden
Administration has already imposed on the Burmese military. The
new version of the legislation will levy stronger sanctions and
provide additional assistance to the people of Burma.
Mr. Chairman, this legislation could go a long way toward
putting Burma back on the path toward democracy. It's way
overdue that we enact legislation to sanction the Burmese
military for its many crimes, so I would urge my colleagues to
support this critical legislation.
And before I close, I'd like to mention just two others
things. First, as I've said many times before, we need to take
seriously, very seriously, the challenge of the Chinese
Community Party. And it's clear that the Commerce Department
unfortunately isn't acting up to where they need to be.
A few days ago, China, for example, tested a game-changing
hypersonic missile. They got the technology from us. So I would
like to associate myself with comments of the Ranking Member
McCaul.
The PRC is getting more and more dangerous. And we cannot
afford to have anyone involved in our national security effort
that's not operating at peak performance. To me, it sounds like
someone was asleep at the switch, considering that this missile
took virtually everybody by surprise.
And like Ranking Member McCaul, I also want to address an
item before I close that we are not marking up today, and
that's that at the beginning of this month, Mr. McCaul and a
lot of us, including myself, introduced H.Res 701, a resolution
of inquiry seeking information from the Administration
regarding the Afghan withdrawal debacle and the decisionmaking
behind this national disgrace.
Such a resolution is supposed to be privileged either here
in committee or on the floor. Unfortunately, Speaker Pelosi is
so scared of proper oversight of the Biden Administration that
the Rules Committee has turned off the privilege for
resolutions of inquiry, a privilege that's existed for about
200 years.
We have a constitutional oversight responsibility, this
committee does, and on this score the majority is failing to
fulfill its duty to the American people. And with that, I yield
back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative Sara Jacobs of California, who is the
Vice Chair of the Subcommittee on International Development,
International Organizations, and Global Corporate Social Impact
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for
supporting my resolution calling for stability and the
cessation of violence in northern Mozambique.
My team and I actually did some research and found out that
this is the first time the Committee has marked up legislation
on Mozambique since the year 2000, which just so happened to be
your resolution, Mr. Chair. So I am proud that we are shining a
light on the situation in the country today.
I also want to thank Chairwoman Bass and Congresswoman Kim
for partnering with me. This bipartisan resolution not only
condemns the violence perpetrated by ISIS Mozambique against
civilians and children, but also calls attention to the
underlying grievances fueling violent extremism in northern
Mozambique, including human rights violations by security
forces, steep corruption, and historical socio-economic
marginalization on Cabo Delgado.
It urges the government of Mozambique to address the
conflict and restore security in a manner that respects
civilians and human rights and encourages donor governments to
consider this in their support as well.
We need to make sure our approach and the international
community's approach is not just through a counterterrorism
lens, but is actually taking a comprehensive approach to
address the conflict. And this resolution calls on us to do
just that.
If we're serious about calling for an end to this violence,
we need to get serious about the factors that are driving it.
I'm proud to lead this important resolution, and I urge my
colleagues to support it.
I'd also like to speak on Chairwoman Bass's resolution on
Ethiopia.
I, like many of my colleagues, have been following the
devastating conflict and humanitarian crisis in northern
Ethiopia that began in Tigray over the past several months, and
it's heartbreaking. I recently traveled to Ethiopia with
Chairwoman Bass, and I can say that this conflict is extremely
complicated with a lot of legitimate historical grievances from
all parties.
This resolution takes the important step of recognizing the
horrific atrocities taking place and urging for perpetrators to
immediately cease violence against civilians.
I'd also like to recognize and condemn the recent military
air strikes against Tigray's capital, Mekelle, which has
reportedly resulted in the loss of civilian lives, including
children. We are also increasingly seeing deteriorating
humanitarian situations in both Afar and Amhara, with enduring
challenges with humanitarian access and mass internal
displacement.
The people of Ethiopia are suffering. Lives are ending
needlessly, and the violence must stop. I thank the Chairwoman
for her leadership on this issue, and I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back the balance of
her time.
Mr. Connolly. Would the--excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Would the
gentlelady yield to me? This is Mr. Connolly.
Ms. Jacobs. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentlelady.
And I certainly support the package in front of us today. I
just wanted to respond both to Mr. McCaul and Mr. Chabot and
their comments about the privilege resolution with respect to
the evacuation of Kabul.
You know, what's sauce for the goose is sauce for the
gander. If we're going to do that, we're going to have a
resolution that looks at the catastrophic decisions made by the
Trump Administration in Doha, Qatar, that led directly to the
downfall of Afghanistan's military government and to the
release of 5,000 prisoners, including many terrorists.
So there will be such a resolution so that we make sure
we're looking at the full context of what happened in
Afghanistan, and that we hold everyone who is responsible
accountable.
I thank my friend for yielding.
Ms. Jacobs. I yield.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Joe Wilson of South Carolina, who's the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa, and
Global Counterterrorism for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Greg Meeks and
Ranking Member Mike McCaul, for your efforts to bring these
bipartisan measures before the Committee today. I support House
Resolution 569.
On August 4, 2020, a massive explosion of improperly stored
ammonium nitrate at the Port of Beirut killed over 200
individuals and devastated nearby high density housing and
infrastructure. I received a call about the explosion from a
former staff member who was living in Lebanon, who thankfully
was not home in her nearby apartment, which was devastated, at
the time of the disaster.
Evidence indicates that officials who were made aware of
the improper storage posing a risk well before the explosion
occurred. This speaks further to the corruption and negligence
in Lebanon as the country spirals further into economic crisis.
It is concerning that officials refuse to meet the needs of the
Lebanese people calling for transparency, basic human rights,
and an end to corruption.
Sadly, the new Lebanese Government does not inspire
confidence, especially with Hezbollah increasing dominance over
the cabinet and State institutions, including the very vital
Lebanese armed forces.
On a visit to Beirut, I have been inspired by meeting so
many dedicated patriots of the country. And in my home State of
South Carolina, the citizens of Lebanese heritage are valued
leaders in business, government, and community service. That's
why the people of Lebanon deserve better.
We should support maintaining expanding sanctions against
the Iranian-backed Hezbollah and its allies. The Biden
Administration greenlighting of the Egyptian pipeline into
Lebanon benefiting the brutal Assad regime will do nothing to
ease the suffering of the people of Lebanon and will benefit
Assad and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, which threatens Israel
with additional rocket attacks.
President Biden should recognize the threat to Israel and
America by Hezbollah, Iran, and Assad. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Dina Titus of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
bringing these bills. I'm a cosponsor of a number of them, and
I support the rest.
I want to also thank Chairwoman Bass for her leadership on
the House Resolution 445 and thank her for allowing me to work
with her on this, because I have a lot of constituents who are
interested in this outcome.
Since the Ethiopian conflict began in November 2020,
international efforts to quell the violence really have been
less than fruitful. And as you have heard from others this
week, just proved and showed that the situation is worsening
and the violence is escalating.
This serves as a first step, but it cannot be the last, in
confronting the brutality that's been perpetuated by all sides
in this conflict. I strongly condemn the use of military
strikes against civilian population centers throughout the
country.
And I hope that the Ethiopian Prime Minister and his allied
Eritrean forces, along with representatives from the Tigray
People's Liberation Front, will cease the hostilities and come
together to meet at the negotiating table. That's the only way
we'll get a solution, is if they're involved in coming up with
what works best for all parties.
Even before the start of the recent conflict, Ethiopia was
struggling with one of Africa's largest internally displaced
populations, and the continued violence throughout the country,
along with COVID, have just exasperated the situation.
So along with my colleagues on this committee, I strongly
urge the Ethiopian Government to allow humanitarian relief into
the country. Let it come in unencumbered. And I hope that we'll
see that that is distributed fairly, and that we'll see an end
to the hostilities soon.
And I thank you very much for your time. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Scott Perry of Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you very much, Chairman Meeks.
I want to echo the remarks made by the ranking member on
the resolution of inquiry regarding Afghanistan. I do believe
it's an important piece of legislation.
And given the horrific nature of our withdrawal from
Afghanistan, a withdrawal so successful that hundreds of
Americans are still stranded in that country as far as we know,
and of course, billions of dollars in premier military
equipment left to what is now a terrorist superState,
congressional oversight is absolutely the first thing that is
need.
It's absolutely beyond me how there's been nobody in the
Biden Administration that's been held accountable for this. And
while my good friend from Virginia would like to change history
as he always does, we're not going to let him.
We're not going to let anybody just disregard the fact that
the Commander in Chief at the time of this occurrence was Joe
Biden, not Donald Trump. And Joe Biden had every ability and
authority to do whatever he wanted to do regarding that
withdrawal, and every failure is one that he owns.
According to the Lugar Center, the House Committee on
Foreign Affairs, our committee, has a projected grade of an F
for oversight. I do not think anybody's proud of that, but I do
think it's a result of zero (inaudible) something the American
people should know about.
This committee ranks among the lowest of the low for House
committees in relation to its oversight responsibilities. This
committee is simply not interested in oversight, and the lack
of hearings on Afghanistan in recent weeks has only indicated a
dug-in approach to defend this Administration's failure at any
cost.
I urge my colleagues on this committee to stop their
intransigence and focus on obtaining as much information on the
botched withdrawal of Afghanistan. Our veterans deserve answers
and accountability, and so do the American people.
In the remaining time, as some of my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle refuse to bring up legislation that
will effectively counter the existential threat that the
People's Republic of China poses to our country, I wish to
bring up two pieces of legislation that will effectively keep
the PRC in check.
The first is H.R. 5431, the designated the CCP as a
transnational organized crime group. Chinese Communist Party is
an aggressive criminal organization, and while it's taken far
too long, Americans are finally clearly seeing the threat posed
by the CCP to the health, security, and prosperity of the
United States.
The Community Party of China continues to be heavily
involved in drug trafficking, including fentanyl trafficking.
They continue to commit an ongoing, grotesque genocide of their
very own people, and they continue to lie about the origins of
the coronavirus and obstruct international efforts to learn
more about that.
The CCP steals up to 600 billion annually in intellectual
property. Theft from the United States alone, forced technology
transfer accounts for anywhere between 180 billion to 540
billion in lost revenue to our national economy.
On top of all this, they regularly engage in espionage
activities. Last year, we arrested two Chinese military agents
at the Houston consulate for attempted theft of coronavirus
vaccine research. The State Department has since confirmed that
the Chinese consulates in more that two dozen US cities are
helping Community Party soldiers posing as students spy on our
colleagues. We're asleep at the switch here.
My legislation would apply the RICO Act to the CCP and
designate them for the top international criminal organization
target, or TICOT, list. It is beyond time we've held the CCP
accountable for who they are. They are a transnational
organized crime organization.
The second bill I wish to discuss today likely has a much
better chance of bipartisan consensus, and that is the Taiwan
Plus Act. This bill would provide Taiwan with temporary NATO
plus status alongside some of our Nation's greatest allies and
would foster a strong deterrence posture against an evil CCP
regime that has made every indication of their intentions to
violate Taiwan's sovereignty.
My hope is that this measured bill will earn bipartisan
support. The United States of America will always stand
shoulder to shoulder with our friends in Taiwan. With that, I
look forward to debating the legislation before us in this
markup, and I yield back the balance.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back the balance. I
will now recognize Representative Kathy Manning of North
Carolina, the Vice Chair of the Subcommittee on the Middle
East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism. But let me ask
Ms. Manning whether she would yield 10 seconds to me.
Ms. Manning. Of course.
Chairman Meeks. Yes, I just wanted to respond to Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry, I have in front of my the 117th HFAC Afghan
engagements. I'm sure to give them to you, but there's 43
occasions of such meetings that we've held in this hearing
oversighting Afghanistan.
I yield back to Ms. Manning.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Chairman Meeks and Ranking Member
McCaul, for your leadership and for the Committee's excellent
work on all these important measures.
I am proud to join my colleagues as an original cosponsor
of H.R. 5497, the Burma Unified through Rigorous Military
Accountability, or BURMA, Act, bipartisan legislation
introduced by Chairman Meeks and Congressman Chabot.
This legislation imposes targeted sanctions on military
officials responsible for the February 2021 coup, which deposed
Burma's democratically elected government. Within days, the
world witnessed thousands of citizens pouring out on the
streets in protest, calling for an end to military rule and the
release of elected leaders, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
They were met with a brutal, violent crackdown. Since
February, security forces have killed more than 1100 people and
arrested more than 9,000. Many of the junta forces are the same
ones responsible for the campaign against the Rohingya Muslims.
Since August 2017, more than 730,000 Rohingya Muslims have
fled Burma's Rakhine State to escape the military's large scale
assault, with many fleeing to neighboring Bangladesh to escape
killings, arson, and other mass atrocities.
Under Burmese law, the Rohingya are denied citizenship and
have faced decades of oppression and discrimination. Roughly
600,000 Rohingya Muslims remain in Burma facing dire and
worsening humanitarian conditions.
This bill will impose targeted sanctions on the Burmese
military, the State administrative council, and affiliates
responsible for the coup and the ongoing crackdown in Burma. It
will establish a U.S. special coordinator for Burmese democracy
to make sure the United States remains at the forefront of
helping to promote human rights and restore civilian government
in Burma. And it will require State to make a determination
about the genocide against the Rohingya.
Additionally, the bill calls for the immediate and
unconditional release of Danny Fenster, an American journalist
from my hometown of Detroit, who is represented by our
colleague, Congressman Andy Levin, and who has been unjustly
detained since May, as well as all other journalists unjustly
detained. We continue to hope that Danny will be able to come
home soon.
Mr. Chairman, this bipartisan bill will crack down on those
who threaten democracy and human rights in Burma. This is an
important, comprehensive bill to hold accountable those
responsible for gross violations of human rights, freedom of
assembly, and freedom of the press. And I look forward to
seeing it become law.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Darrell Issa of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I won't use the
whole 5 minutes. I want to thank you and Representative Bass
and Jacobs and the team and, of course, the ranking member and
his team for this thoughtful en bloc package.
Included in it is H.Res 569, and I want to thank you and
all the members of the committee and the committee staff for
working on such a bipartisan basis to refine a resolution that
deals with describing a country on the brink of being a failed
State. One in which the United States has made many years of
peaceful investment in the Lebanese Armed Forces and other
institutions.
Unlike Afghanistan and other nations, Lebanon will not fall
from without. If it falls, it will fall from within. It will
fall because we failed to fight corruption. We failed to
support the law enforcement capabilities and the stabilizing
capabilities of the LAF. Additionally, we have made commitments
to that country to help them as they continue to battle foreign
influence including the influence from Iran.
And, Mr. Chairman, as a member of what is often called the
diaspora of Lebanon, I take special pride that Lebanon has been
a successful melting pot for many years, but in the last few
weeks, we have seen the beginning of sectarian violence, the
beginning of the breakdown. So now more than ever, this
resolution and the continued support by the United State to the
institutions that can curb or head off another terrible civil
war has never been more important.
And I know that for all the members of the committee on
both sides of the aisle recognizing that as Iran continues to
put its thumb on one side of the scale in the Palestinian
territories, particularly Gaza, put one side on the scale in
Lebanon, put one side on the scale in Syria, now more than ever
it is important that this committee say America will put its
thumb on the other side of the scale to provide justice for a
people who want peace in the region.
And again, I will be supporting the entire en bloc, but I
want to thank both you, Chairman and Ranking Member McCaul for
your support and leadership and I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Jim Costa of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I hope you
can hear me clearly. I want to thank you and the committee for
this hearing. I support all of these pieces of legislation. I
think it is important as you have said repeatedly that the
House Foreign Affairs Committee assert itself on issues and
challenges facing our country around the world in these
resolutions. (inaudible) on record, but obviously there are
more that we have to do and to the degree we can do it on a
bipartisan basis, we are all, I think, much better off to find
or return to a point someday where a lot of our politics end at
waters' edge.
I think the Resolution 445 condemning the violence and
human rights abuses in Ethiopia, Eritrea, and the combatants
and the conflicts in Northern Ethiopia, it is a tragedy what
has taken place there, and respect for human rights and
unfettered access to allow the United Nations and others to
perform humanitarian access and cooperate, and also to
investigate the independent efforts to the incredible
atrocities that we have heard that have taken place. So I think
this resolution is certainly in the right direction.
In addition to that also within the continent of Africa,
the situation in Mozambique, I think, concerns many of us who
are familiar with the situation. The necessity for stability
and cessation of violence is in the Cabo Delgado Province is
important to recognize, and I want to thank the authors for
this effort and in keeping in our efforts to maintain a
spotlight and attention on that effort.
And I want to thank the chairman and the ranking member for
their efforts on trying to put this together in a bipartisan
effort and, clearly, we have a lot to do. This Havana Syndrome,
I think, concerns all of us. American diplomats are where the
rubber meets the road around the world to represent our Nation
and to do so in a way that allows us to allow the rest of the
world that we are engaged in all of these efforts within their
countries.
When our diplomats are being singularly singled out in ways
in which their health is compromised or their efforts being
attacked, we have got to get to the bottom of this. And,
clearly, I think it behooves all of us to join together in
supporting those Americans who have committed their careers and
their livelihoods representing our country around the world.
So with that said, as I have indicated I support these
measures and I look forward to continuing to work with the
committee on our efforts to ensure that the United States of
America lets the rest of the world know that our willingness to
provide leadership is consistent and hopefully bipartisan. I
yield back the balance of my time and I thank you very much.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Brian Mast of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the effort
by the chairman, ranking member, and staff to put together this
en bloc package. For several important reasons though I must
oppose the en bloc package. The two reasons are, one, having to
do with the Burma Act and, No. 2, having to do with the failure
to include the ROI into this en bloc package.
And I want to start with the Burma Act and something that I
believe we need to address moving forward as a committee in
many different places. If you look at our ability to get
dollars sent to domestic projects here, most of us would kill
to be able to get projects funded in our communities,
domestically, for three, four, five, six, 7 years on end, to be
able to have tens of millions, hundreds of millions of dollars
go to projects like that.
But we cannot get that done domestically here, but
internationally in the Burma Act, in what has been described
just in the last few minutes as a worsening situation and a
country on the brink of failure, we are going to, No. 1, give
away our negotiating leverage by authorizing appropriations to
them for half a decade.
In the shadow of having just raised our Nation's debt
limit, we are going to do that. And then you look beyond that
and to say why would we give a nation on the brink of failure
millions and millions and millions of dollars year after year
without evaluating that each year, and I think it would be a
fair ask for anything we do that goes to international
appropriations that we look at that year over year. That would
be not being asleep at the wheel, not putting on auto pilot the
same thing that we do domestically with spending.
So that is one of the reasons that I have to oppose this en
bloc package. We cannot allow spending like that to be on auto
pilot even amid the devastating situation of what is going on
within Burma. As it relates to the ROI--and I am always happy
to yield to people as folks know in this committee if somebody
in here disagrees with making sure that we ensure all documents
or all records, communications, correspondence, emails, text
messages, instant messages, transcripts, summaries, agendas,
notes, diplomatic cables, reports, meeting read-outs--any
member of this committee would like to speak against retaining
those items as it relates to the withdrawal from Afghanistan, I
got 2 minutes here that I am happy to yield to somebody if they
want to say we shouldn't be retaining those items.
It is a fair demand from this committee, Mr. Chairman. You
mentioned in the opening of your remarks that oversight is at
the heart of this committee. If it is at the heart of this
committee, then put it at the heart of this committee and let's
make sure that we retain those documents for bipartisan
purposes.
I have aired my grievances on the en bloc package, but
since I have a minute-thirty remaining, I will sit here and
wait and see if anybody has a problem with retaining all
documents, records, communications, correspondence, emails,
transcripts, texts and instant messages, summaries of agendas,
notes, diplomatic cables, meeting read-outs, other things as it
relates to what happened with the disastrous Afghanistan
hostage crisis, Afghanistan withdrawal leaving Americans
behind, green cardholders behind, those that aided us for the
last couple decades behind.
[Moment of silence.]
Mr. Mast. Mr. Chairman, having sat here for a little bit, I
see that nobody seems to have an objection to that. I can
commit for myself that I would certainly be willing to stay for
as long as it takes to include the ROI into our en bloc package
or whatever we would need to do to continue to get that marked
up as it is urgent and should be done probably weeks ago, but
not done yet to this point. I am certainly happy to commit to
staying if you want to get that done yet today. I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative David Cicilline of Rhode Island for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman Meeks and Ranking Member
McCaul, for holding this markup as we consider key legislation
across the spectrum of foreign policy challenges facing the
United States and its partners around the globe. Once again,
the members of this committee have the opportunity to come
together to support human rights, the rule of law, and
democracy in regions around the world.
In particular, Mr. Chairman, we can join together to
support your legislation, H.R. 5497, the Burma Act of 2021, so
that we may rightly punish those who have overthrown the will
of the Burmese people, and so we may empower our diplomats with
the tools they need to build international support for
objecting the legitimacy of the Tatmadaw coup.
Since the Tatmadaw overthrew the democratic election of the
National Unity Government in February, 1,100 Burmese citizens
have been killed, many of them from the Karen and Rohingya
peoples that have been targeted because of their religious
beliefs. Those resisting to Tatmadaw and protesting on behalf
of democratic values and pluralism have faced a violent
crackdown that threatens lives and the long-term prospect of
human rights and the rule of law in Myanmar.
The Burma Act of 2021 would create sanction regime against
the Tatmadaw, the State Administration Council, and other
responsible parties that represent a strong, proportionate
response to their deliberate sabotaging of Burmese democracy.
It would also create a badly needed office within the State
Department that will be tasked with building international
support for broader sanctions. The situation at hand requires
an international coalition unabashedly opposed to strong U.S.
leadership can help build that coalition.
The Tatmadaw may have wrestled control of the Burmese
Government away from the people of Myanmar, they may have
jailed and killed many that oppose their rule, and while they
continue to trample on the will of the Burmese people,
resistance strengthens with each passing day. As they continue
their reign of terror, the Tatmadaw inadvertently helps build
bridges across the diverse peoples of Myanmar, creating a
hardened opposition that rejects their illegitimate rule.
I saw firsthand the strength of the Burmese people when I
traveled to Burma and Bangladesh in November 2017. There we
bore witness to the discrimination, segregation, and horrific
violence being committed against the Rohingya community,
particularly as we heard firsthand accounts of the savage
treatment and brutality that was visited upon the Rohingya
community. And today as we bear witness to the Tatmadaw's
cruelty we must act, and so I urge my colleagues to join me in
enthusiastically supporting H.R. 5497 and the other bills in
the en bloc package.
I would also like to spend a moment to speak in support of
my colleague Congresswoman Jacobs' resolution, H.Res. 720
calling for stability and cessation of violence in Mozambique.
I am proud to cosponsor this bill which calls on the Government
of Mozambique to end the violence created by ISIS-Mozambique
and provide humanitarian support to those who need it and I
thank my colleague for her strong leadership on that piece of
legislation.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I will now recognize
Representative Tim Burchett of Tennessee for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is always a
pleasure seeing you. I would really like to stress my support
for Ranking Member McCaul's H.Res. 701, the Afghanistan
Resolution of Inquiry, and I would like to echo his sentiments.
We need to get to the bottom of what happened with the collapse
of the Afghan Republic and the catastrophically botched
withdrawal from that country.
We need answers and those (inaudible) that my Democratic
friends on the Rules Committee have continued to extend the
prohibition on resolutions of inquiry becoming privileged
resolutions. This is just another example, in my opinion, of
slimy, hypocritical D.C. politics, as there are 18 of these
resolutions submitted during the first 2 years of the Trump
Administration when the Democrats were in the minority.
These resolutions have been a very narrowed and tailored
oversight mechanism for 200 years, and I cannot think of any
other current issue more important than Afghanistan which
warrants thorough congressional oversight. We as elected
Members of Congress should be demanding answers from this
Administration.
I attended the funeral of Staff Sergeant Ryan Knauss at
Arlington a few weeks back, his people are neighbors of mine,
his parents and grandparents, and he was one of 6,000 soldiers
surged into the country to clean up the mess that the Biden
Administration created. He was also a constituent and one of 13
brave Americans killed during the coordinated attack where
ISIS-K bomber detonated his vest outside the Hamid Karzai
International Airport in August. It was reported that the
bomber was released from prison during the Taliban takeover.
This resolution seeks all materials relating to important
questions myself and many other Members of Congress had but
most importantly, to me, the resolution seeks all materials
relating to the release of violent extremists from prisons in
Afghanistan. I want to know what happened and possibly figure
out why these prisoners were not secured and transferred to
another location. We owe it to the family members of our slain
soldiers.
I am proud to support Mr. McCaul's resolution and I urge
this committee to take up this important resolution. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield the remainder of my time, sir, and I
always appreciate your courtesy and friendship.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman's time--the gentleman yields back
his time. I now recognize Representative Tim Meijer of Michigan
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
McCaul, for holding this markup today. As we consider the
measures today, there remains one top issue of mine for myself
and many of my colleagues, as it has been previously stated,
and that is the Afghanistan withdrawal and the future of those
who were able to evacuate as well as those who were left
behind. The Biden Administration's withdrawal was an
unmitigated disaster and too many questions remain unanswered.
Since April, a bipartisan group of representatives, myself
included, have been imploring this Administration to outline
their plan to get Special Immigrant Visa-eligible individuals
out and to clear the backlog of applicants who had served
alongside our forces throughout the mission in Afghanistan. In
June, as the withdrawal deadline approached, we called for the
immediate evacuation of these Afghan allies and their families,
again while there was still time.
But our calls were ignored until it was too late and in
August, the world watched in horror as the devastating
consequences of this Administration's inaction unfolded. We
have seen very little transparency or accountability from this
Administration. House Democratic leadership has helped shield
the Administration from responsibility by restricting
Republicans' ability to submit resolutions of inquiry, a
privileged oversight mechanism that has been in use for over
200 years by the minority party to obtain information from the
executive branch. Oversight of the executive branch is
Congress's fundamental constitutional prerogative.
We are demanding answers from the Biden Administration on
how the withdrawal went so catastrophically wrong so that we
can hold those responsible to account and to prevent a similar
disaster from ever happening again. I echo the ranking member's
call to bring a resolution of inquiry for documents related to
the withdrawal up for a vote and urge this committee not to
ignore our oversight duties related to Afghanistan.
On a separate note, I am pleased to see that the Burma Act
is included in this en bloc. As the representative of a
district with a significant Burmese population, I hear
frequently about the concerns of my constituents for their
family members who are currently suffering at the hands of the
Tatmadaw. This bill will impose serious costs on the military
regime which continues to commit grave violations of human
rights including the unjust detention of American citizens.
The Burma Act will not only prevent the Tatmadaw from
accessing assets that are currently supporting its rule, but
also send a strong message of support to the Burmese people
that we stand with them in their desire for democracy and human
rights. With that, Mr. Chairman, I encourage a yes vote and I
yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Young Kim of California, who is the vice ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia,
and Nonproliferation, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kim of California. Thank you, Chairman Meeks and
Ranking Member McCaul. I stand in support of the en bloc being
offered today, including Congresswoman Jacobs' resolution on
Mozambique which I am proud to co-lead.
The accounts coming out of Cabo Delgado of violent
extremists targeting civilians with brutal beheadings,
abductions, recruiting child soldiers, and mass killings
seriously endangered the stability of Mozambique and the
surrounding region. So I join Congresswoman Jacobs in asking
this committee to pass this important measure today in
condemning the violence by ISIS-Mozambique and urging the
government there to work with its regional and civil society
partners to restore stability and security while ensuring
strong protections for human rights and humanitarian aid
distribution.
The measures before this committee are worthy of speedy
passage today and I am proud to cosponsor many of them,
including Congressman LaHood's important resolution on the Port
of Beirut explosion and Ranking Member McCaul's critical
legislation to develop a robust United States response to the
Havana Syndrome attacks directed at our diplomatic and
intelligence personnel. I am also proud to cosponsor
Congresswoman Bass' Resolution on the conflict in Ethiopia
which has claimed so many lives and subjected hundreds of
thousands to famine and increasingly unsafe conditions.
Congress must act now in pressing the Biden Administration
to act with more immediacy and transparency to halt the
bloodshed in Northern Ethiopia and continue urging all
combatants to cease hostilities, respect human rights, and
allow unfettered access for humanitarian aid workers. I also
call on all sides of this conflict to fully cooperate with
independent investigations of credible atrocity allegations and
for the Biden Administration to respond to Congress immediately
on its progress toward a determination of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, or genocide.
Finally, I am glad to be a regional cosponsor on the Burma
Act and I thank Chairman Meeks and Congressman Chabot for their
leadership on this important initiative to hold a military
junta of Myanmar accountable for overthrowing their
democratically elected government. Included in the bill is $220
million in assistance for the Rohingya refugee population that
continues to experience substandard conditions and violence, as
well as a requirement for the Biden Administration to determine
whether the Burmese military's atrocities against the Rohingya
constitute genocide. I am proud to support this measure and
ensure our country continues to stand strong as a leader in
supporting democratic rule of law and human rights around the
world.
Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. Any other members
wish to be recognized?
Hearing no further requests of recognition, the committee
will proceed to consider the notice of items en bloc. Pursuant
to the previous order, the question occurs on the measures en
bloc, as amended, if amended. We are going to take a vote by
voice, and all members please unmute your microphones.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. Measures
considered en bloc are agreed to and, without objection, the
motion to reconsider is laid upon the table.
Pursuant to the previous order of the committee, each
measure is ordered favorably reported, as amended, if amended,
and each amendment or amendments to each bill shall be reported
as a single amendment in the nature of a substitute. Without
objection, staff is authorized to make and technical and
conforming changes.
Now on to the next item of business. We will be considering
separately, the following measure, H.R. 4914, the Havana
Syndrome Attacks Response Act.
[The Bill H.R. 4914 follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meeks. Pursuant to notice for purposes of markup, I now
call up H.R. 4914. The Clerk will report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 4914. To impose sanctions against foreign
persons and foreign governments----
Mr. Meeks. Without objection, the first reading of the bill
is dispensed with and, without objection, the bill shall be
considered as read and open to amendment at any point. And,
without objection, the McCaul amendment in the nature of a
substitute number 42, circulated to members, shall be
considered as read and will be treated as original text for
purposes of amendment.
At this time, I recognize myself to speak on this measure.
In 2016, reports first emerged of anomalous health incidents
among U.S. personnel overseas characterized by a concerning
array of traumatic brain injury symptoms, now colloquially
referred to as Havana Syndrome. Experts, convened by the State
Department in 2017, attributed these symptoms to a non-natural
source, and the National Academy of Sciences, in 2020,
described them as plausible, the result of directed pulsed
radio frequency energy.
Since then, these bizarre events have increased in
frequency and scope, with recent press reports estimating
roughly 200 such suspected attacks against U.S. personnel in
multiple locations around the world. Investigations to the
nature and cause of these anomalous health incidents continues
and President Biden has committed to bring to bear the full
resources of the Federal Government to get to the bottom of
them. In that effort, he has the full support and partnership
of this committee.
But before I go on, let me speak directly to our diplomats
and their families who have reported being impacted by
suspected attacks of anomalous incidents. We believe you. We
lament the harm it has caused to your health, well-being, and
careers and will not let this threat to you and your colleagues
persist unchallenged.
The ranking member's amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 4914 would make clear that it is the policy
of the United States to deter any suspected attacks of this
sort, provide assistance to those affected, prioritize research
into measures to protect our personnel, and hold accountable
anyone responsible for them.
The ANS to the bill would permissibly authorize sanctions
against any foreign persons or governments the President
determined responsible for any such attacks against U.S.
personnel resulting in brain injury, mandate reports to
Congress on the nature of and response to any such clandestine
attacks or anomalous health incidents, and express the sense of
Congress that the executive branch should prioritize
coordination to investigate and deter suspected attacks or
anomalous health incidents.
Many of you know I am of the mind that sanctions are a
powerful foreign tool that should only be deployed carefully,
so there is a red line for me that these authorities be
permissive and that the executive branch be afforded the
flexibility it needs to respond to a still-evolving situation.
But it is squarely in the jurisdiction of this committee to be
debating and authorizing the appropriate use of foreign
(inaudible) ranking member's ANS today.
It is reasonable to have permissive sanction tools ready
for consideration when we are dealing with what many
increasingly worry could prove to be detrimental physical
attacks against our very own people. I am pleased that this
Congress previously passed a Havana Act, recently signed into
law, authorizing additional financial support for individuals
harmed by anomalous health incidents. This committee must also
now be willing to have the hard conversations about diplomatic
engagement and foreign policy responses needed to stop such
harm. As such, I appreciate the ranking member's willingness to
offer the ANS and I support this measure.
Are there any other members who wish to speak on the
measure? I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meeks. I recognize the ranking member.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for working
with me on this important bill. You know, around the world,
American personnel are being attacked in their homes and hotels
and even on public streets. What first started in Havana in
late 2016 has now expanded to attacks all around the world,
including right here in Washington, DC.
There are hundreds of victims, including children, and
recent cases have been reported in Vietnam, Vienna, Berlin, and
Bogota. We must find out who is behind these attacks and hold
them responsible and we must reassure the people who serve our
Nation overseas that we have their backs.
To help deter future harm, Congress needs to call these
incidents what they are--attacks. And that is what this measure
does. We need to ensure that there will be consequences for
those who are responsible and that is why I introduced the
Havana Syndrome Attacks Response Act.
My bill we are considering here today, with the Chairman's
support, will do just that by authorizing broad sanctions
against those who are attacking Americans. It establishes a
policy to prevent, punish, and deter these attacks and it
requires greater transparency with Congress about what is
happening and, most importantly, what the United States is
doing in response.
I worked with the chairman and his staff for 2 months to
get this legislation to a place where we could get it marked up
and passed out of committee on a bipartisan basis and I am
pleased that we were able to come to an agreement on this
critical issue. And that is why I will be opposing amendments
from either side of the aisle that would upset this agreement
that we have made, Mr. Chairman. Changing this bipartisan bill
will jeopardize its passage in its current form and it could
weaken it. Americans are being attacked and they expect us to
work together to help them.
So again, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
considering this bill today. It is an important measure and
with that I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The ranking member yields back. I now recognize
Representative Sarah Jacobs of California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. And, first, I want
to thank the ranking member, Mr. McCaul, for all of your work
and efforts to ensure that this pressing issue gets due
attention. And while I appreciate and agree with my colleague's
concern about the health and well-being of our diplomats
overseas, I have to say I disagree with this bill.
It is clear our Foreign Service officers have suffered from
distressing neurological symptoms and widespread fear and we
need to get to the bottom of what happened here and continue
with robust investigations; however, I do think the sanctions
authorized by this bill are premature and possibly not the
right tools to begin with. By perspectively authorizing the
President to impose sanctions against an unspecified entity for
reasons we have not been able to fully determine yet, we are
tying our hands on properly assessing what would be the
appropriate and effective response once we are actually able to
review the details.
As we are still dealing with the consequences of the 2001
AUMF that was overly broad, we have to make sure we do not make
the same mistake. We are not able to assess the anticipated
economic and political implications of sanctions if we do not
know who they are targeted against. We cannot ensure this is
the right tool when we do not have all the facts and we cannot
pair these sanctions with a clear and effective strategy when
we do not know what the threat or potential threat actually is.
We need to ensure we are seriously investigating the cause
of so much suffering of our diplomats, but this bill is not the
answer and, more importantly--sets a bad (inaudible) and for
these reasons I oppose and urge my colleagues to do the same. I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Not hearing Mr. Smith, I now recognize Representative Joe
Wilson of South Carolina for 5 minutes.
Not hearing from Mr. Wilson, I now recognize Representative
Abigail Spanberger of Virginia, who is the vice chair of the
Subcommittee on Europe, Energy, the Environment and Cyber, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want
to thank the chairman and the ranking member for their work in
bringing this bill forward for markup. Addressing the Havana
Syndrome attacks deserve the highest level of urgency of
Congress and of our government. It is absolutely critical that
the U.S. Government provide care of affected personnel,
investigate what is going on, and deter and prevent future
attacks.
I know that public servants, people who have dedicated
their careers to serving and protecting our Nation, are facing
the persistent threat of these ongoing attacks and I know
people who have been impacted who have experienced these
attacks and now face debilitating consequences, a complete
change in their lives, and inability to continue in the pursuit
of their professional career and we must do everything that we
can do to provide them with the assistance they need and
prevent more people, public servants, from experiencing what
they have gone through.
I have had the pleasure of working with the chairman and
the ranking member on this issue before and I am so grateful
that we are continuing these efforts today with Representative
McCaul's legislation, the Havana Syndrome Attacks Response Act.
I thank the ranking member for working with the chair to make
important refining edits to this bill and I am proud to support
it.
I appreciate that this bill makes it clear that Congress is
ready to provide the tools necessary to address these suspected
attacks with the highest level of concern and urgency, and I
appreciate and I was glad to have and I appreciated that Chair
Meeks and Ranking Member McCaul joined my amendment that was
included in the House-passed NDAA focused on bolstering the
interagency response to these suspected attacks.
Enacting my legislation would help structure and prioritize
a robust, whole of government response to Havana Syndrome
attacks and the bill we are considering today builds off the
steps that Congress has already taken. However, we must keep
our legislative and oversight efforts going to ensure that the
response of the U.S. Government is well-coordinated, effective,
and strong. Anything less would be a dereliction of our duty to
protect our Nation and our selfless public servants as they go
about the business of protecting us.
I appreciate Ranking Member McCaul's legislative efforts
and the chair's commitment on this issue. I look forward to
continuing to work closely with this committee, of the Members
of Congress in the House and Senate, and the Administration to
get right at the heart of this critical issue. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. I urge all of my colleagues to vote yes on
this bill and I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Wagner of Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
your willingness to work with the ranking member and all of us
to advance H.R. 4914, the Havana Syndrome Attacks Response Act,
which I am proud to cosponsor.
The underlying legislation holds Castro's brutal Communist
regime accountable for directly attacking U.S. citizens. As
many as 200 Americans, primarily individuals serving their
country as part of the State Department, Department of Defense,
and intelligence community has suffered traumatic brain
injuries while stationed in Cuba. Recently, scientific analysis
has revealed that the attacks were most likely the result of
``directed pulsed radio frequency energy.''
This bill punishes the attackers by authorizing the
President to sanction those determined to be responsible. It
will protect Americans by deterring future attacks. There must
be, Mr. Chairman, serious, unambiguous consequences for
attacking U.S. citizens. It is both reasonable and prudent for
the United States to sanction the individuals responsible for
the Havana attacks. Furthermore, it would deter any President
from imposing sanctions, and I want to make sure that the tools
are available to both the legislative and executive branch
moving forward. I urge my colleagues to vote yes and to support
the Havana Syndrome Attacks Response Act and I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Andy Levin of Michigan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I support most
of the measures that came before us today, and I am grateful to
you and the ranking member for your work on them, especially
the situations in Burma and in Tigray, and thank Chairwoman
Bass of the Subcommittee on Africa for all that great work.
But I do want to express my concerns about this one
measure, H.R. 4914. You know, I share all of my colleagues'
alarm regarding the illnesses that have impacted U.S. personnel
both at home and abroad and I thank the ranking member for his
attention to this really very, very serious matter. We
absolutely need to protect the hardworking individuals serving
our country and I want us to get to the bottom of these
incidents as soon as possible and do whatever is necessary to
make sure they do not continue to occur. That being said, this
is really a matter of how to make policy. I worry that there is
still too many unknowns for us to prepare a thoughtful,
effective policy response to these incidents and to craft a
successful deterrent if they are, indeed, found to be attacks.
In service to the Americans who serve us in this way around
the world and in interest of responsible policymaking, I feel
that we ought to have more questions answered before we advance
this legislation and I fully support devoting whatever
resources are necessary to getting those answers ASAP. Thanks,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Joe Wilson of South Carolina for 5 minutes.
I understand Mr. Wilson has some audio problems. We will
come back to him.
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meeks. There you go. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I am grateful to support H.Res 4914, the Havana Syndrome
Attacks Response Act, which has been drafted and introduced by
Ranking Member Mike McCaul.
The safety and security of American diplomats and
Department of Defense personnel is critical to the success of
our missions around the world, to the (inaudible) around the
world. This is outrageous. This bill underscores the commitment
of Congress to assist victims, research the counter measures
and, most importantly, to identify and hold responsible the
parties accountable. Thank you to Mr. Chairman Meeks and thank
you to Ranking Member Mike McCaul and I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Joaquin Castro of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you to the
ranking member for working on what is a very important issue
that all of us are greatly concerned about.
I have had the opportunity to sit on the House Intelligence
Committee now since 2016, and for 2 years at least we have been
dealing with this issue. And so I know that, you know, I have
had a chance to work with Ranking Member McCaul on different
legislation, on cyber and other pieces of legislation, and I
know that this is a sincere piece of legislation.
But I am concerned because, you know, I have concerns about
prescribing the consequences before we have confirmed the
culprits here, and so I feel that this is a bit premature. I
know that all of us want to be able to hold these folks
accountable, the nations accountable, or whoever it may be that
is responsible for harming our diplomats, but I also think that
once we have all of the information in front of us, we will be
in a better position to do that. With that I yield back,
Chairman.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back.
Votes have been called on the House floor, so therefore
this committee will go into recess until after the votes are
completed on the House floor. We will resume immediately
thereafter. The committee is now in recess.
[Whereupon, at 3:42 p.m., the committee recessed, to
reconvene at 4:15 p.m., the same day.]
Mr. Meeks. The committee will come to order. Do any other
members wish to speak on the measure?
Hearing no further requests, let's move on to amendments.
For what purpose does the Representative from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Perry, seek recognition?
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk.
[The amendment offered by Mr. Perry follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5851.190

Mr. Meeks. The Clerk shall distribute the amendment to your
staff, virtually, and here in the hearing room.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, which number amendment is the
gentleman offering?
Mr. Perry. I have 366 and 367, I believe, so we could do
them in order.
Mr. Meeks. Let's do 366.
The Clerk. Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 4914.
Mr. Meeks. Everyone receive a copy of the amendment?
The Clerk will please report the amendment.
The Clerk. Perry Amendment Number 366 to the amendment in
the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4914. Page 11----
Mr. Meeks. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment will be dispensed with, a point of order reserved,
the Representative from Pennsylvania is recognized for 5
minutes in support of the amendment.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The current language
within the ANS of this bill is weak. A foreign government
sanctioned under this bill can have those same sanctions
removed by the President if that country promises not to
conduct clandestine attacks on U.S. personnel. The absurdity of
that is simply breathtaking, as if we are supposed to take
Putin's or Xi's word for it that they will stop attacking our
personnel. I mean they shouldn't be attacking them in the first
place.
The second precondition isn't much better. It places the
burden of proof on the executive branch and says if the
President doesn't have persuasive information that an attack
resulting in brain injury to the U.S. personnel over the last 6
months, that is grounds for vacating the sanctions described in
the bill. The sanctions are time-tested IEEPA sanctions
including the blocking of property and assets and revocation of
visas. Not a single person here wouldn't be in favor of
applying those sanctions against a perpetrator of these
attacks, I would hope.
I am firmly opposed to creating such an easy litmus test
for removing these sanctions. It gives offending countries an
opportunity to use these attacks as leverage to extract
concessions from the United States at certain points, only to
turn around and apologize to have the sanctions removed.
Sanctions once implemented should require an enormous about-
face in the way the offending country interacts with the United
States.
American personnel stationed around the world to include
our Foreign Service officers and CIA deserve our full backing
and support against those who wish to do them harm. Creating
such an easy litmus test for the removal of sanctions is an
insult to those who have been attacked and who have endured
horrific brain trauma. This amendment would make it clear that
one sanction of a foreign government may not see its sanctions
removed absent an act of Congress.
This amendment would make it clear to the rest of the world
that we will not tolerate any kind of attacks on our personnel
and it would also serve as a useful deterrent against future
attacks or, if you are so inclined, against anomalous health
incidents. A truly tragic aspect of all this is that we have
the policy tools to mitigate the frequency of these attacks
while we determine which foreign adversary is behind them. One
of those tools is deterrence and its applicability here is both
obvious and useful.
In a circumstance in which we are confronting an adversary
with advanced technological capabilities, the tightening of the
removal of sanctions provisions would still make them think
twice about attacking our citizens. The current provision on
the removal of sanctions will also be ready--correction--read
by foreign adversaries as a total lack of commitment to those
who dedicate their lives to the security of our Nation.
This has a broader implication that several of my
colleagues apparently do not fully appreciate. If we are unable
or, worse, unwilling to aggressively target those inflicting
debilitating harm on our citizens that has implications for
everyone who commits themselves to the defense and preservation
of our republic and that is unacceptable. To me, this is a
pretty common-sense provision and to reject it would be to
embrace weakness. I urge my colleagues to accept this amendment
and I yield back the balance.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield for a question, Mr.
Perry?
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Perry said he has yielded back the balance
of his time.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I seek recognition for a
question.
Mr. Meeks. I did not hear you, Mr. Connolly.
The gentleman yielded back the balance of his time. He has
no more time. I now recognize myself. I oppose this amendment.
Mr. Connolly. I know. I am seeking----
Mr. Meeks. I cannot hear you, Mr. Connolly.
I do not hear you, Mr. Connolly.
We will go back. Let me proceed. All right, I recognize
myself. I oppose this amendment because it is unnecessary and
overly restrictive and I urge my colleagues to do the same. The
bill already includes the clear criteria for certifying when
any sanctions imposed under the act should be removed. And as I
have already stated, sanctions are indeed a powerful foreign
policy tool and, in my opinion, it is simply common sense in
this still unfolding situation to provide the Administration
necessary flexibility in both their imposition and removal.
I yield back the balance of my time. Is there any further
debate on the amendment? I recognize Representative Wagner for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have to stand
in strong opposition to Mr. Perry's amendment. The gentleman's
amendment adds a sanctions removal requirement that will, in
fact, discourage the President from imposing the critical
sanctions authorized by the underlying bill. It completely
removes the President's authority to lift sanctions without a
new, specific act of Congress removing those sanctions. This is
well beyond anything ever enacted in U.S. law.
The United States needs to demonstrate its resolve, its
strong resolve to protect all Americans by sanctioning those
who attacked our personnel in Havana who were serving at the
behest of our government in the State Department, the
Department of Defense. This amendment all but guarantees that
those sanctions will not be levied, Mr. Chairman. It would
deter any President, current or future, from ever imposing the
sanctions.
This undermines one of our most valuable foreign policy
tools and sets a terrible precedence. I urge my colleagues to
protect the integrity and utility of our sanctions system and
oppose the gentleman's amendment. I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Meeks. The gentlelady yields back.
Is there any further debate on the amendment?
Hearing no further requests to speak, the question is on
the amendment number 366. We are going to take a vote by voice.
All members please unmute your microphones.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to. And, without objection, the motion
to reconsider is laid upon the table.
For what purpose does the Representative from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Perry, seek recognition?
Mr. Perry. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk.
[The Amendment offered by Mr. Perry follows:]

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meeks. The Clerk shall distribute which, that is 367?
Mr. Perry. 367. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meeks. The Clerk shall distribute the amendment to the
staff, virtually, and here in the hearing room.
Has everyone received a copy of the amendment?
The Clerk will please report the amendment.
The Clerk. OK. Amendment Number 367, the amendment in the
nature of a substitute to H.R. 4914.
Mr. Meeks. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment will be dispensed with, a point of order reserved,
and the Representative from Pennsylvania is now recognized for
5 minutes in support of his amendment.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are instances during committee markups when the
underlying bill is stronger than its ANS and this is one of
those instances. The way the ANS is written, even if the
President determines that these so-called anomalous health
incidents are actually being orchestrated by a malign actor,
the President is not required to do anything to protect U.S.
personnel. In short, this ANS does absolutely nothing.
Let me repeat that again. Even if China or Russia or
another American adversary is attacking U.S. personnel and
leaving them with debilitating brain trauma, this committee is
ready to tell the President of the United States that he or she
does not have to react in any way whatsoever. I am not sure if
that is not dereliction of duty, but I do not know what it is
if that is not.
The underlying bill and the ANS cite an important study on
the issue, a 2020 report by the National Academy of Sciences.
In that report, the researchers argue that many of the
distinctive and acute signs, symptoms, and observations
reported by affected employees are consistent with the effects
of directed pulsed radio frequency energy and that directed
pulsed RF energy appears to be the most plausible mechanism in
explaining these cases.
Despite this study, the Biden Administration is refusing to
acknowledge the near reality that these are not just random
health incidents; they are almost certainly directed attacks
from an adversary. What is logically absurd about this ANS
given the Administration's position is that countries may be
sanctioned for what are essentially random anomalous health
incidents. First of all, why on earth would the U.S. Congress
waste its time passing a bill to give the President authority
he already has? More to the point, why on earth would we waste
our time in punishing anomalous health incidents?
An anomalous or irregular health incident could literally
mean anything. It is a vacuous expression meant to shield the
Administration from any responsibility or accountability in
protecting the American people, its first obligation and sacred
duty. We have seen time and again that this Administration
consistently fails at keeping our citizens safe. For anyone who
needs convincing, let me remind you of the hundreds of
Americans still stranded in the Taliban's 13th century Islamist
theocracy.
With respect to this bill, here is the point. If these
Havana Syndrome attacks are truly anomalous health incidents,
then there is no purpose for this ANS at all. It simply doesn't
make sense. Worse still, it gives the Administration an easy
out. Even if the Biden Administration received enough evidence
to prompt them to finally concede that a foreign adversary is
attacking U.S. personnel, even in that case they still wouldn't
be pressured by Congress to apply sanctions against defending
foreign persons and governments.
That is why I have introduced an amendment to strike
several instances in this bill where it says the President only
may apply sanction, instead directs that the President shall
apply sanctions against offending foreign persons and
governments. There is bipartisan consensus that these are
attacks being conducted by a foreign adversary and if the Biden
Administration fails to call out these attacks for what they
are, they are providing aid and comfort to our enemies and
encouraging future attacks on American personnel.
With that I urge the passage of this amendment and I yield
the balance, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes. I oppose this amendment because it is
overly restrictive and unhelpful to the bipartisan work of this
committee and I encourage all my colleagues to do the same. As
I said before, investigations are ongoing to fully understand
the cause of these anomalous health incidents, which I strongly
support since we need the best information possible to inform
our actions.
So flexibility is key. The executive branch must have
latitude to deploy these tools most effectively as the picture
becomes clear. These sanctions authorities must be permissive.
It is my understanding that H.R. 4914, as introduced, was the
only bill put forth in the House during this Congress related
to Havana Syndrome that was not originally bipartisan.
But the work of my team, working with Mr. Ranking Member
McCaul and Republican staff for over 2 months as Mr. McCaul has
stated to negotiate permissive authorities that members from
both sides of the aisle can support corrects that anomaly and
reflects the proud tradition we have on this committee of
putting politics aside when dealing with such serious matters.
This amendment seeks to undo the hard work and focus and
work that I really appreciate working with Mr. McCaul in coming
to a bipartisan consensus and therefore I oppose it. I yield
back the balance of my time.
Is there any further debate on the amendment?
Hearing no further requests to speak, the question is on
the Perry amendment number 367. We are going to take a vote by
voice. All members please unmute your microphones.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it and the
amendment is not agreed to. And, without objection, the motion
to reconsider is laid upon the table.
The question is now on the McCaul amendment in the nature
of a substitute number 42. We are going to take a vote by
voice. All members, again, please unmute your microphones.
All those in favor, say aye.
All opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. And, without
objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon the table.
The question now is to report H.R. 4914 with the
recommendation that the bill do pass, as amended. We are going
to take a vote by voice. All members, again, unmute your
microphones.
All those in favor, say aye.
All opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. And, without
objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon the table.
Without objection, the staff is authorized to make any
technical and conforming changes.
This concludes our business today.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Chairman, can I make a--just in conclusion,
I want to thank all the members. I want to thank you for
working with me in a bipartisan way. As you stated that is a
tradition of this committee and I intended to fulfill that. And
I also want to thank all the members, particularly you, Mr.
Chairman, all the members on both sides of the aisle. As you
know, I missed the last markup because my wife was at MD
Anderson while I was (inaudible) and it was very heartfelt to
me to have members on both sides of the aisle contact me
wishing her well, and she is well, and for that I am very
grateful. I yield back.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. And we continue to have your wife in
our prayers. We welcome you back. You were missed. You were
missed. Mrs. Wagner, Representative Wagner did do a fine job,
but there is only one Michael McCaul, and it is indeed, you
know, people often do not know what happens behind the scenes
and the conversations that we have.
It is a pleasure to have you as a partner working together
in the spirit of bipartisanship and trying to move our
committee to look forward in the same traditions that we have
always done, so it is good to have you as my partner on this
Foreign Affairs Committee and I mean that from the bottom of my
heart.
This concludes our business today. And I want to thank also
all the staff on both sides of the aisle because that is really
important. They have worked very hard on this in getting
together, so I just want to make sure I acknowledge the staff
on both sides of the aisle for all of the work that you have
done, as well as all of the members on both sides of the aisle
for your contributions and your assistance with today's markup.
It is truly an honor to be the chair of this committee. With
that this markup is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:33 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
