- MEMBER DAY HEARING

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY HEARING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

March 26, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

45-978      WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
KAREN BASS, California
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
AMI BERA, California
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
DINA TITUS, Nevada
TED LIEU, California
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
SARA JACOBS, California
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DARRELL ISSA, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
LEE ZELDIN, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN MAST, Florida
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
KEN BUCK, Colorado
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
MARK GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GREG STEUBE, Florida
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
PETER MEIJER, Michigan
NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
RONNY JACKSON, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California
MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Meng, Hon. Grace, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York.......................................................     4
Case, Hon. Ed, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Hawaii.........................................................     9
Hill, Hon. French, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Arkansas.......................................................    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    18
Hearing Minutes..................................................    19
Hearing Attendance...............................................    20

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD

Additional statement for the record from Representative Pete
Sessions.......................................................    20
Additional statement for the record from Representative H. Morgan
Griffith.......................................................    22
Additional statement for the record from Representative John
Garamendi......................................................    24

MEMBER DAY HEARING

Friday, March 26, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:08 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Gregory Meeks (Chairman of the committee)
presiding.
Chairman Meeks. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come
to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point.
And all Members will have 5 days to submit statements,
extraneous material, and questions for the record, subject to
the length limitation in the rules. To insert something into
the record, pleas have your staff email the previously
mentioned address or contact full committee staff.
As a reminder to Members, please keep your video function
on at all times, even when you are not recognized by the Chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves, and
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
Consistent with House rules, staff will only mute Members
as appropriate, when they are not under recognition, so that
they can eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum, and I now recognize myself for
opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to conduct a Members Day
Hearing to hear from our colleagues on their legislative
priorities that fall within the jurisdiction of the Committee
on Foreign Affairs.
I welcome our colleagues to the Foreign Affairs Committee,
and we are pleased to have this opportunity today to hear from
our colleagues about their legislative priorities, especially
colleagues who do not sit on the best committee in the House of
Representatives.
This Congress will preside over a historic shift in U.S.
foreign policy, and there is no shortage of work ahead for our
legislative body and this committee. It is critical that we
look ahead to the realities and challenges of the 21st century.
Financial crises, pandemics, climate change, and the rise of
authoritarianism are indeed worldwide problems that have far-
reaching domestic impacts.
These challenges will require global solutions, which will
undoubtedly overlap committee jurisdictions. Likewise, our
foreign policy is interdependent on having a domestic policy
that reflects the values we champion abroad.
As Members of the U.S. Congress, the diversity of our
districts and the diasporas that make up our communities give
each member invaluable insight. It is critical that this
committee works closely with the entire Congress.
And it is in that spirit this hearing offers an open
platform for Members who may hear their--so that Members can
hear their legislative proposals, and for some of our most
pressing foreign affair-related challenges are heard.
This of course will not be the only opportunity to engage
with representatives from our other committees. As Chair of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, my door is always open. I look
forward to hearing from you and your ideas.
I now turn to Mr. Green for his remarks.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Meeks. And really appreciate
you convening this important hearing to give our colleagues an
opportunity to present their legislative ideas before the
committee.
At a time of unprecedented challenges around the globe,
from the coronavirus pandemic to a rising China, of course, the
human crisis at our southern border, the work of this committee
is more important than ever, and the participation of every
Member of Congress is indispensable.
I look forward to continuing to work with you, sir, and
lead Republican McCaul, on these issues. And I look forward to
hearing from our Members today.
Thank you, sir, and I yield.
Chairman Meeks. I thank Mr. Green. And I should put out--I
know Ranking Member McCaul is not here, but I want to thank
Ranking Member McCaul for his work and cooperation and working
in a bipartisan spirit on this committee. Glad to have Mr.
Green with us.
Each witness will now have 5 minutes to testify and then
answer questions from Members of the committee. However, this
hearing is intended to be primarily a listening session.
Witnesses testifying today will be recognized in the order in
which they arrive. So I look forward to hearing the testimony.
I now recognize my friend and fellow New Yorker,
Representative Grace Meng, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. GRACE MENG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Ms. Meng. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member McCaul,
and distinguished Members of this committee. Thank you for this
opportunity to discuss several of my priorities that are under
the jurisdiction of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. I
always look back on my time on this committee so fondly. I'm
grateful to the many friendships I have made, and I look
forward to being together in person with you all again soon.
First, I really want to thank this committee for marking up
my Refugee Sanitation Facility Safety Act just yesterday. Thank
you, in particular, to Representative Lee Zeldin, my partner in
this effort. One of my top priorities as a Member of Congress
is protecting those who are vulnerable around the world,
whether women and girls seeking an education or employment,
those who lack access to basic services, or victims of natural
disasters.
As vice Chair of the State and Foreign Operations House
Appropriations Committee, I am proud to do what I can to help
direct our Federal funding priorities to address these
concerns. During the 117th Congress, I hope this committee will
champion bills that protect vulnerable women and girls around
the world.
Today I want to bring to your attention a few pieces of
legislation, some of which have already been introduced and
others which I will reintroduce in the coming months. First, I
would like to discuss the Safe from the Start Act, H.R. 571,
which aims to prevent and respond to gender-based violence from
the onset of emergencies.
This legislation helps the humanitarian community take
preventative measures to ensure that quality services are
available to survivors from the onset of an emergency or
crisis. Crises like the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbate risks for
GBV, which is exactly what Safe from the Start is set up to
mitigate.
I am thankful to the bipartisan co-leads of this
legislation, Representatives Chris Stewart, Lois Frankel, Mario
Diaz-Balart, and Chrissy Houlahan, as well as the co-sponsors
who sit on this committee, Chairman Meeks, Representatives
Phillips, Cicilline, Costa, Titus, Deutch, Lowenthal, Connelly,
Spanberger, Bass, Wild, Kinzinger, and Young Kim.
I also introduced the Divided Families Reunification Act,
H.R. 826, with Representative Van Taylor as well as my
colleagues on this committee, Representatives Sherman, Bass,
Omar, Andy Kim, Schneider, Connelly, and Young Kim.
Over 70 years ago, the division of the Korean Peninsula
into the two Koreas separated millions of Koreans from their
family Members. This bill requires the Secretary of State or a
designee to consult with officials in South Korea on potential
opportunities to reunite Korean American families with their
family Members in North Korea and requires the special envoy on
North Korean human rights to submit a report on the
opportunities for video reunion.
I will also be introducing the Youth Peace and Security
Act, along with Representatives Fitzpatrick and Phillips. Youth
populations have long been at the forefront of building peace
in their communities by creating youth-led movements to
mitigate negative effects of conflict and to prevent recurring
cycles of violence. After all, it will be the young people who
bear the burden of sustaining the peace over generations and
lead their society from reconciliation to prosperity.
I look forward to introducing this legislation and hope to
have the committee's support.
Finally, I will also introduce the Global Wildlife
Trafficking Biosecurity Act with Representative Jeff
Fortenberry. This bill is an entirely international response to
end commercial trade in live wildlife for human consumption. It
does this by incentivizing governments to address the root
causes of zoonotic pandemics through international cooperation
and powers U.S. assistance for health surveillance, wildlife
trade enforcement, biodiversity, and food security.
Thank you again for allowing me to testify today and for
your leadership on critical issues of human rights and national
security. I look forward to continue working with this
committee in the 117th Congress.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Meng follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. Thank you so much for your remarks,
Representative Meng. The committee looks forward, of course, to
continuing to work with you. And I just want to thank you for
your excellent work reducing the vulnerabilities for women and
girls--that women and girls face, and whether it is access to
sanitation in refugee camps or protection in humanitarian
crises or being excluded from peacebuilding where their voices
are so crucial and critical.
And I just want you to know that our foreign policy
efforts, through diplomacy, development, and defense, are made
stronger with women fully empowered and at the table being
heard.
I am so pleased to have marked up, as you indicated, your
refugee sanitation bill in our committee yesterday, and it
passed with bipartisan support. And I look forward to
continuing to partner with you and others on HFAC as we
consider our priorities, and yours, as you have just dealt
with. Of course, human rights is something that is on the very
front burner for us on the committee also. So I thank you so
very much.
Mr. Green, anything that you want to add?
Mr. Green. No, sir. I just appreciate the member bringing
these to us. We look forward to the bills.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you.
I now recognize--I am trying to see if I see him--
Representative Garamendi. Is he with us?
Ms. Stiles. No, sir. Not at the moment.
Chairman Meeks. So who--I cannot see. Who else do we have
with us today? Representative Case?
Mr. Case. I'm here.
Chairman Meeks. Who do we have?
Mr. Case. Good to go?
Chairman Meeks. Yes. Representative Case, you are now
recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. ED CASE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF HAWAII

Mr. Case. Chair Meeks, Mr. Green, Members of the committee,
aloha from Honolulu, Hawai'i, Pacific Ocean. Thank you for the
opportunity to again testify before the committee.
In my last Member Day testimony to this committee in
December 2019, I highlighted the importance of the vast Pacific
Islands region and urged this committee and Congress to pursue
efforts to broaden and deepen our engagement in this critical
part of the world.
A few months prior to that, I had joined several of my
colleagues in co-founding the congressional Pacific Islands
Caucus, the first-ever such organization of Members focused on
this critical region. We followed with the introduction of H.R.
7797, our Boosting Long-Term U.S. Engagement in the Pacific
Act, otherwise titled the BLUE Pacific Act, to establish a
comprehensive long-term framework for U.S. foreign policy in
the Pacific Islands.
Since then, the challenges and opportunities for our
country and the Pacific Islands and the broader Indo-Pacific
have grown far more acute and urgent.
To continue Congress' leadership in forging the best path,
earlier this month we formally reconstituted our Pacific
Islands Caucus, co-Chaired on a non-partisan basis by me; the
dean of this house, Mr. Young; and Representatives Sherman,
Bera, Chabot, and Wagner of this committee.
Today I return to again ask for your full support of our
caucus and its goals, including our improved soon-to-be
reintroduced BLUE Pacific Act. Our initiative focuses is on
three essential pillars: security, development, and shared
values.
It would expand diplomatic and development presence,
increase maritime security cooperation and assistance, deepen
and diversify trade, support regional economic and social
development in areas like public health and education, invest
in climate adaptation and climate-resilient infrastructure,
promote shared values like press freedom and gender equality,
and strengthen people-to-people relationships and civil
society.
In naming this bill, we pay tribute to the concept of the
BLUE Pacific embraced by leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum
as a shared identity and platform for collective action. This
legislation would integrate our efforts with the work of
existing regional institutions and frameworks, including those
of our like-minded allies and partners, such as Australia, New
Zealand, Japan, Taiwan, and more.
Both our caucus and this legislation have been very well
received by our allies and partners throughout the Indo-
Pacific. We believe these initiatives are the responsible
response by Congress to the significantly increased level of
attention in Washington on the Pacific Islands in just the past
few years.
Driving much of this increased interest is China's
increased activity and influence in this region that has
triggered alarm among our foreign policy and national security
communities. Yet it would be a big mistake to characterize U.S.
interests in the Pacific Islands as purely a response to
current changing regional dynamics.
The United States is, and always has been, a Pacific
nation. And as such, we share interests, values, and, most of
all, a common destiny with the peoples and countries of this
region.
We have goodwill and networks in the Pacific Islands built
by decades of quiet and consistent engagement at all levels of
American society, ranging from government to ordinary
Americans. Through programs hosted by the Peace Corps and
Hawai'i's own East-West Center, over the past 20 years in
particular, the United States has contributed over 5 billion in
assistance for the region. The idea that the U.S. is a recent
newcomer to the Pacific could not be more wrong.
Nevertheless, a coordinated strategy of U.S. engagement in
the Pacific Islands has never been more necessary. COVID-19 has
devastated the region's travel and tourism economy, even as
longstanding development challenges persist. Regionalism, long
a hallmark of the Pacific, faces uncertainty and reasonable
demands for reform to ensure all Pacific countries and voices
are represented.
Above all, climate change looms over the future of the
region as an existential threat to these island nations, their
people, and their livelihoods.
Our initiatives in Congress are sending a clear message to
the Pacific Islands that we stand with them in the face of
these challenges, that the United States is a neighbor and
partner to all those who share common aspirations for a
regional order built on mutual assistance and benefit, free of
coercion and fully respectful of democracy, human rights, and
the sovereignty of all nations.
I sincerely look forward to working with the committee and
its Members and staff all over again on increasing and
sustaining U.S. engagement in the Pacific Islands.
Thank you very much for your time and consideration.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Case follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Pause.]
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I think you might be unmuted.
Ms. Stiles. I think we may be experiencing some technical
difficulties with the Chair's account. If we could just pause
for 1 second, so we can look into it.
[Pause.]
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Hi, everyone. This is
Congressman Malinowski. I think I may jump in here, just to
move us along while we wait for Chairman Meeks to come back.
And so to do that, I wanted to thank Representative Case
for your presentation, sir, and to also--and to recognize
Representative Hill for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. FRENCH HILL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Hill. Well, thank you for the time. I want to thank
Chairman Meeks and Ranking Member McCaul, and my friend Dr.
Green, and the Members of the committee, for giving those of us
not serving on the House Foreign Affairs Committee an
opportunity to visit on our priorities.
I appreciate the chance today to brief the committee about
my resolution H.Res. 117, supporting Coptic Christians in
Egypt, which has a diverse and bipartisan coalition of Members
that co-sponsor it.
I would also like to give special thanks to my friend and
Democratic lead on this measure, Foreign Affairs Committee
member Dave Cicilline of Rhode Island. Currently, this bill has
17 co-sponsors. In the last Congress, my resolution had 71 co-
sponsors, including 25 on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
I decided to introduce this legislation following a 2017
visit to Egypt. While preparing for the trip, visiting the
country, and returning home, I repeatedly heard about the
plight of Coptic Christians in Egypt. Although the Copts have
been the victims of numerous terrorist attacks by groups like
ISIS, what was most disturbing to me were the attacks against
Copts carried out by their fellow Egyptians.
That is why on January 16, 2019, I originally introduced
this resolution expressing support for Coptic Christians and
religious liberty in Egypt. H.Res. 117 acknowledges the
importance of the U.S.-Egypt partnership in advancing our
common interests, recognizes Egypt's need for certain
governmental reforms, and calls on the Egyptian government to
end what has become a culture of impunity and makes examples by
arresting, prosecuting, and convicting those responsible for
attacks on Christians. It also calls on government to hold
those local government officials accountable who fail to
enforce the law.
In the Minya Province of Upper Egypt, in late November, a
mother and her son were stabbed by a Muslim man while sitting
out in front of their home after being told that Christians
were not allowed outside. Luckily, they were not killed. Sadly,
this is a persistent narrative in Minya.
In the 2018 and 2019 State Department reports on religious
freedom in Egypt, they each mentioned Minya Province more than
any other province in the country.
Also, Ramy Kamel, a Coptic Christian and founder of Coptic
Christian Rights Organization, was arrested by Egyptian police
and has been accused of numerous terrorism-related charges. It
is also reported that he has undergone intensive interrogation
and has been given no legal representation.
Unfortunately, cases like this in Egypt are becoming more
numerous. Our country and our citizens over the generations
have worked mightily to uphold the values and unalienable
rights granted to us by God and enshrined in our founding
documents.
We offer vocal support of free expression abroad,
particularly in the form of advocacy for religious tolerance
and freedom, the rule of law, human rights, education for women
and minorities. These are fundamental tenets of our foreign
policy.
Likewise, I have met with religious leaders from all across
the Levant, from Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Jerusalem, with an eye
toward better shaping American and allied support for
Christians and other persecuted religious minorities.
In previous years, Pope Francis, together with the Grand
Imam from Egypt's most important Al-Azhar Mosque, issued a
message on human fraternity inviting, and I quote, ``All
persons who have faith in God and faith in human fraternity to
unite and work together, so it may serve as a guide for future
generations to advance a culture of mutual respect in the
awareness of the great divine grace that makes all human beings
brothers and sisters.''
The public coming together of Catholicism and Islam is a
powerful statement to all governments around the world, but
particularly those in the Middle East, to support religious
freedom and religious tolerance. This was on display recently
for the whole world to see as Pope Francis toured ancient
Mesopotamia, said Mass in Baghdad, and met with the Grand
Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
I have great respect for Egyptian President el-Sisi, and I
applaud the changes in message that he has made in the area of
religious tolerance. He continues to say and do the right
things at the top level of government. This includes having a
good relationship with the Coptic Pope, attending Mass on
multiple occasions, reconstructing churches that have been
destroyed, constructing the largest Christian cathedral in the
Middle East in the new administration center, and holding
terrorists accountable for their atrocities.
However, since 1978, the United States has provided Egypt
with what now totals over $50 billion in military and $30
billion in economic assistance. I believe there is more to do.
As the fourth-highest receiver of annual American aid in the
world, the U.S. Government must use the tools that we have to
hold our good allies like Egypt to a higher standard, if they
are to continue to receive our sense of aid and partnership.
It is in this regard that I believe one vehicle readily
available to this committee is to highlight the U.S.
Government's concern over the treatment of Coptic Christians in
Egypt. And that is the resolution, H.Res. 117.
In conclusion, let's recall President Reagan's admonition
as to our responsibility. He said, ``Respect for human rights
is not social work. It is not merely an act of compassion. It
is the first obligation of government and the source of its
legitimacy.''
I thank my friends on House Foreign Affairs. I appreciate
you, Chairman Meeks. And I appreciate the opportunity to spend
a few minutes with you this afternoon. Thank you, and I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hill follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Malinowski. Thank you so much, Congressman Hill. And we
very much look forward to working with you on Egypt and human
rights in general. I very much appreciate those words from
President Reagan. I think those speak for all of us.
I see Chairman Meeks has gotten back on. Welcome back,
Chairman.
Chairman Meeks [presiding]. Thank you. Thank you for
stepping in. Technology. I thought something else was
happening, but I did hear much of what Congressman Hill had to
say. And like you, I just want to thank him. You know, I have
known Congressman Hill for a while. I thank him for his
leadership on the issue of protecting the rights and the safety
of the Coptic Christians in Egypt.
And as you know, the Coptic community has been the victim
of discrimination, harassment, and deadly violence, and I
intend to keep this issue high on the agenda of the State
Department. I am happy to work with my good friend,
Representative Hill, as he moves forward this Congress on this
important issue.
So thank you, French, for that. It was unfortunate I could
not see you, but I could hear you.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time, and my
best wishes.
Chairman Meeks. Very good.
And I do not know whether I missed it, did Mr. Garamendi--
was he able to join us? I know he was Chairing another hearing,
but I know he wanted to be on. So I do not know whether or not
he was able to join us.
Ms. Stiles. He was not able to, sir.
Chairman Meeks. Okay. So I think Mr. Hill was our last
witness. So I want to thank all of you for testifying today, as
well as all of the Members on the Foreign Affairs Committee. We
appreciate the testimony, and we will consider them as the
Foreign Affairs Committee considers its legislative priorities
for next year.
Again, I hope everyone has had, and will have, a good
weekend, and I now adjourn this hearing.
[Whereupon, at 3:36 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
