- THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGY AND FISCAL YEAR BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGY AND FISCAL YEAR BUDGET
REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-41

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-804 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2021

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia        CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida         STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island       DARRELL ISSA, California
AMI BERA, California                ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas               LEE ZELDIN, New York
DINA TITUS, Nevada                  ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California                BRIAN MAST, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania            BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota            KEN BUCK, Colorado
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota               TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                 MARK GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia        GREG STEUBE, Florida
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey          CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
SARA JACOBS, California             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina       NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
JIM COSTA, California               RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California             YOUNG KIM, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas             MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Blinken, the Honorable Antony J., Secretary, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     7

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    71
Hearing Minutes..................................................    72
Hearing Attendance...............................................    73

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

Statement for the record submitted from Represetative Connolly...    74

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    76

THE STATE DEPARTMENT'S FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGY AND FISCAL YEAR BUDGET
REQUEST

Monday, June 7, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Gregory Meeks (Chairman of the committee)
presiding.
Chairman Meeks. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come
to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point, and all Members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and questions
for the record, subject to the length of the limitation in the
rules.
To insert something into the record, please have your staff
email the previously mentioned address or contact full
committee staff.
As a reminder to Members, please keep your video function
on at all times even when you're not recognized by the Chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves.
Consistent with House rules, staff will only mute Members
as appropriate when they are not under recognition to eliminate
background noise.
I see that we have a quorum, and I now recognize myself for
opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to review the State
Department's foreign policy strategy and the Fiscal Year 1922
budget requests.
Mr. Secretary, it is fantastic to have you back before our
committee so soon after your testimony before us in March, and
this is precisely the kind of relationship that we seek with
the Administration--one of regular constructive dialog and
debate. And we're so glad that you're here and we appreciate
you setting the tone from the top at the State Department on
maintaining a productive engagement with Congress as we carry
out our oversight legislative responsibilities.
An Administration's budget demonstrates its priorities. As
President Biden said when he was a senator, ``Don't tell me
what you value. Show me your budget and I'll tell you what you
value.''
So I'm pleased to see that Fiscal Year 1922 budget requests
strive to direct funding directly to address what I believe are
America's most promising opportunities and pressing challenges.
As you heard me say the last time you appeared before this
committee, Secretary Blinken, personnel is policy, and if the
United States wants to continue with its global leadership
role, it is critical that the Department's work force look like
the America it represents abroad with a diversity of
backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives.
This was a key component of our bipartisan State
authorization bill that was passed in the House a few weeks
ago, and though I welcome the more than doubling of the funding
dedicated to broadening recruitment and diversity and inclusion
programs at the State Department in the Administration's Fiscal
Year 1922 budget request, I'm hopeful the department will soon
provide us specific programs it will undertake to address the
systemic barriers to retention and promotion for ethnic and
racial minorities in the mid and senior levels.
Let's continue to build on that work, including by shifting
to paid internships in the department. Internships help open
the doors to careers in foreign affairs, and without a paid
internship program these opportunities are accessible only to
those from more affluent backgrounds.
A paid internship program will help broaden the pool of
candidates interested in pursuing a career in public service at
the State Department.
I also applaud the Administration for proposing to increase
the U.S. contribution to the Green Climate Fund and more than
tripling climate funding across the board. Climate change is,
indeed, an existential threat with a shrinking window for
action.
Not only does America need to work multilaterally with our
allies and partners and even competitors, we must galvanize
global action, and as the wealthiest nation on Earth, it is
incumbent upon us to help those nations adapt, whether it be
through implementation of clean energy or resilient
infrastructure.
This is one example of coalition building on which America
must lead. Now that the United States is back at the table,
effective multilateral engagement is critical, and this starts
with fully funding the United States commitments to the United
Nations, including by paying down our arrears.
As you know, the U.N. has long served as a force multiplier
for the United States to protect our interest and promote
democracy, human rights, peace, and stability, and I appreciate
that the President's budget request does a far better job of
prioritizing our multilateral commitments than the previous
Administration ever did.
However, we must recognize that continuing to avoid our
full financial obligations is against our interests and costs
us our credibility and champion multilateralism.
We must also forge new bonds
[inaudible] including our Latin American and Caribbean
neighbors in the Western Hemisphere and the continent of
Africa, and we need to modernize not only working with
governments and regional organizations but also directly with
local civil society and historically marginalized communities.
And the committee is pleased to see the Department's
continued support for close allies such as the State of Israel
and related efforts to improve the lives of the Palestinian
people and leave the door open to a two-State solution.
So I look forward to the discussion today on this budget
request and a range of other foreign policy matters that I know
will come up, and to also listen to the Administration's plan
to provide COVID vaccines globally, to strengthen our posture
in the Indo-Pacific region, to seeking a lasting peace between
our ally, Israel, and the Palestinian people.
Success rests on ensuring that the brave men and women of
the State Department have the resources to do the critical work
you do every day to advance and defend America, work for which
this committee is very grateful.
I now will recognize Mr. McCaul, the Ranking Member, for
his opening remarks.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for joining us here today.
I've repeatedly said that Vladimir Putin is not our friend.
In addition to last year's SolarWinds hack in my hometown of
Austin, he and his cronies are responsible for at least three
additional cyber attacks in the last 2 months, including two on
U.S. companies which seriously disrupted our supply chain.
He continues his illegal occupation of Crimea. He
orchestrated the poisoning of Alexei Navalny. He publicly
reports and supports the illegitimate despot Lukashenko in
Belarus, even though he scrambled a MiG to hijack a commercial
airliner to arrest the journalist, and he's holding two
Americans hostage, Trevor Reed and Paul Whelan.
Yet, late last month, the Biden Administration made the
baffling assertion that waiving sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG,
a Russian Gazprom subsidiary, and its CEO and corporate
officers is somehow in the U.S., quote, ``national interest.''
Let me be clear. Allowing a Russian malign influence
project to be built that will enrich Putin, give him greater
strength in Europe, and further endanger Ukraine is absolutely
not in our U.S. national interest.
Now President Biden is rewarding Putin with a summit in
Geneva next week. This sends a very powerful and very dangerous
message. It is my hope this summit will provide at least some
good.
So I would urge you and the president to call for the
release of Trevor Reed and Paul Whelan as a precondition to
this meeting.
Now I'd like to turn to Afghanistan. I made very clear I
oppose the ill-advised and arbitrary withdrawal from
Afghanistan. But the decision has been made.
Now we must mitigate the fallout, and that starts with
honoring our promises to those Afghans who risked their lives
to work alongside our troops and personnel.
I've spoken with officials at your departments as well as
people at DHS, and their conclusion is that there's no way to
process enough Special Immigrant Visas for these Afghans to
withdraw by September 11th.
So, Mr. Secretary, the clock is ticking, and the Taliban
are on the march. And that's why I'm calling for this
Administration to evacuate any person who has reached a
significant stage in the security vetting process to a third
country to finish their visa processing before the U.S.
completes its military retrograde.
The time for platitudes and vague promises are over. We
need action and we need it yesterday. While we have, certainly,
turned a corner in our fight against COVID-19, the devastating
impacts are still being felt in this country and around the
world.
More than 3.5 million people worldwide have lost their
lives, including approximately 600,000 Americans. I want to
thank the president for finally calling for a full
investigation into the origins of COVID-19, and I also want to
thank the Chairman for organizing last month's classified
briefing on the topic.
Last year, I conducted an extensive investigation into the
origins of COVID, and I would like to submit that here for the
record and send you a copy, Mr. Secretary.
[The information referred to follows:]

*********COMMITTEE INSERT**********
Mr. McCaul. I hope you will provide guidance to the
Administration as you vigorously search for answers. If we
cannot get to the bottom of how this happened, we are doomed to
watch as history repeats itself.
And if it turned out this did leak from a Chinese lab, it's
just one more example of how the CCP's malign behavior damages
the entire world.
Confronting the generational threat posed by the CCP isn't
a Republican issue or Democrat issue. It's an American issue,
and it's vital we work to solve this issue, as this committee
has already done with our bipartisan genocide resolution.
So I thank Chairman Meeks for working with me on this
important resolution. I urge Speaker Pelosi to bring it to the
floor for a vote as soon as possible.
And, Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you again today for
joining us. The world is facing many crises. As we speak, new
reports from Ethiopia find 2 million people have been displaced
in failing conditions that are threatening the lives of
millions more in Tigray.
Starvation is being used as a weapon of war there. The work
of the U.S. State Department and this committee's oversight has
never been more important.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you, Mr. McCaul. With that, I'll
introduce our witness.
Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken was sworn in as the
United States Secretary of State on January 26th, 2021, and he
really needs no further introduction than that. We know of all
of his past work, and as I mentioned in my opening statement,
Secretary Blinken testified before this committee in March, and
here he is again, just a short time thereafter to appear before
us again, and we are grateful for his appearance before the
committee again today to present the Administration's budget
request.
So without objection, Secretary Blinken's prepared
testimony will be made part of the record, and I now recognize
the witness for 5 minutes to summarize his testimony.
You're on, Mr. Blinken.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ANTONY J. BLINKEN, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Secretary Blinken. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member McCaul, all
committee Members, thank you very, very much for this
opportunity to talk about our proposed budget and how it will
help achieve our national security priorities and deliver
results for the American people, which is what I know all of us
are about.
This is a critical moment for the United States and our
global leadership. We face major tests--you've alluded to some
of them already--including stopping COVID-19, rising to the
challenge of the climate crisis, supporting a global economic
recovery that delivers for our workers and their families.
We have got to revitalize our alliances and partnerships,
outcompete China, and defend the international rules-based
order against those who would seek to undermine it, renew
democratic values at home and abroad, and push back against
malign activity by our adversaries.
In a more competitive world, other countries are making
historic investments in their foreign policy toolkits. We need
to do the same. That's why in this budget we have requested
$58.5 billion for the State Department and USAID for Fiscal
Year 2022.
Here are some specifics. This budget will strengthen global
health. The United States has been a leader in this field for
decades in Africa, around the world.
We're asking for $10 billion for global health programs,
including nearly $1 billion for global health security to help
us prevent, prepare for, and better respond to future global
health crises so we can stop outbreaks before they turn into
pandemics that put our safety and our prosperity in danger.
The budget will accelerate the global response to climate
change and the climate crisis by providing $2.5 billion for
international climate programs, including $1.25 billion for the
Green Climate Fund to help developing countries implement
climate adaptation and emissions mitigation programs, which is
directly in our interest as well.
The budget will double down on the fight for democracy,
which, as we all know, is under threat in too many places. Our
budget requests includes $2.8 billion in foreign assistance to
advance human rights, to fight corruption, to stem the tide of
democratic backsliding, and strengthen and defend democracies,
for example, through technical training for elections and
support for independent media and civil society. It also
requests $300 million for the National Endowment for Democracy.
The budget will support a comprehensive strategy to address
the root causes of irregular migration from Central America. It
will--it will invest $861 million in the region as a first step
toward a 4-year commitment of $4 billion to help prevent
violence, reduce poverty, curtail endemic corruption, and
expand job and educational opportunities.
The budget will reestablish U.S. humanitarian leadership
with a request for $10 billion in assistance to support
refugees, victims of conflict, and other displaced people, and
to rebuild our refugee admissions program.
It will support our partners in the Middle East by fully
funding our commitments to key countries, including Israel and
Jordan, and by restoring humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, and includes a budget request of $3.6
billion to pay our assessed contributions in full to
international organizations, initiatives, and peacekeeping
efforts, including to restore our annual contributions to the
World Health Organization.
As China and others work hard to bend international
organizations to their world view, we need to ensure that these
organizations instead remain grounded in the values,
principles, and rules of the road and rules of the world that
have made our shared progress possible for so many decades.
Finally, to deliver in all of these areas, the budget
reinvests in our most vital asset, our people. It will provide
new resources to recruit, train, and retain a first rate
diverse global work force with nearly 500 additional Foreign
and Civil Service positions, the largest increase to the State
Department staffing in a decade.
And it will modernize our technology and cybersecurity,
protect our embassies and consulates, and include a direct
appropriation of $320 million for consular services worldwide
so we can continue to provide these vital services to Americans
and those who seek to travel, study, or do business in the
United States.
Our national security depends not only on the strength of
our armed forces, but also our ability to conduct effective
diplomacy and development. That's how we solve global
challenges, forge cooperation, advance our interests and
values, protect our people, and prevent crises overseas from
turning into emergencies here at home.
And that's why diplomacy and development are smart
investments for our taxpayers. A top priority for me as
Secretary is to restore the traditional role of Congress as a
partner in our foreign policymaking.
That's the spirit that I bring to today's conversation, and
I'm grateful for the chance to answer your questions.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Blinken follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. Thank you for your testimony, Mr.
Secretary, and I'm now going to recognize Members for 5 minutes
each pursuant to the House rules, and all time yielded is for
the purposes of questioning our witness.
Of course, I will recognize Members by committee seniority,
alternating between Democrats and Republicans. And if you miss
your turn, please let our staff know and we'll come back to
you.
If you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone
and address the Chair verbally and identify yourself so that we
know who is speaking. I will hold strictly to the 5-minute rule
so that we can get as many questions in as we can.
The Secretary has graciously given us three and a half
hours, and we intend, as I've said, Mr. Secretary, if you could
keep your answers brief and if the Members can make sure that
they stay within the confines of that 5 minutes.
Unfortunately, because of that, I will have a strict 5-
minute rule, and I will start with that strict rule for myself.
So I'll ask you, Mr. Secretary, to be succinct with your
answers as I must try to get in some questions and we have got
a lot around the room.
So I'm going to leave some for some of my colleagues who
are going to be asking you about questions, I'm sure, about the
Middle East and the Indo-Pacific, et cetera.
But I want to start out now with my 5 minutes of questions,
and I'll start out about COVID and the vaccines and vaccine
diplomacy, particularly as we look at our friends and allies to
our south, the Caribbean, and Central and South America.
I was pleased to see the Administration's plans for the
initial distribution of vaccines bilaterally through COVAX
including to, of course, our neighbors in Latin America and the
Caribbean.
To me, that was an important first step toward supporting
the region and their recovery for this pandemic and one I
encouraged the Administration to take.
So my question is when do you expect these vaccines to
arrive in the region and what support is the U.S. providing to
actually distribute these vaccines and provide overall support
for their health response?
Secretary Blinken. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And
you're right, we are very, very aggressively now pushing out
vaccines. We have 80 million vaccines that will be distributed
either working through COVAX and with COVAX, or directly by the
United States--80 million vaccines between now and early July.
So this is happening--starting to happen as we speak. We
want to make sure that anything we send out is safe and
effective. But it's starting now and it's going to roll out
over the coming days and weeks between now and the end of July.
And as you noted, we have dedicated--we started--of the 80
million that we have currently available we're starting with 25
million.
We have allocated them by region and within regions by
country. About 75 percent of that first 25 million will be done
in coordination with COVAX. The other 25 percent we'll be able
to do directly, making sure that we're taking account of the
science and the needs where there are surges, where there are
variants, where some countries need second shots and have a
deficit, all of this based on science, based on equity, and
without political favor being demanded in return, unlike some
other countries.
By the time we complete the distribution of these 80
million, there will be more to follow as we have excess
vaccines in the months beyond July. And beyond that, we are
working to increase significantly the international production
of vaccines so that the overall supply of vaccines increases
significantly.
Latin America, our neighbors, our partners in the region,
in the Caribbean, will be among the first beneficiaries of the
vaccines that are going out. We are working closely to make
sure that we have in place the support system necessary so that
the vaccines can get there, be distributed and used
effectively.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you for that. And I have another
question about the Northern Triangle. I'm going to jump to the
other side of the world real quick in the time that I have
left, and that is to talk about last month I unveiled the
Ensuring American Global Leadership and Engagement Act, or what
we call the EAGLE Act, which will reinvigorate our institutions
and our diplomatic efforts to effectively respond to the
challenges posed by China and boost U.S. engagement in the
Indo-Pacific region.
In these efforts, we must attack from a position of
strength that emphasizes human values that set our Nation apart
including multilateralism and building relationships, promoting
human rights and democracy, and leading the fight against
climate change.
So my question to you, Mr. Secretary, is what do you see as
the most critical step to take to advance U.S. engagement,
values, and interests in the Indo-Pacific region, and how is
the Administration's budget request supporting those steps? And
is that enough--do you think it's going to be enough?
Secretary Blinken. Mr. Chairman, thank you for putting the
spotlight on that. As you know, from your own engagement and
leadership, this is the fastest growing, most dynamic region in
the world and it's on the front lines of the strategic
competition that we have with China.
By the way, China invests about 50 percent of its global
assistance and 50 percent of its economic diplomacy in the
Indo-Pacific. So this is, clearly, a priority for them. We are
working closely with partners to promote a free and open Indo-
Pacific, and our budget reflects that.
We have a significant budget allocation for work in the
Indo-Pacific that we hope that the Congress will support, and
this will help us engage effectively in the region.
I think you know that the president held the first ever
leader summit among the so-called Quad countries--the United
States, India, Japan, Australia. We are working with them
across a number of fronts to strengthen the work that we do
together in the region.
We have a number of tools that I know this committee and
others believe strongly in to make us even more effective in
the work we're doing.
For example, with our economic diplomacy, we have the
Development Finance Corporation and other tools that we're
bringing to bear in the region on different projects,
leveraging the private sector.
But I think, as you'll see as you look at the budget
request, we have asked for a significant allocation of
resources for our work in the Indo-Pacific.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. My time has expired.
I now go to Ranking Member McCaul for his questions. You
have 5 minutes.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
Last month, Chairman Meeks and I sent you a letter on these
Special Immigration Visas regarding Afghans who have worked
with us over the years. General Milley said, quote, ``We must
remain faithful to those Afghans who risked their lives to help
the United States troops and personnel,'' and he said we must,
quote, ``Do what's necessary to ensure their protection and, if
necessary, get them out of the country.''
Just last week, Secretary Austin ordered General McKenzie
to develop a plan to evacuate these people. But we need a place
to temporarily house them while their visas finish processing,
which falls within the State Department.
And most importantly, we need President Biden as commander
in chief to give the order. The military retrograde in
Afghanistan could be complete as early as July, according to
latest reports, and I've been told by your senior officials in
your department that there's no way the Special Immigrant Visas
can be processed that quickly.
So that means that these people will have a bull's eye and
a target on their back from the moment we leave the country.
According to No One Left Behind, there have been 300 targeted
killings of these people since 2014, and if we abandon them we
are signing their death warrants.
Have you spoken to any country about temporarily housing
these Afghanistans, to process these visas? And if so, which
countries and where are you in negotiations?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much for that question. I
appreciate it because I share both your concern and your
commitment to those who put their lives on the line to help us
in Afghanistan--our diplomats, our military--and let me do two
things, if I can.
First, let me just, in direct response to your question, we
are looking very actively at every possible contingency to make
sure that we can accommodate and care for those who are
seeking--who've helped us and are seeking to leave.
And whether that's through the Special Immigrant Visa
program, whether that's through the refugee program, whether
that's through parole, other things, we're looking very
actively at everything.
Let me just quickly tell you where I think we are with the
Special Immigrant Visa program itself. There are about 18,000
so-called principal applicants in the system. Of the 18,000,
half are at the very early stages, by which I mean they've
expressed interest. They haven't submitted applications or
forms but we think they're interested.
Then there's another 9,000 who are much further along. Of
those 9,000 about 30 percent are awaiting so-called chief of
mission approval. That is the approval that the chief of
mission gives to determine that they are in fact eligible for
the--for the program.
Once that determination is made, they move into the
immigration process and that's where about another 20 percent
of them actively are. We have backlogs. When it came to chief
of mission approval, we had a backlog of about 5,500. We have
surged staff, mostly here in Washington because a lot of this
work is actually done in Washington.
We're adding by the end of July at least 50 people here in
DC to expedite this. We expect to be able to clear the backlog
over the next few months at about the pace of a thousand a
month.
We have also had an immigration backlog, those who are past
chief of mission approval and are in the immigration process.
That's because we have had challenges interviewing folks in
Kabul.
But there, and that was slowed by COVID, we have cleared
that backlog. It was about 1,400. We're scheduling appointments
in regular order. We have a quarterly report coming to you that
will show, I think, the progress.
The current cap, as you know, for Special Immigrant Visas
for Afghanistan is 26,000. That's what's been allocated. We
have used 15,000, so we have got 11,000 left to accommodate,
potentially, these 18,000 if everyone who's expressed interest
actually follows through.
So we're asking your support to add 8,000 to our cap so
that we can accommodate everyone, and then be able to come back
to you if we need more. But we are seeing----
Mr. McCaul. And if I could just--yes, if I could reclaim my
time. And I feel very confident on the National Defense
Authorization we will increase that cap that you're requesting.
Again, though, they're--we only have 2 months before the
DOD is completely out of Afghanistan, leaving these people
behind? Is the department considering a process to get them out
of country while these claims are being processed that I've
been told could take up to a year or two, possibly?
Secretary Blinken. Two things, quickly. We're considering
every option. Yes.
Second, I do not think that the fact that our forces are
withdrawing--one, we're not withdrawing. We're staying. The
embassy is staying. Our programs are staying. We're working to
make sure that other partners stay. We're building all of that
up, and whatever happens in Afghanistan, if there is a
significant deterioration in security, that could well happen.
We discussed this before.
I do not think it's going to be something that happens from
a Friday to Monday. So I would not necessarily equate the
departure of our forces in July, August, or by early September
with some kind of immediate deterioration in the--in the
situation.
Mr. McCaul. Well, I think you're going to have a
humanitarian crisis and a refugee crisis, and I think
humanitarian parole is something, as you mentioned, we should
be looking at as well.
I yield back.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Brad Sherman--Representative Brad
Sherman of California--for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, not only
for your second visit to our committee for a formal hearing but
your availability to us as individuals. I hope that the
Administration will support a prohibition on Americans
purchasing Russian State debt or loaning money to Russian
sovereign--the Russian sovereign or State-owned enterprises,
not just Americans acting as underwriters but Americans buying
in the secondary market. That could raise Putin's borrowing
costs by about half a percent.
In 2019, Congress recognized the Armenian genocide. I want
to commend the Administration for doing the same in April of
this year.
However, the Administration has issued a Section 907 waiver
to allow for the sale of weapons to Azerbaijan, and I hope that
you would reconsider that in light of Azerbaijan's violations
of the territorial integrity not of Nagorno-Karabakh, although
that is important, but of Armenia itself in an unprovoked
aggression.
As to Myanmar--Burma--you have come before Congress asking
for another $106 million in aid. The Marshall Plan demonstrates
that economic aid can help a government stay in power, and I
hope that you would reevaluate your request for education,
economic development, and agriculture assistance, in light of
the fact that that money might help the regime stay in power
and the incredible needs that we have to help Africa, the
Caribbean, and the Northern Triangle countries.
But I hope also in your policy toward Burma that you'll be
fighting for full citizenship for the Rohingya people. Even
those who are champions of democracy are resisting making that
pledge and are, unfortunately, talking only about respecting
Burma's existing and hostile laws.
I hope that you'll work with Congress over the years to
repeal the Helms Amendment and allow our international funds to
provide abortion care around the world.
I want to thank you for everything the Administration is
doing to help countries around the world deal with COVID, but,
particularly as co-Chair of the India Caucus--everything you're
doing for India.
As you come before us to talk about the budget, one issue
that you'll always confront is where should work be done.
Should it be done in Foggy Bottom or in our foreign missions?
Having an American citizen overseas costs two or three
times as much to provide the security, the housing, the
education, the private sector, and we here in this committee
are doing business differently. This is a virtual hearing.
And I hope that you will reevaluate, and you may determine
that you're--that the no change should be made, but at least
reevaluate. For example, should a visa interview be done onsite
or by Zoom?
Now, Hamas has fired 4,500 rockets into Israel for the sole
purpose of killing as many civilians as possible. Every one of
these rockets was a war crime. President Biden has committed to
replenish Israel's missile defense system. We have saved
countless Israeli civilian lives and also countless Palestinian
lives by helping bringing this fight to a more speedy
conclusion.
Every one of those 4,500 rockets that was an attempt to
kill as many civilians as possible is a war crime.
Unfortunately, we will not bring the criminals to the
International Justice, but we can prevent those crimes in the
future by replenishing Iron Dome. What is the status of
potential supplemental assistance for missile defense for
Israel?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much, Congressman. I
appreciate all the comments that you've made. You put the light
on a number of very important subjects, which I very much
appreciate.
With regard to Iron Dome, we're committed to its
replenishment. The Israeli defense minister was in Washington.
I met with him. Most importantly, Secretary Austin met with
him. National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan did, and we are
working with the Israelis to fully understand their needs and
working with Congress, most importantly, to make sure that we
can secure the funding for that replenishment.
So these are--this is under very active review, and we look
forward to working with you to make sure that that happens.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey,
who is the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Africa, Global
Health, and Global Human Rights, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Mr. Secretary. Two decades ago, the great Jewish human rights
leader and former political prisoner in the Soviet Union Natan
Sharansky testified at one of my hearings on combating anti-
Semitism.
He said, and I quote, ``There are two important components
in this new phenomenon of anti-Semitism. One is using an anti-
Israeli campaign for strengthening anti-Semitism and the other
is classical anti-Semitism, the old deep, primitive prejudices
against Jews.''
He proposed a simple formula for exposing anti-Semitism
that masquerades as policy differences and he called it the
three D test: demonization, double standard, and
delegitimization.
I'd like to ask you, Mr. Secretary, do you and does the
Administration regard the 4,000 missiles that were launched by
Hamas against Israeli citizens, which was reminiscent of the
bombing of--with the V2 in London by the--by the Nazis--did you
see that as an act of violent anti-Semitism?
Second, could you tell us if, as prime sponsor of the law
to create the Ambassador for combating anti-Semitism, will the
president soon nominate that person? I hear that there's a name
or names that are under active consideration.
Thirdly, May 18th I Chaired another hearing on the Lantos
Commission on the Beijing genocide Olympics--as we all know, a
genocide against Muslim Uighurs that is personally led by Xi
Jinping.
In one statement, he said, ``We will show no mercy.'' And,
of course, what's happening in the gulags and all the elements
of the U.N. Convention on Genocide, obviously, have been met.
It is a horrific, horrific killing and change of forcing people
to give up their culture.
And I wanted to ask you, one of our witnesses said that at
the 19th CPC National Congress in 2017, Xi Jinping said that
among his goals for hosting the Olympics was to demonstrate to
the world the superiority of China's political system and to
promote its products worldwide. Doesn't sound like sports to
me.
Some have suggested a mere diplomatic boycott, and I would
ask you and I would appeal to you, that would not be enough
when you put that side by side with a genocide to be going on
simultaneously with the Olympics.
Will the Administration try to move the venue to another
city, or will we lead a boycott of nations of conscience?
And finally, just speak to the issue on the budget. The
U.S. Agency for Global Media has pretty much flatlined and yet,
the Russians have really--and others, but they have really done
a terrible focus against Radio Free Europe and Radio Free
Liberty. Will that be brought up at the summit, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much. Appreciate all
those questions. Yes, we're moving forward expeditiously with
the envoy to combat anti-Semitism. I hope that's before the
Senate very, very soon.
And with regard to Hamas, Hamas is engaged in terrorism,
period, and the idea that the--that any country could accept
and, for that matter, the world could accept a terrorist
organization which is valid in its own charter to destroy
Israel, to indiscriminately launch rockets against Israeli
civilians, that anyone finds that acceptable or does not
understand that it constitutes terrorism is hard to fathom.
And Israel has the right to defend itself against these
attacks and we have stood strongly for that proposition.
With regard to the Olympics, we're consulting closely with
other countries, with allies, with partners, to make sure that
we understand what the common concerns are and, ideally, to
establish a shared approach. So more on that in the weeks to
come.
And with regard to our work on combating misinformation, I
couldn't agree with you more. I think it's vital.
Unfortunately, we have seen our competitors and adversaries
engage in more and more of it.
We have a number of tools to do that. One of them is the
Global Engagement Center, where we have asked for, I think,
important resources. I think we have seen success in its
efforts to expose misinformation, whether it's coming from
Russia or whether it's coming from China, and very much would
welcome the support that you can give to that request.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, just let me also say that I would disagree,
respectfully, with my good friend, Mr. Sherman, on the issue of
public funding for abortion.
I do believe that abortion takes the life of a child and
wounds many women--harms many women, and the public funding for
overseas abortion, i.e., the Helms amendment, the prohibition
is strongly backed by the American people.
The most recent Marist poll in January show that 77 percent
of the people are against publicly funding abortion overseas
and domestically it's 58 to 60 percent in terms of the Hyde
amendment.
So let's----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Albio Sires of New Jersey,
who's the Chairman of the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere, Civilian Security, Migration and International
Economic Policy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Secretary, thank you for being with us for
the second time. I know you have your hands full. But I am very
concerned about the Western Hemisphere as I look around.
First of all, I'm glad to see that the budget request
maintains a consistent level of funding for Cuban democracy and
human rights programming. I thank you for that. They've been
really cracking down on dissidents, and that should help.
I'm also very concerned about what's going on in some of
these countries like Nicaragua, Venezuela, especially Colombia.
It seems like the Russians, the Cubans, the Venezuelans, are
happy to see what is going on with the stabilization of
Colombia, and I'm happy that the Administration has decided to
continue the assistance to Colombia.
People should have the right to demonstrate. They do not
have a right to be killed. But this is important that we
recognize that there are other groups who are trying to
destabilize many of these countries in the region.
Nicaragua is very troubling to me. They keep putting the
opposition in jail, and I would just like to hear what you have
to say about some of these directions that these countries are
going.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much. And, look, I share
and we share many of the concerns you've expressed and we are
very much focused on them. I was just in Costa Rica, and not
only was that an opportunity to meet with our counterparts from
a very strong and important partner, but we also had a meeting
of all of the Central American foreign ministers and so I was
able to spend time with them.
I recently met with my Colombian counterpart in Washington
just a few days ago, and with regard to Colombia, first, I
share the concerns that you've expressed. Colombia is a vital
strategic partner for the United States.
We strongly support the 2016 peace accord with the FARC and
its implementation, and they're a very strong partner as well,
as you know, in counter narcotics, as well as making sure that
we have rural development and security.
With regard to these protests, to your point, people have
the right to protest peacefully and to make their views known,
and the government needs to protect that right and to make sure
that people can express their opinions peacefully.
We have called upon the police to respect that peaceful
protest. We appreciate the government is investigating the use
of excessive force and making sure there's accountability. At
the same time, the government is working hard to bring together
the different stakeholders in a dialog to address the issues
raised by the protests and we applaud that effort.
With regard to Nicaragua, as you know very well, it
continues to move in the wrong direction, not the right
direction, including with the recent detention of the leading
opposition leader, Mrs. Chamorro. We call for her immediate
release as well as the colleagues who have been incarcerated as
well.
Beyond that, for the past many months the Organization of
American States has called on Nicaragua to take concrete steps
to make sure that elections that it plans to hold can go
forward freely and fairly.
And instead of heeding the call of the Organization for
American States, instead of making good on its own commitments
that it's signed up to in the Inter-American Democratic
Charter, it continues to move in the opposite direction,
squeezing space for the opposition, for civil society, making
it impossible to hold free and fair elections.
I had an opportunity when I was in Costa Rica to briefly
see the Nicaraguan foreign minister--he was there--and pressed
him on behalf of the United States and the Organization of
American States to make good on these commitments and to make
good on putting in place measures that would allow free and
fair elections.
He went on a long exposition of the allegedly positive
things that the regime has done for the people, to which I
responded, if you have that much confidence----
Mr. Sires. Mr. Secretary, I only have about 30 seconds.
Secretary Blinken. All right. Go ahead. I'm sorry.
Mr. Sires. Thank you very much.
But I think we should keep an eye on Costa Rica because of
all the Nicaraguans that are going there. I think they're
trying--they're putting a lot of pressure on this country and
they were one of our best partners.
Colombia, we have to keep an eye--there are groups in
Colombia that are stirring things up that we do not seem to
focus on, and we should really keep an eye on that. And I
appreciate the Administration keeping the funding to one of our
closest allies.
Thank you very much for being here. My time is up.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Steve Chabot of Ohio, who is
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific,
Central Asia and Nonproliferation, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Let me begin with this.
Mr. Secretary, how likely is it, in your opinion, that the
COVID-19 pandemic began in that laboratory in Wuhan, China?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, I cannot put a percentage
on it. I think there are two possible and likely scenarios. One
is the one you just described, that it emerged from the
laboratory. The other is that it was naturally occurring.
President Biden has ordered a comprehensive government wide
review to try to get to the bottom of what happened. He
initiated an initial review back in March. The results
concluded that it was likely to be one of these two scenarios.
He's now asked on a 90-day basis for the entire government
to really dig into everything we have, including working with
experts, to see if we can make a determination. At the same
time, we're pressing the World Health Organization to move
forward with its Phase 2 study to understand the origins.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. The COVID-19 pandemic has
made it clear that the economic interdependence with the
Chinese Communist Party threatens American lives and
prosperity, and the CCP is continuing to poison economic ties
that were previously thought to be benign.
They're degrading Hong Kong's legal and financial system,
contaminating supply chains with Uighur forced labor, and
extracting technology from corporations as the cost of
admission to China's market.
Secretary Kerry acknowledged before this committee that
China's dominance in solar panel manufacturing comes with
Uighur forced labor. What is the Administration going to do
about the CCP's continuing economic exploitation that threatens
our security, our economy, and our American way of life?
Secretary Blinken. Well, a couple of things. First, with
regard to the Uighurs and with regard to forced labor, we're
working very hard to try to make sure that products made with
forced labor do not come to the United States and, similarly,
that our companies do not, one way or another, inadvertently
aid and abet the repression of Uighurs or anyone else by the
technology that we export, including surveillance technology.
We have a new executive order that covers that to try to
make sure that we're using all the tools at our disposal to
prevent that.
More broadly, to your question, we're working across the
entire spectrum to deal with many of the things that you just--
that you just raised, for example, building more resilient and
diversified supply chains.
Second, working with countries around the world to shine a
light on the need to have trusted vendors in their networks,
especially when it comes to high tech, 5G, for example, to have
laws on the books to allow them to do that and to make sure
that, especially when it comes to sensitive areas of their
economies or sensitive technology, they have their guard up and
are not doing business with some of these vendors to include
Huawei.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Let me move on.
Most fentanyl and fentanyl-related products in the United
States, let's face it, originate in China. These substances
continue to fuel the opioid crisis in this country.
President Biden has said he will make fentanyl a, quote,
``top priority in our dealings with China,'' unquote. Have you
spoken with the president about this issue and what adjustments
have been made at the State Department to advance this
priority?
Secretary Blinken. I've, certainly, spoken to him about it
in the past. So you're exactly right, he is deeply concerned.
He's deeply concerned by the countries that export precursors
or export fentanyl to the United States, whether it's China,
whether it's coming through Mexico and other places and we are
very focused on that.
This is something that we engage directly with our Chinese
counterparts and we are looking to see concrete action to stop
and, certainly diminish the export of fentanyl or precursors to
the United States.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Let me squeeze one more in.
The national security officials in the Biden Administration
have argued that it would be destabilizing to clarify U.S.
support for Taiwan's defense. Does the department agree with
this sentiment, despite its being sharply at odds with the
analysis of our uniformed commanders?
And, basically, I'm talking about the so-called strategic
ambiguity, which I think is a terrible idea. Where are you at
that--at this point on that?
Chairman Meeks. Very briefly.
Secretary Blinken. I'm sorry?
Chairman Meeks. I just said very briefly. Two seconds.
Mr. Chabot. Very briefly.
Secretary Blinken. Sorry. We are committed to the
proposition that Taiwan must have the means to defend itself
and that is consistent with the Taiwan Relations Act. We have
continued to provide significant equipment and sales to Taiwan
for that purpose and I will continue to work closely with them.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you for that.
I now recognize Representative Gerry Connolly of Virginia,
who's the president of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
welcome back to the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Thank you
so much for joining us today. As the Chairman indicated, I am
serving on this----
Chairman Meeks. We're having a hard time hearing you, Mr.
Connolly. You're coming in very (inaudible). You're breaking
up. It's hard to hear you, to understand you.
Mr. Connolly. Can you hear now?
Chairman Meeks. Well, maybe. Let's go ahead and try it.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Secretary, can you hear me?
Chairman Meeks. Mr. Secretary, can you hear Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Secretary, can you understand Mr. Connolly?
Secretary Blinken. It's coming in a little--a little----
Chairman Meeks. Choppy.
Secretary Blinken. Choppy. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I'm sorry, I----
Secretary Blinken. There we go. That sounded better.
Mr. Connolly. I'm very far away in Fairfax.
Chairman Meeks. There you go.
Mr. Connolly. OK. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I was saying welcome back, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you so much for joining us as at the House Foreign Affairs
Committee.
As the Chairman indicated, I serve as the president of the
NATO Parliamentary Assembly, which, as you know, is kind of the
legislative arm of NATO representing all 30 member countries
and parliamentary delegations, as well as 12 associate Members.
Our top priority, our top priority, that we're recommending
to the Secretary General and to our respective governments is
the creation of a Center for Democratic Resilience within NATO.
NATO is 71 years old. It has all the architecture
imaginable in terms of collective security and military
preparedness and cooperation, and interoperability and
mobilization.
It has no architecture, none, dedicated to what we say we
are organized around, namely, shared democratic values. We are
experiencing backsliding among some Members. We see some
backsliding among prospective Members.
We, certainly, experienced an insurrection in our own
country at the cradle of democracy, at the Capitol. And so we
feel that creating a center that could serve as a resource, a
clearinghouse, best practices, the place people could go to how
do you do judicial reform, how do you--how do you run a
parliament in a democratic way, how do you build in
accountability in prospective governments, we think, is long
overdue.
And I was very pleased that the working group that's doing
the spade work for the Secretary General in preparation of the
strategic concept embraced our recommendation and recommended
it.
We have taken this idea on the road to the Marshall Fund,
the Wilson Center, lots of other bodies, most of whom have
embraced it. So I want to commend the idea to you and strongly
urge you to press it as a position of the United States with
respect to the Secretary General.
But I'd also like to give you the opportunity to react.
Secretary Blinken. First, thank you. Thank you for all of
the work that you and your colleagues have done in support of
NATO. It's vital and the legislative connection could not be
more important. So we're really grateful for that.
Second, we have, I think, an important opportunity at this
upcoming NATO Summit to, hopefully, bless the work that
Secretary General Stoltenberg has been doing to help NATO more
effectively address exactly the kinds of challenges that you're
talking about, including democratic resilience.
He has a NATO 2030 initiative, as you know very well, that
incorporates some of these--some of these ideas, and revising
the Strategic Concept is a critical piece of that.
The last time, as you know, it was revised was 2010, at
this point in the Strategic Concept Russia was referred to as a
partner and China was nonexistent. So we have our work to do. I
think we also have a real opportunity that the president is
deeply engaged in as we head to the summit meeting in just a
few days.
So, in short, I think, and I expect and certainly hope that
we'll see significant progress, in particular, in strengthening
NATO to deal with democratic resilience.
Mr. Connolly. So, Mr. Secretary, our view, though, is that
this has to be part of the architecture of NATO itself. It
cannot be an outside center. We have outside centers. You know,
democracy is not on a par with dealing with the cyber threat.
Democracy is the raison d'etre, and I know you know this
and believe it for why we have NATO, and from our point of
view, shared democratic values are as potent an antidote to
authoritarianism, propounded by Putin and Xi, as is our
strength--our military strength. Otherwise, we become just
another military bloc.
And so I just strongly urge you to take under advisement
the idea of building into the architecture of NATO itself a
Center for Democratic Resilience that could really serve as a
resource not only for Members but for prospective Members. And
I commend that thought to you.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Representative Joe Wilson of South
Carolina, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on the Middle
East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Greg Meeks, for your
bipartisan leadership.
Mr. Secretary, sadly, American media of the left have
become a propaganda arm of Hamas terrorists. Sickening proof, a
page of the New York Times 10 days ago, May 28th, picturing 64
dead children of Gaza and Israel, ignoring total Hamas
responsibility.
But for the 4,500 rocket attacks by Hamas war criminals of
Iranian missiles targeting Israeli families, no child would be
dead.
But for Hamas using children as human shields no child
would be dead. The photo display is a disgusting smear of
Israel and the people of Israel.
What is your view of the American media coverage? What can
the State Department do to provide the truth of the rocket
attacks on families by Hamas with Iranian rockets?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I guess the first thing I'd
say is that in my--in my position, the one thing I do not do is
politics. I'll focus on the policy, and so I'll leave it to
others to do the politics.
Second, to the point that you've made about Hamas, it is--
it would be unacceptable for any country to have rockets rain
down on it indiscriminately targeting civilians and not do
something about it.
And as you know, we strongly supported Israel's right to
defend itself, to defend its people, against these
indiscriminate rocket attacks. As a democracy, Israel also has
an extra burden to do everything it possibly can to avoid
civilian casualties.
And I have to tell you, I think we're all--and irrespective
of politics, we also cannot lose sight of the fact that lives
were lost on both sides in this most recent conflict,
including----
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Secretary, respectfully, this would have
not occurred if there hadn't been rocket attacks. This was not
just an incidental occurrence. The rocket attacks were the sole
cause of the death of these children. And that's--it's not
politics.
As a former journalist myself, I'm just shocked that we
would have American media be so complicit in promoting a false
narrative that Hamas is not totally responsible. And you can
only make so many--and I've been to Israel to see mothers there
protecting their children. It's just horrifying. And so we need
to be specific and go after the war criminals. Congressman
Sherman was correct.
And on another issue, in regard to the Iranian nuclear
deal, there's an effort to resume that but there's no mention
of addressing the Iranian efforts of ballistic missile
capabilities.
There's only one reason for ballistic missile capabilities,
is provide a nuclear attack against the people of America to
promote their view death to America, death to Israel. Why is
there no effort to include a bar against continuing development
of intercontinental ballistic missiles?
Secretary Blinken. There are multiple egregious activities
that Iran is engaged in including missile activity,
proliferation, support for proxy groups, terrorism,
destabilizing actions.
Each and every one would be even worse if Iran had a
nuclear weapon or was on the threshold of having one. It would
be able to act with even greater community.
So the first urgent thing that we need to do, if we can, is
to try to put the nuclear problem back in the box that it was
in under the agreement and, unfortunately, it has now gotten
out of.
And that takes away not in the least from our ability and
determination to deal with these other actions that Iran is
engaged in, including the ones you rightly point to with regard
to missiles.
Mr. Wilson. But their actions, clearly, indicate they're
not serious, OK. They're developing missiles to deliver what
they plan to do in the future. Additionally, there's no
provision to stop regional instability by providing the rockets
to Hamas and Hezbollah to attack Israel, by providing the
rockets to the Houthis to attack Saudi Arabia, beginning with
the Beirut bombing killing hundreds of Americans, the IEDs
killing hundreds of Americans in Iraq. Why is there no
reference to blocking the instability which Iran is promoting
throughout the region?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, there are constant
references to it. Not only references, efforts and actions
taken to stop it, curb it, deal with it. But at the same time,
we have a nuclear program that was in a box that is now
escaping from the box.
Each and every single one of those activities is going to
be even worse if Iran has a nuclear weapon or has the ability
to produce one on very short order. So none of--these things
are not inconsistent. We are working to deal with the nuclear
program and to combat Iran's other actions in these other
areas. We're committed to doing both.
Mr. Wilson. But----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Wilson [continuing]. Thing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Ted Deutch
of Florida, the Chairman of the Subcommittee on the Middle
East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, for holding today's
hearing. I appreciate the commitment that you and the Ranking
Member have made to this committee's engagement with the
Administration, and Secretary Blinken, thanks for rescheduling
your appearance here so quickly and we appreciate your
willingness to keep an open line of communication.
I want to start just by acknowledging and thanking you and
the Administration for the efforts on providing vaccines around
the world. The commitment to distribute at least 80 million
COVID-19 vaccinations worldwide by the end of this month is so
important, and from Mexico to India, throughout Africa, Asia,
the Americas, it's really critical that America leads here and
you are, and we're grateful for that.
I also want to thank you for the Administration's strong
commitment to fighting the disturbing rise in global anti-
Semitism. Attacks are up 80 percent, and I know you're deeply
and personally committed to combating anti-Semitism. I
appreciate your statement today that the Department's going to
move quickly to appoint a special envoy to monitor and combat
anti-Semitism. We look forward to seeing that happen very soon.
And I want to followup on your trip to the Middle East last
week. Over the course of the 11-day conflict between Israel and
Hamas, the Administration engaged in sustained quiet diplomacy,
helping to facilitate the cease-fire agreement.
You and the president repeatedly reaffirmed Israel's right
to defend itself from a terrorist organization's rockets, and
I'm deeply appreciative of the commitment the Administration
has made to Israel's security, including the work that you're
doing now as you committed again this morning to ensure the
replenishment of Israel's life-saving Iron Dome missile defense
system.
So just to followup on Mr. Wilson's question, Hamas
launched 4,500 rockets over 11 days, rockets that have long
been supplied with support from Iran. At the same time, the
Administration is deeply engaged in indirect negotiations with
Iran over mutual reentry into the JCPOA.
And as you and I have discussed previously, I support
reentry into the JCPOA so long as it gets us to a stronger and
longer deal, as you've committed, one that will ensure that
Iran never gets a nuclear weapon and can lead to an
international agreement with our P5+1 partners to limit the
nonnuclear behavior of Iran, like its support for terror
proxies, ballistic missile advancements.
So while talks have been ongoing, we are hearing troubling
reports from the IAEA about their ongoing access to Iranian
nuclear sites, failure to explain uranium traces at three
sites.
We also have Americans still held hostage by Iran, and I
will not miss an opportunity to raise the resolution of the
case of my constituent, Bob Levinson. The Levinson family
deserves closure from the Iranians.
So your position thus far has been compliance for
compliance, the continuation of non-JCPOA sanctions leading to
a deal that, as you say, is longer and stronger. There are some
who are arguing once you lift any sanctions you lose the
possibility of ever getting to longer and stronger.
I'd ask if you could help us understand the path from JCPOA
reentry to a follow-on agreement, and at what point do we deal
with the nonnuclear issues? When do those come into view and
how do we address them?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Thank you very much, and
thank you also for raising Bob Levinson. We're determined to
bring closure and resolution to that as well as to bring home
any arbitrarily detained American or any American held hostage
anywhere. This is a real focus, irrespective of anything else
that we're doing.
With regard to the JCPOA and any follow-ons, first of all,
we're not--we're not even at the stage of returning to
compliance for compliance. We do not know if that's actually
going to happen.
We have been engaged in indirect conversations, as you
know, for the last couple of months and it remains unclear
whether Iran is willing and prepared to do what it needs to do
in compliance. So we're still testing that proposition.
But to your point, what we what we do know, unfortunately,
is that, meanwhile, its program is galloping forward. It has
lifted restraints imposed on it by the agreement, including the
amount of enriched material that it has, material that's now,
in some cases, enriched up to 20 percent and even a small
amount to 60 percent.
It has started to deploy some more advanced centrifuges.
The longer this goes on, the more their breakout time gets
down. The agreement, it pushed it to a year or more. It's now
down by published reports to a few months at best, and if this
continues, it will get down to a matter of weeks, exactly what
we have sought to avoid and what the agreement stopped.
And so we have a real incentive, if we can, to at least put
that back in the box and then, to your point, use it as a
platform both to look at whether the agreement itself can be
lengthened and, if necessary, strengthened. And also, to
capture these other issues.
We're going to be in a much better place with our allies,
with our partners who've wanted to stick with the agreement for
all this time, to do exactly that, to insist that Iran engage
on these other issues, and there will be a united front to hold
them to--hold them to account.
We continue, as you know, even if--even with the agreement
if we return to compliance to have all of these other tools,
which we will very actively use to deal with the other problems
presented by Iran.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Blinken. But we are actively talking to our
partners about exactly what----
Chairman Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. The gentleman's
time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Darrell Issa of California
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I guess the first question, as you know, in
wartime we look to the military to look for peace, and in peace
time we look for you to conduct many times things which are
warlike.
In the case right now of vaccine distribution, China has
aggressively denied countries that recognize Taiwan vaccines.
Will you commit to either directly or through our allies to
provide what would otherwise be available to those countries
from China an equal or greater amount as part of our diplomatic
efforts?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you, Congressman. We are--with the
distribution of the vaccines and anything that follows from
that, based on need, based on--based on science, based on
equity, based on a whole series of factors, we're going to make
sure that those who need it get it and that would include
Taiwan.
Mr. Issa. No, no, I wasn't talking about Taiwan. I was
talking about countries in Central America that recognize
Taiwan.
Secretary Blinken. I missed--I missed--I apologize. I
missed your question. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Yes. Right. And the question is the--you know,
the equity, obviously, moves when China is denying them access
to the drugs they----
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Yes. Yes, absolutely, and I think
in the first allotment, the 25 million, about 6 million or so
are dedicated to our own hemisphere, including Central America.
Mr. Issa. OK. And I guess the second question goes right
back to vaccines again. As you know, the Administration has
committed or at least proposed that they may invalidate or set
aside patents and other materials by those country or those
companies which have vaccines and are supplying them under U.S.
patents.
And I know that I'm not asking you to go against policy,
but from a--from a practical standpoint, isn't one of your
mandates to promote and defend our historic recognition of
patents and trademarks and intellectual property?
And from an equally practical standpoint, 6 months from
now, essentially, will not the entire world have had an
opportunity to receive from one or another source at least the
current vaccine?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Yes, protecting patents,
protecting trademarks, protecting intellectual property is very
much a part of our mission, our national mission and the State
Department's mission.
In this case, first of all, as you know, this would be a
very lengthy process, but a very now issue-bound time-bound
exception. That's what's being discussed.
As we have looked at it, Congressman, I think the challenge
we have is this. If we stayed on the current course before we
were distributing the 80 million, before we're looking at
increasing production around the world, not just in the United
States, we're on track to have the world vaccinated or at least
to have 75 or so percent of the world vaccinated not until
2024. And even if we're fully vaccinated, as you know, that
does not do it because variants start to perk up, spread and
come back. Economies----
Mr. Issa. Yes, and if I can--if I can quickly----
Secretary Blinken. Please.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. Focus the question, there were only
a relatively small amount of laboratories and facilities around
the world in maybe 15 or 20 countries that have the capability
of producing safely and effectively these drugs and a fraction
of those have the ability to develop them.
From a practical standpoint, many of the countries that
would see these invalidated do not currently and are not likely
to have the ability to safely produce them. And, of course, the
technology, if it became widely available, would give China and
some of our other adversaries--Russia--access to technology
that allows them to compete.
Isn't there a way to encourage or facilitate those
additional assets to be put online to maximize production
without giving up intellectual property to, if you will, our
current adversaries?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Look, there may well be. We
just want to make sure that we have every tool at our disposal
to accelerate the production of and the access to vaccines.
So we want to make sure everything's on the table. We'll
have to make a determination of what is most effective, what is
most efficient, and also does not have unintended consequences,
or second or third order effects that would be problematic.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And in order to save time, I'll
followup with a suggestion offline.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Karen Bass, who is the Chair
of the Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and Global Human
Rights, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and, certainly,
thank you, Mr. Secretary, for coming back to our committee
again, and I actually wanted to followup on my colleague, Mr.
Issa.
I, too, am concerned about intellectual property. But in
this instance, I'm way more concerned about global health. And
so I know that there are at least a couple of countries in
Africa that are ready to manufacture and--vaccines, and so I
wanted to know where we are in terms of that, exporting our
technology to a manufacturer.
And I think that's so important, not just because of COVID
but because of future pandemics. How do we think about the
world in terms of increasing the capacity and not just thinking
about the profits that can--that could be made?
So I wanted to ask you that. I have a couple of other
questions, too, but maybe you could respond to that right now.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. And, in short, we need to do
two things. Beyond the distribution of vaccines that we have
access to, we need to increase production and that means both
in the United States but also around the world.
And I think we also need to increase production capacity in
different parts of the world for precisely the reasons that you
cite, whether it's for this pandemic or for anything coming
down the road in the future.
And it makes sense, certainly, on a regional basis, to
have--to have countries that can be production hubs that's
going in the future to facilitate getting vaccines out
effectively and efficiently or other health products out
effectively and efficiently.
So we're looking, in short, at that and looking to see what
can be done to either increase or develop as necessary
production capacity in different parts of the world, including
Africa.
Ms. Bass. Now, I didn't see that in documents I looked in.
Are there specific line items or categories of the budget that
you are requesting to do just that? Is there any support that
you need from us?
Secretary Blinken. I think that there are a couple of
things. In our own budget, we have asked for resources
dedicated to helping countries, including in Africa, better
develop the capacity to detect, prevent, mitigate the potential
outbreak of pandemic. So that's one category and that's very
important.
When it comes to the production piece, I do not think--but
let me--let me come back to you, if I can, on that. I do not
think that's part of our----
Ms. Bass. OK.
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. Budget. But let me come
back to you on it.
Ms. Bass. OK, no problem. I noticed that you had several
accounts that were decreased in Africa. Ethiopia, for example,
is $34 million below. Kenya and Mali accounts are also
decreased, too.
For Ethiopia, I'm wondering is that directly related to the
conflict? And then I do not--I do not know why that would be
the case with Kenya and Mali, especially given the problems
that Mali is currently facing.
Secretary Blinken. Yes. With Ethiopia, we are more than
deeply concerned about the situation in the country as a whole,
but particularly right now in Tigray, and I think we need to
look very carefully at the allocation of resources because, as
you know better than I do, we not only have the horrific
violence and the atrocities that have been committed, we now
have a famine right on top of that.
Ms. Bass. Right.
Secretary Blinken. So I do want to go back and make sure
that we have the appropriate resources dedicated to deal with
that. In the first instance, though, we have to get
humanitarian access.
We have to get a cessation of hostilities so that people
can do their jobs. We have to get an end to the intentional
destruction of food sources, which is one of----
Ms. Bass. So----
Secretary Blinken [continuing]. Which is driving it. So I
need to--I need to take a look and make sure that we are
effectively resourced. And let me come back to you, in the
interests of time, on the--on the other countries you
reference.
Ms. Bass. OK. So the other area I wanted to ask you about
is the staffing of the State Department. No. 1, when you
entered, are you facing a large number of vacancies? I'm asking
you that specifically in regard to the diversity issue because
oftentimes when diversity is mentioned, people feel like
they're going to lose something.
And so the commitment that I made to the Staff Association
was that I would push for an expansion of mid-career positions.
I want to know, do you need them? Did you encounter a large
number of vacancies in general about the work force?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Thank you. Yes, we have significant
vacancies to fill and we also have to have new positions in
order to deal with many of the challenges that have already
been alluded to this morning where we are understaffed or under
resourced.
That's why we have asked for almost 500 new Foreign Service
or civil service positions, including also, on top of that, 70
for global health security----
Ms. Bass. Are those career? Are any of those for career?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Yes.
Ms. Bass. OK. Great.
Secretary Blinken. And USAID would have the 70 or so
positions. But I'd actually love to come back to you on some of
the specifics, because we do have gaps that we need to fill and
we need Congress' help. We very much appreciate the support for
that.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. Thank you for that. The
gentlelady's time has expired.
I now call on Representative Lee Zeldin of New York for 5
minutes.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank for being here. You recently announced
sanctions on the former president of Albania, Sali Berisha, for
many that seemingly came out of nowhere. As far as a history of
U.S. political associations, he was a guest, an ally, of the
Bushes. He was also known to be an aggressive opponent of
George Soros.
What specific information can you share with the committee
at this time to justify this dramatic move?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. We continue to look across
the board at those who are engaged in corrupt activities who
are undermining human rights or pose a challenge to democracy
or democratic principles.
We had--in his case, the case developed through the--
through the normal process, including our lawyers, and I'd be
happy--if it's helpful happy to share with you exactly what
went into that.
Mr. Zeldin. Yes. Is there any specific information that you
can share with the committee at this time in this hearing?
Secretary Blinken. I do not have anything to share right
now for the committee, but I'd be happy to come and make sure
that we share that with you and anyone else who's interested.
Mr. Zeldin. I tried to do some research as to what type of
new information involving his corruption and I couldn't find
anything. So where should anybody go--a member of the media,
let's say, wants to find out information, because there's some
back and forth going on right now between the State Department,
your decision on the sanctions against him and his family, as
well as Mr. Berisha's defense. Where would a member of the
media go to get information on what corruption you're referring
to?
Secretary Blinken. Sure. Two things. First, with regard to
Members, before I get to the media, please come to our Office
of Legislative Affairs and we'll make sure that you get the
information.
And second, with regard to the media, of course, please
come to the office of the spokesperson and Public Affairs, and
we'll make sure that, consistent with whatever other
obligations or restrictions we have, we make information
available.
Mr. Zeldin. OK. But are you aware of anywhere that is open
source info backing up this claim that there was some new
allegations of corruption involving Mr. Berisha?
Secretary Blinken. I think that certainly, anyone from the
media can ask that question, for example, in the briefings that
we do every single day at the State Department and get whatever
information we have that's publicly available.
Mr. Zeldin. Just to clear up one item of Mr. Berisha's
defense, have you--I'm just trying to understand what's true
and what's not true. Have you or anyone on your behalf had any
communication with Mr. Soros and anyone on his behalf? Just
trying to clarify what's true and what's not true.
Secretary Blinken. I have not. I cannot speak to the entire
State Department, but I have not.
Mr. Zeldin. If--with regards to the COVID origin question
that you were asked, what would the U.S. actually do of
substance to pressure China to give access to the lab if China
does not grant that access?
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, what we have seen,
unfortunately, more than unfortunately, from the PRC since the
beginning of this crisis is a failure to meet its basic
responsibilities in terms of sharing information, providing
access, and doing that in real time with transparency.
That was true at the start. It remains true, unfortunately,
today, and I think what you're seeing is through the work
that's being done, for example, at the WHO, the work that we're
doing and the concerns expressed by countries around the world
that there is a strong course insisting that China make good on
its commitment--on its responsibilities to provide the
information.
I do not want to get into hypotheticals, going forward, in
the future about what we would or would not do. But I think I
can say with confidence that there is going to be an increasing
international demand that countries, including China, meet
their responsibilities when it comes to providing information,
access, and transparency on global health, including COVID.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. And there's
just many in Congress who are skeptical of whether or not China
is going to grant access to the labs and we're trying to
understand what the next step is going to be if and when China
says that lab access will not be granted.
Also, clarify one other point. Does the Biden
Administration recognize Israeli sovereignty over the Golan
Heights?
Secretary Blinken. With regard to that, as a practical
matter Israel has a control of the Golan Heights irrespective
of its--of its legal status, and that will have to remain
unless and until things get to a point where Syria and
everything operating out from Syria no longer poses a threat to
Israel, and we are not anywhere near that.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you for that. The gentleman's time
has expired.
I now recognize Representative Bill Keating of
Massachusetts, who is the Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Europe, Energy, and the Environment and Cyber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you for the State Department's work,
particularly with trying to free Paul Whelan and Trevor Reed.
My question, first question is this. Despite sanctions, we
have seen an escalation of attacks--cyber attacks in our
country, disrupting the food production chain, disrupting our
energy chain, and I have great concerns about that expanding to
healthcare institutions as well, among so many others.
Despite these sanctions, they are escalating and they are
becoming more of a concern. The president has moved
domestically to try and shore up cooperation with the private
side. We're advancing a bill here in our committee for the
Cyber Diplomacy Act. What can we do to better coordinate and
what suggestions do you have for dealing with this great
threat?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. This is front and center in
our focus, the cyber threat writ large and, of course, its most
recent manifestations in terms of ransomware, which is deeply,
deeply, deeply concerning.
So on that, let me just speak to that very quickly. We are
working whole of government to develop a counter ransomware
strategy to better protect all of our networks and, of course,
this requires working closely with the private sector, since
many of these things are controlled by the private sector, to
disrupt and destroy ransomware infrastructure and ecosystems,
to find and bring to justice those responsible, to build an
international coalition to hold countries who harbor those
engaged in ransomware attacks accountable and, of course, much
more international coordination with regard to the use of
infrastructure, money laundering, et cetera, that is required
for these attacks, as well as getting at some of the crypto
currency challenges to find ways to stop transactions.
So this is a whole of government effort and it is building
out a comprehensive strategy. One of the things that President
Biden will make clear to President Putin when he sees him is
that States cannot be in the business of harboring those who
are engaged in these kinds of attacks.
Mr. Keating. I have legislation also in the CROOK Act, and
I'm glad you mentioned President Putin because in Russia, as we
know, this kind of nonactor activity would not go on without
the knowledge or the tacit approval of Russia.
So I look forward to those discussions.
This Friday, Mr. Secretary, we're going to have the first
hearing, to my knowledge, on the human rights issue dealing
with the LGBTQI community. There's been progress in the Balkans
in this respect. But in Russia, Poland, Turkey, and even
Hungary, we have seen a greater concern for attacks on this
civil rights issue.
The U.S. has to be in a leadership role in this regard, I
think, to make progress. What could you--what do you advocate
in terms of moving forward on this important human rights
issue?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I very, very much agree with you.
We are deeply concerned by not just the ongoing challenges to
LGBTQI rights but actual backsliding in a number of places,
which is not, in some sense, surprising since we're seeing
backsliding on democracy writ large.
And this is very much a part of the State Department's
portfolio and our work. We are engaging directly with countries
where we're seeing either backsliding or the failure to uphold
LGBTQI rights, and this is something that our Ambassadors are
seized with, our diplomats are seized with, and I am seized
with.
And so whenever--and whether it's in the countries that you
referenced or others, when we're seeing a problem we're putting
a spotlight on it. We're engaging with these countries to make
sure they understand that we are--we're looking at this very,
very closely and carefully and we want to see progress.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. It's great to hear that the State
Department is going to take a leading role on this. It's an
important priority. I'll have written questions on J-1 visas
and other issues to come. But my time is waning quickly. So I
want to thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman yields back his
time.
I now recognize Representative Brian Mast of Florida for
questions.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. Appreciate the time.
I just want to start with this question, Mr. Secretary, and
that is this. Who is in charge of Gaza?
Secretary Blinken. Who's in charge of Gaza? As a practical
matter, probably more than anyone Hamas.
Mr. Mast. I'm glad this is an acknowledgment that we can
both agree on. Would you say that any Palestinian police forces
did anything to try to disrupt the thousands of rockets that
were fired into Israel?
Secretary Blinken. I guess I would distinguish--well, first
of all, it's not clear what capacity they had. In terms of any
forces in Gaza, absolutely not. As you know, Palestinian police
forces in the West Bank work in coordination with Israel to try
to provide for security in the West Bank.
There's been, I think, tremendous success with that over
the years, and it's something that I know the Israelis value.
But with regard to Gaza, no.
Mr. Mast. Nothing in Gaza. The Palestinian National
Security Forces, they have no--I mean that they have a
jurisdiction that they couldn't function in that way over
there.
But as we talk about that and what's going on in Gaza and
the thousands of rockets that were fired in May, those that
were fired in April, those that were fired back in January,
could you give any assurances that we're not going to be
talking about rockets fired in July, August, September and
throughout the year?
Secretary Blinken. I think I got the import of the
question, Congressman. I lost you a little bit there. But can I
give assurances that this will not happen again in the future?
No, I cannot. And in fact, I think that underscores the
importance as well as the urgency in making sure that as we
engage in addressing the deep humanitarian challenges in Gaza
and rebuilding and reconstruction, we do it in a way that does
not benefit Hamas and allow it to further rearm or put itself
in a position to engage in further attacks.
And it's also pretty hard to ask countries around the world
to contribute to rebuilding and reconstruction if there is a
real prospect that everything that is--that is rebuilt will
wind up--wind up losing because Hamas decides to engage in
further rocket attacks. I would hope that Palestinian people
would see that Hamas has brought nothing but ruin and misery to
them and----
Mr. Mast. So let's start with that. Let's go there a
minute, Mr. Secretary. I know--I appreciate your time and
you're answering these questions. Hamas is in charge there. Why
would you say Abbas is cancer?
Let me ask it this way. Would you agree Abbas has canceled
elections because in all likelihood Hamas would take the
majority again, as they did previously back in 2006?
Secretary Blinken. Mr. Abbas says that elections couldn't
go forward because of the--because of the inability to vote in
East Jerusalem. But I would certainly suspect that part of his
calculation is concerned that Hamas would do--would do well in
elections.
Mr. Mast. So it's not just that Hamas is taking over by
force. If Hamas would do well in the elections, then we're
talking about the people fundamentally supporting Hamas, which
makes it a false hope that the people would realize that
they've been drastically hurt by Hamas and all of their--they
would--in your speculation, as you've said, Hamas would
probably win the majority of people voting for them.
Secretary Blinken. Hamas--Hamas feeds very effectively on
despair and the lack of hope, and so in the absence of that,
some people will, unfortunately, tragically, horrifically turn
to extremes, which I think only underscores the imperative
including for Israel's security, that we find ways to
effectively offer----
Mr. Mast. It's not some people. It's the majority. It's the
majority----
Secretary Blinken. Not necessarily. Again, it depends how--
it depends how the--you know, the way the elections if there
were elections go forward. Groups come together in coalitions.
If the Palestinian Authority groups are divided, they may
well represent a majority of the people but still not win an
election or Abbas might do better. There are all sorts of
different permutations. But the point is, and I think an
important point----
Mr. Mast. What's policy, though? I think we largely agree
on this. We're, largely, agreeing that Hamas is in charge there
and Hamas--Abbas certainly recognizes that Hamas may very well
win a popular election, and we're going to give them hundreds
of millions of dollars or invest hundreds of millions of
dollars into their infrastructure.
Secretary Blinken. In a way that does not benefit Hamas and
in a way that benefits the----
Mr. Mast. That's impossible. It's impossible to not benefit
Hamas.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative David Cicilline of Rhode
Island for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being back before the
committee and for your extraordinary work. In the 3-months
since you last appeared before this committee, the United
States has confronted an array of challenges including the
COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the developing world,
climate change, the conspicuous rise of authoritarianism and
the renewed crisis in Gaza.
It's clear that the United States needs to robustly fund
the Department of State and the Agency for International
Development and all of the related foreign affairs programs so
that we can address the challenges of the 21st century head on.
And so my first question, really, is as we seek to reenter
or reengage with the world and recenter our foreign policy of
focusing on democracy, human rights, and the rule of law as
pillars of United States foreign policy, we need to ensure that
our diplomats have all the tools that they need to do this
work.
And Representative Bera and myself along with Senator
Murphy and Senator Van Hollen have been leading on this
proposal, Investing in the 21st Century diplomacy, a plan that
would call for an increase of $12 billion for State and USAID.
So the challenges are daunting and you are providing
extraordinary leadership. But my question really is, are there
enough resources there and what can we do to further support
your work?
Because I think we all recognize that additional funding
for key departments and agencies and programs are going to
really be necessary to give our country the best chances of
leading successfully.
Secretary Blinken. Congressman, I deeply appreciate that
and deeply appreciate Congress' support for the resources that
we need to effectively represent the United States and advance
our interests around the world.
I think the budget requests that we're making answers the
needs that we have, the gaps that need to be filled, both in
terms of programs and also in terms of personnel.
And there are, as you know, a whole host of areas where we
have to make sure that the State Department, USAID, the other
agencies of our foreign policy, have not just the programmatic
resources, which are vitally important, but the human resources
necessary to do the work, and there are a number of areas where
we have to buildup even more our skill set.
I'm thinking particularly of global health, of technology
and emerging technologies, climate and the environment, and, of
course, China, the one country that poses economically,
militarily, politically, diplomatically, the biggest challenge
the United States.
So the budget requests tries to, among other things, fill
some of those gaps and make sure that we're resourced
appropriately.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I just want to get
one more question in. I know human rights remain a priority for
the Administration in a time when we have seen a real decline
globally in human rights.
The LGBTQI community particularly has faced increased
hostility from governments that seek to scapegoat LGBTQ people
to shore up their political base or deflect from their failed
leadership.
And while you've increased the number of things you've
referenced--global climate change and gender equality and U.S.
leadership in international organizations--funding for LGBTQ
accounts have remained flat, and I just wonder how the
Administration is going to meet this challenge--Congressman
Keating mentioned it as well--of expanding the rights and
protections for global LGBTQI populations with flat funding
when the problem is really increasing dramatically all around
the world, and kind of how you expect to meet that challenge
with that flat funding.
Secretary Blinken. I think it starts with making it clear,
as we have, that this is an important component of our--of our
foreign policy and our diplomacy--that is, defending and
protecting rights of LGBTQI persons.
And that's why, as I was discussing a little bit earlier
with our colleague, from our embassies to right here at main
State, in our engagements, in our conversations with
counterparts around the world and in countries in particular
where we have seen a failure to protect those rights or even
backsliding on those rights, this is very much in--part of what
we're talking to them about engaging with them on. So that--it
starts there.
We will have an envoy to put full time focus on this work.
That is vitally important, and that person and the team that
the person has will be engaged with all of our different
offices and all of our different bureaus to make sure that they
are, in their own work, keeping a spotlight and keeping
engagement on these issues.
So I think that based on the direction from me and from the
president this is something that we have the ability and the
commitment to focus on.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for that
assurance. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Representative Ann Wagner of Missouri, who
is the Vice Ranking Member of the full committee, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for organizing the
important meeting here today and hearing, and I want to thank
you, Secretary Blinken, for your time.
Mr. Secretary, just yesterday you committed to holding
China accountable for COVID-19's origins. I strongly agree. We
all do. But talk is often cheap, and we all want to see action,
a full investigation led by the United States of America.
As we continue to combat the coronavirus pandemic, we must
be united in ensuring that the People's Republic of China
cannot use this time of uncertainty to further undermine global
prosperity, stability, and the rule of law.
We should have acknowledged that right from the outset of
this devastating crisis. The Chinese Communist Party, or CCP,
suppressed, they misrepresented, and they falsified information
necessary to prevent a pandemic, and holding the CCP
accountable is the only way to deter the release of another
deadly virus on the global community in the future to ensure
that the Communist Party stops violating international law and
provide compensation to millions of Americans who suffered
tragic unthinkable losses over the course of this pandemic.
That's why I introduced the Compensation for Americans Act
in the 116th Congress, which will establish a compensation fund
for those affected and allow the president to freeze Chinese
assets to bring the Communist Party to this negotiating table,
which has been used in the past, and it also gives the United
States a comprehensive toolbox of punitive measures to further
incentivize China's cooperation. I will again be introducing
this legislation in the 117th Congress, and I hope my
colleagues will support my efforts to ensure that the United
States leads the way in holding the CCP accountable.
Secretary Blinken, the World Health Organization's abject
failure to combat China's coronavirus--related misinformation
campaign in the early days of the pandemic cost the
international community precious time it needed to avert a
crisis.
The WHO remains a deeply flawed institution and is highly
susceptible, as you know, to China's malign influence. The
president's budget request includes an additional $124 million
for the WHO.
I want to ask you, sir, is this funding contingent on the
implementation of stringent reforms that will prevent
totalitarian States like China from co-opting global health
policy to serve their interests? If not, what leverages does
the United States have to secure these badly needed reforms?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you very much. I very much agree
with you that the WHO is in need of reform and that's precisely
why the president reengaged the United States. It's very hard
to be a strong advocate and successful advocate for reform when
not only are you not at the table, you're not even in the room,
and in your absence, who is at the table and in the room? Well,
China, among others.
So the very first step that was important to be taken was
to reengage the United States, and that puts us in a much
better position and stronger position to advance the kind of
reforms that you're talking about and that we agree on. That
needs to happen and that's what we're focused on.
We also need to make sure that the WHO is appropriately
resourced in order to carry out the important work with
stronger tools and stronger commitments to prevent, detect,
mitigate the next pandemic and that requires, among other
things, not just that the WHO will have these tools and that
commitment, but that countries including China live up to their
responsibilities, which is what we're going to be focused on.
Mrs. Wagner. Mr. Secretary--Mr. Secretary, whatever we can
do to leverage the U.S. to secure these badly needed reforms
must be done and must be done urgently.
The United Nations Population Fund, or the UNFPA, was
complicit in the tragic and highly coercive implementation of
China's one child policy, which relied on the use of forced
sterilizations and abortions as forms of population control.
China is now restoring or resorting to similar tactics in
its horrifying persecution of the Uighur Muslims.
Secretary Blinken, the Biden Administration is restoring us
funding for the UNFPA. How can the United States justify
sending taxpayer funds to an organization that looks the other
way as China implements genocidal family planning programs.
And I know my time is short here. If you'd like to respond
briefly or in writing, sir.
Secretary Blinken. We conducted a very full review to make
sure that any funding provided to the Population Fund would not
be used in these ways and we're confident that's the case that
they have not--the U.N.--this program is not engaged in
coercive abortions or other coercive measures. On the contrary,
it seems that it has--its influence has helped move China in
the other direction.
Mrs. Wagner. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Ami Bera, Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, Central Asia, and
Nonproliferation, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, I'll reiterate our gratitude for your
availability both to the subcommittee, but I also want to
recognize the men and women that work for you and how available
they've been both to myself as well as to my subcommittee.
I also want to recognize the Chairman for his focus on the
region and the complexity in the region.
Mr. Secretary, as we work on the budget process, I do want
to make sure as we shift resources to the region, we also make
sure the budget reflects that both in the East Asia and South
and Central Asia bureaus.
I also want to associate myself with the Ranking Member,
Mr. McCaul's, comments on addressing Afghanistan, the folks--
the men and women--that supported our effort and mission there.
And, again, I know you and I have spoken about the Special
Immigration Visa as well as the urgency of protecting these men
and women.
So you'll find strong bipartisan support both in the
committee as well as in Congress to get the resources necessary
to honor our commitments.
I'm going to actually shift to a topic that hasn't come up.
As someone who supported the Trans-Pacific Partnership, I'm not
asking the Administration to reengage in that, although
obviously, we'd like that.
It was a tool not just of movement of goods and services
but also a geopolitical tool of strategy in setting the rules
and norms.
I actually think you would find some support in Congress.
Again, maybe it's not CPTPP but if we focused in on digital
trade or something like that. I talk to our like-minded allies
in the region, our friends in Singapore or New Zealand,
Australia, Japan, there really is a hunger for a reengagement
of the U.S., again, in setting the norms and the rules of
movement of goods and services and on issues like data privacy,
data localization.
I actually think you would find strong bipartisan support.
I would just point to the strong support that USMCA had with
over 193 Democrats and 192 Republicans voting in favor of
moving that deal forward on the House side.
So I'd be curious, again I think there is strong bipartisan
support for something in digital trade. I think it's urgent to
protect our privacy but also to set those norms and rules and
not let China set those norms and rules. So I'd be curious to
your thoughts.
Secretary Blinken. Yes, thank you. I very much agree with
the basic proposition. We need to be in the--in the business of
helping to set these norms and rules, particularly when it
comes to technology. That is something that we're engaged in a
number of conversations on right now.
I also want to defer to my colleagues at USTR and other--
Commerce, other places, that are very much focused on this. But
I agree with the basic point, and I think you'll see the United
States both engaged and leading in those areas.
Mr. Bera. Great. And again, I think you'll find a
bipartisan coalition as a member of the Digital Trade Caucus,
which is bipartisan, and a leader in that New Democrat
Coalition, 96 of us in the Democratic Caucus. I think you will
find strong partnership.
Let me shift to an area and region we do not talk as much
as I think we should, the freely associated States Micronesia,
Palau, others. We are seeing a lot of Chinese incursion into
this area that we have obviously had compacts with and a strong
partnership between the United States and the freely associated
States.
I am very worried about the Chinese influence in this
region and, again, want to express to those countries the
strong partnership and importance of the U.S. relationship. I'd
be curious how State Department is thinking about this region
and approaching it.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Yes, I agree with that as
well. I had the opportunity to speak to a gathering of those
very States just a few weeks ago, virtually.
And in addition, when it comes to the vaccine programs,
they are also part of the vaccines that we're--that we're
pushing out. And we are looking across the board at places
where China is engaged economically, diplomatically,
politically, militarily, to include--to include those States.
Mr. Bera. And last, in my last 15 seconds as I look at
Myanmar and what's happening in Burma I think there's a strong
commitment from the committee and the subcommittee to support
the people of Burma. This may be a long-term proposition, and
we look forward to working with the Administration and
supporting the people of Burma.
Secretary Blinken. Appreciate that. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Brian Fitzpatrick, the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Europe, Energy and the
Environment and Cyber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you again, sir.
Mr. Secretary, when representatives of the Chinese
government came to our country in Alaska and disrespected you,
they disrespected all of us, and I just wanted you to know,
sir, you stand strong against China, we will stand strongly
behind you, and this will be something that will unite our
country.
So I wanted you to know that you will have Republicans and
Democrats strongly supporting you and we know you're going to
stand strong against China and their abuses.
Sir, if you look back at the three coronavirus--based
pandemics that we faced this century, 2002 SARS1, roughly, 700
people died. The host source bat was found within 4 months.
Fast forward to 2012, MERS. Roughly, 800 people died. We
found the host source bat within eight to 9 months.
Fast forward to 2020. COVID-19, 3.5 million lives lost. No
indication that we will ever find the source, and I suspect
what we will ultimately discover, and we're going to have to do
it on our own through circumstantial evidence because we're not
going to gain access to anything in China, is that 75 percent
of that virus will have been natural, 25 percent will have been
genetically modified.
And I'm not going to ask you to answer a hypothetical,
sir--I do not like answering them myself--other than to say, I
hope to God that there is significant consequences to China
should anything come out, and we will stand behind you in a
bipartisan fashion. It will unify our country.
Because could you imagine if a virus leaked out from the
United States that killed 3.5 million people, cost $30 trillion
of lost economic growth worldwide, permanent psychological and
emotional damage to our kids? There would be protests in every
street across the planet.
I wanted to shift, sir, though to Nord Stream 2 and give
you an opportunity to address that. Our Eastern European
friends--Ukraine, Poland, the Baltics, Czech Republic--they are
very concerned about this, sir, about the message it sends
where we are opening--doing what America has done, which is
essentially lift sanctions and open up Nord Stream 2, allowing
Russia to not only transport gas, bypassing that whole region,
directly to Germany but, basically, funneling corruption to
them as well and really risking our allies in the East.
It's hurt relations with Germany and the United States with
these allies. I wanted to give you an opportunity to respond
and help us understand that.
Secretary Blinken. Great. Thank you. And let me just,
first, say how much I appreciate your comments about China and
I look forward to working with you on that.
With regard to Nord Stream 2, as you know, construction
started in 2018. By the time we took office, the pipeline was
over 90 percent physically completed. A couple of weeks ago on
May 19th, we actually sanctioned more entities, 13 ships, four
companies, that had ever been sanctioned under PISA.
What we also did, though, as you know, under the law was
issue a national interest waiver with regard to Nord Stream 2
AG and its CEO. That waiver can be rescinded.
There's a reason that we did that. As a practical matter,
the physical completion of the pipeline was, I think, a fait
accompli, and irrespective of sanctioning that entity and its
CEO, that would not, in our judgment, have changed anything in
terms of the physical completion.
So the worst of all worlds is a pipeline that's completed,
which we continue to believe is a fundamentally bad idea, a
poisoned well with one of our closest partners, Germany, which,
whether we like it or not, has invested a tremendous amount in
this, wrongly, I think, but they did it. They had a lot of sunk
costs.
They were determined to see its completion. So pipeline
complete, poisoned well with Germany, and no incentives for
Germany to actually work with us to mitigate and correct some
of the damage that this is likely to do.
Now Germany has come to the table and we are actively
engaged with them to look at what can and should and, I
believe, must be done to do some of the things that you've
alluded to.
Make sure that the transit fees that Ukraine at some point
in the future may lose as a result of this pipeline being able
to go around Ukraine, that they--that they are made hold, that
the ability of Russia to use gas as a coercive tool or weapon
against Ukraine or anyone else is eliminated and there are ways
to do that, and that we have agreements in place up front to
come back on any activities by Russia that are challenging the
security of any of these countries that we will take action
against them.
So I think we have an opportunity to make something
positive out of a bad hand that we inherited when we took
office.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Joaquin Castro, the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on International Development, International
Organizations and Global Social Impact, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Secretary
Blinken, for joining us again.
Secretary Blinken, over the past several months, the
situation in Colombia has seriously deteriorated and I'm very
concerned about the reports of police violence and brutal
crackdowns on protesters by the Duque government.
As you know, the United States provides a significant
amount of security assistance to Colombia, and I want to ask my
question in a historical context, that, for some reason in
Latin America, the United States has always found it easy to
press and challenge and sanction left-wing leaders, but for
some reason has given the kid glove treatment to right-wing
leaders over the years.
So I want to ask you, will you consider using our security
assistance to Colombia as leverage to stop these human rights
violations?
Secretary Blinken. When it comes to human rights
violations, democratic backsliding, other concerns we have, we
make no distinction between left, right, and center. Doesn't
matter, and we are going to address the situation as we--as we
see it and do what we can to help correct it.
When it comes to Colombia, as you know, Colombia has been,
remains a vital partner for the United States. We invested a
tremendous amount both diplomatically and in terms of resources
way back in dealing with narcotics.
That continues, and then helping to bring peace, including
the historic agreement in 2016 with the FARC, and we continue
to be invested in trying to make sure that we help Colombia
implement that agreement in a meaningful way.
And when it comes to the protests, we have been very
concerned about the use of excessive force by the police, other
concerns about human rights abuses that have been raised, and
we have called upon the government and, in fact, I met with the
foreign minister just about a week ago to make sure that the
police respect peaceful protest and also that the government
investigate and hold accountable any of those engaged in the
use of excessive force.
At the same time, what we have seen is the government
working to bring together all of the stakeholders in a dialog
to try to both understand and then, hopefully, act on the very
legitimate concerns and grievances that many of the protesters
have brought to the fore, and that process is ongoing and we
support it.
Mr. Castro. Well, thank you very much for those actions
and, of course, our committee will be monitoring the situation
closely in Colombia.
I want to ask you about separated families. A few weeks
ago, I sent a letter to you and the other co-Chairs of a
reunification task force asking you to support my legislation
with Senator Blumenthal, the Families Belong Together Act, to
ensure these families are given permanent status in the United
States.
After my conversations with executive director Michelle
Brane, my understanding was that the task force will be looking
at different policy recommendations to support these families,
and your department told my staff that these families are being
reunited under parole authority, which, as you know, is not a
long-term fix.
Will you commit to working with me in Congress to find a
permanent solution for these families, such as through the
Families Belong Together Act?
And just for the committee, these were the kids that were
separated from their parents, their mothers, oftentimes,
without any way to track them.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Thank you for putting a
spotlight on that. Thank you for your engagement on it. And we
want to find the most effective and most humane ways to make
sure that families come together and are reunited.
So we'll look at whatever tools we have consistent with
our--consistent with the law, consistent with our obligations,
consistent with, of course, maintaining a secure border, to do
that.
And whether it is through the asylum program, whether it's
through parole, whether it's through the refugee program,
whether it's through various legal pathways, we'll look at--
we'll, certainly, look at everything and work with you on that.
As you know, the responsibilities and equities of other
departments are front and center on this to include, obviously,
DHS, HHS. We're working closely with them. But I also invite
you to engage directly with them.
Mr. Castro. No, absolutely, and we certainly have and I
appreciate that, and would just ask that in the end that all
the departments of the Administration work together on a long-
term solution as we intend to try to do in Congress.
And then in my last few seconds--I do not have enough time
for full question--but I just wanted to bring to your attention
we sent a letter on May--some of us sent a letter on May 26th
on diversity again at the State Department, and we just ask for
your review of it as we'd like to get a response back.
Thank you again, Secretary, for being here again in such a
short time. Thank you.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Tim Burchett of Tennessee
for 5 minutes.
We cannot hear you, Representative Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Ah, there we go. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. I'm
sorry you missed that. I said some really nice things about
you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Burchett. I want to yield some time, if I could, a
minute to Representative Maria Salazar from Florida before I
get up to speak, Mr. Chairman, if that would be appropriate.
Chairman Meeks. That is appropriate. The gentleman yields.
Ms. Salazar. Yes. Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairman,
and Secretary Blinken, thank you for your time and for being
here with us.
I am Maria Salazar from District No. 27 and we have a
deeply problem situation in Nicaragua. I commend you for caring
about this topic, and I serve hundreds of thousands of
Nicaraguans exile community in my district.
In Costa Rica, as you know, a few days ago you met with
Nicaraguan--you met with Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Denis
Moncada and reinforced the importance of free and fair
elections this coming November.
I am disgusted, and I am sure you are too, by Daniel
Ortega's response to your good advice. Immediately after your
conversation, the Ortega regime arrested two Presidential
candidates, Christiana Chamorro and Arturo Cruz.
At this hour, Cruz is in a military jail and Cristiana is
under house arrest. Daniel Ortega is following Fidel and
Chavez's textbook on how to rig a Presidential election, and as
you know, sir, Nicaragua is part of the free trade agreement
with this country with the United States, known as the CAFTA-
DR.
So I have one question for you, Mr. Secretary. Should this
country, the United States, a free country, the beacon of hope
and human rights, have a free trade agreement with dictators in
this hemisphere who rig elections and jail his political
opponents? I would like your answer, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. First of all, I very much
share all the concerns that you've expressed and call, as you
do, for the immediate release of Ms. Chamorro and her
colleagues. And that was outrageous, not--maybe not surprising,
but certainly outrageous.
Second, we're going to look at all the tools that we have,
economic and otherwise, to try to move Nicaragua on a better
path. Unfortunately, to your point, it's moving in exactly the
opposite direction.
Ms. Salazar. And I--yes, thank you very much for that
answer and I certainly would love to followup with this
discussion with you and the U.S. Trade Representative Katherine
Tai in order to discuss this topic even more. I think Ortega
only understands when the United States speaks loud and clear,
and I thank you very much for caring.
I commend you and I continue helping you in this. This is a
bipartisan issue. This has nothing to do with parties, and
we're here to help you. Thank you very much.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Ms. Salazar. And now I want to yield back to the gentleman
from Tennessee, and I thank you very much for your time.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman reclaims his time.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, sir,
for being on here with us.
In a speech, President Xi recently told his subordinates to
focus on a trustworthy, lovable--which is kind of laughable--
and respectable image for China. Does this mark the end of the
Chinese Communist Party's wolf warrior diplomacy and why this
sudden change in tactics?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I cannot--I cannot speak for
President Xi or what he may have in mind. But here's one
possibility. It may well be that China has concluded that soft
power is pretty important, too, and the way it is engaging
around the world is alienating more people than it is
attracting. So this may be a manifestation of that recognition.
Having said that, I do not want to draw any--you know, any
clear conclusions from that. I cannot get inside their thinking
on this.
Mr. Burchett. OK. When Secretary Kerry was here with us a
few weeks ago, I asked him why his office even existed, given
the fact that the State Department already has an entire bureau
devoted to oceans and international environment and scientific
affairs.
He admitted that it was a fair question, and last month, I
also sent you a letter regarding Secretary Kerry's role in the
Administration. It seems it's very duplicitous. It's in several
other departments doing the exact same thing, and I've yet to
hear back from y'all.
And so what I was wondering what the necessity is of the
Office of the Special Presidential Envoy for Climate has.
Secretary Blinken. No, appreciate the question and, just
quickly, let me say a couple of things. We have been disengaged
from international climate efforts for some time, and yet we're
at a critical time and a critical year heading to the COP 26
meeting at the end of the year.
And it was very important in the--in the view of president
to make sure that the United States was not only reengaged but
leading in the effort, not only to do what we need to do here
at home but to make sure that other countries were meeting
their own responsibilities.
And that requires intensive diplomacy and day in day out
sustained engagement at a very senior level, and that's exactly
what Secretary Kerry offers.
He's been able to, in the short space of time that he's
been there and that we have been in office, to move other
countries to raise their ambitions when it comes to what
they're going to do to curb emissions.
So we're not the only ones doing the hard work. So that's
good for us and it's good for the world. We have had many
situations in the past at the department where a particular
issue has demanded concentrated, sustained, high-level focus.
We had that when we did the Coalition to Counter ISIS, and
we had Special Envoys John Allen and then Brett McGurk working
on that. We had that before for Afghanistan and Pakistan when
Mr. Holbrooke did the same thing. And I can go back in time,
but there are times and places including on climate where
having that is vitally important.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hey, I was wondering, Mr. Chairman, if when you introduce
me I'm the only who does not have a title. If you could just
say something like he's an all-around good guy and one of your
favorites. It would help my very fragile ego to sustain a
little longer. So thank you.
Chairman Meeks. We'll work on it.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Dina Titus
of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. I
think I'm an all-around good guy, too. So keep that in mind.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Titus. Nice to see you, Mr. Secretary. I wonder if you
could comment just a little bit about the elections yesterday
in Peru and Mexico and how they may change the State Department
priorities or need for resources.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Look, too soon to tell,
especially when it comes to Peru. We do not have a--we do not
have a result. It looks like it's too close to--too close to
call, and so we need to see what government emerges and what
positions they take and how we engage.
But I'm determined that one way or another, we engage Peru
effectively. It's an important country that we need to find
ways to work with. But let's see what happens.
With Mexico, I think we are more interconnected,
intertwined with Mexico than--maybe other than Canada--with any
other country in the world for obvious reasons and the
relationship is usually important to people on both sides of
the border day in, day out, whether it is on economic matters,
whether it's on migration, whether it's on security, whether
it's on real opportunity.
So we're building and trying to strengthen even further a
comprehensive relationship and partnership with Mexico that
will be there irrespective of which--you know, which government
is in office.
I'm working very closely with my counterpart, the foreign
minister. The president has engaged repeatedly with President
Lopez Obrador and will continue to do that, because this is too
important to the lives of our fellow citizens.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. It will be interesting to see the
results. You're right.
Another question I have is during the Obama Administration,
the State Department's International Disability Team was very
active and engaged, and, of course, like so much of those good
programs or many of them, they were lost over the last 4 years.
I just wonder if you have resources or if the president's
budget proposal includes the necessary resources to get them
reactivated so that we can be a leader again, dealing with
individuals with disabilities, be sure they have access to our
facilities abroad, and if there's a plan to develop any kind of
outreach?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, thank you very much for raising
that. I'm determined that we do that both in terms of our own
missions in the State Department itself and then, of course,
with regard to disability rights around the world.
We are going to have a person who is responsible for that
full time at a senior level and that should be, I think, coming
forward fairly soon. And I'm going to make sure that we are
focused on that both in terms of what we're doing within the
department itself, including building a diverse work force, but
also making sure that we are engaged in standing up for those
rights around the world.
Ms. Titus. That's wonderful, and I know that community will
be very glad to hear you say that.
Just briefly, before I leave, could you talk about what the
State Department's doing to encourage international travel?
That is such an important part of Nevada's economy and the
whole country, both our folks going abroad and people from
other countries coming here.
Secretary Blinken. Yes, we've--needless to say, we are very
eager to do that, especially as we, hopefully, are moving
beyond or starting to move beyond COVID.
That just underscores the fundamental importance of
actually moving beyond COVID, what we're doing on getting
vaccines out there, working to boost production, trying to end
this much earlier than it otherwise would if we left things as
they were, and I believe we can do that.
At the same time, we want to make sure that the department
has the resources it needs to facilitate and enable travel
whether it's for tourism, for business, for students.
We know how much that brings to our own economy. We know
how much that does, actually, for our diplomacy, because people
traveling back and forth are the best Ambassadors that we have.
Our consular services have taken a huge hit. As you know,
it's a money--it's been a moneymaker for the State Department,
but with COVID, of course, and travel going to a near
standstill, we have not been issuing visas except in essential
circumstances and doing that work. The fees that come in have
not been there.
So the budget tries to make sure that we're making consular
services whole so that they can get back to the business of
doing what they do so well, which is to look out for Americans
abroad and to facilitate travel to and from the United States.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. I yield
back.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Representative Mark Green of Tennessee,
who's the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere, Civilian Security, Migration, and International
Economic Policy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank you
and the Ranking Member in holding the committee today and, of
course, Mr. Secretary, thank you for testifying. Thanks for
giving us three and a half hours.
Before I start, I'd like to remind all the Members of the
committee about Journal Club. The first meeting of the
bipartisan Journal Club on Foreign Affairs led by myself and my
colleague across the aisle, Dean Phillips, will be on the 16th
at 5:15 p.m.
Of course, the goal is to go beyond sort of the 5-minutes
we get to have in committee and dig deep into a dialog across
the aisle about key issues, and we'll just take two Journal
articles that are published and you'll get those.
In fact, all the details will be to your schedulers by COB
tomorrow. And if you could and if you're coming, let us know
and then read the articles before we get there.
Now for my comments. As Congress considers the State
Department's appropriations, we have to prioritize a lot of
things.
But I'd like to mention three that are really important to
my constituents: countering Communist China, reinforcing our
ally, Israel, and of course, strengthening alliances in the
Western Hemisphere.
First, countering the Chinese Communist Party. The CCP is
the greatest threat facing the world. I believe that, and I'll
use sort of a dime paradigm--what I call the dime paradigm to
describe that diplomatic, informational, military, and
economic.
Diplomatically, China has deployed the Belt and Road
Initiative to drive a wedge between the United States and
developing nations and our allies. They've perfected the art of
debt trap diplomacy, taking advantage of struggling countries
to bend them to their will.
Informationally, you look no further than COVID-19. Rather
than alerting the world about the coronavirus outbreak, the CCP
focused on silencing their own doctors, scientists, and
journalists who tried to warn us.
Additionally, the CCP cyber attacks on U.S. military
personnel information, the F-35, submarine bases, are well
known, and China has deployed Western technology to supply on
and oppress the Uighurs and have even conducted genocide
against them.
Militarily, China has been deploying its forces and
building islands in the South China Sea in violation of
international court judgments. Just a few weeks ago, the
Chinese People's Liberation Army and Navy opened its first
overseas base in the Horn of Africa, and lately, we have seen
alarming trends in the Chinese State-backed entities looking to
gobble up American companies critical to our national security.
Economically, China continues to steal intellectual
property from Western nations, especially the U.S. Huawei's
theft of Motorola technology, which led to the company's
demise, the loss of thousands of U.S. jobs, and billions from
the U.S. GDP.
It's a case study in their predatory behavior. The U.S.
Trade Representative has estimated that China's IP theft has
cost our GDP between $200 and $600 billion annually, and of
course, China continues to practice currency manipulation and
unfair trade behavior.
The second priority must be--that must be reflected in the
budget is supporting Israel, our greatest--one of our greatest
allies. From my experience fighting the war on terror, I know
that the Middle East is fraught with instability, insecurity,
and lots of uncertainty.
While we have other solid allies in the Middle East, by far
the Nation that aligns with our values the most is Israel. It's
a thriving democracy that respects human rights and shares our
Western values.
Unfortunately, Israel has once again come under threat.
Just last month, Hamas militants reportedly fired over 4,000
rockets deep into Israeli territory. Given the importance of
Israel to regional security, we have to ensure that the State
Department's budget enhances our diplomatic and security
partnership.
Last, strengthening the Western Hemisphere. As Ranking
Member of the Western Hemisphere, working side by side with
Chairman Sires, it's our job to advocate for strong
relationships with Latin America and Caribbean countries. It's
a region of significant opportunity that's too often
overlooked.
There are weak economies there, areas of human rights
violations. Corruption and violence have increased, and the
dangerous surge of illegal migration on our southern border is
due to push factors in those countries. Over the last few
decades, many manufacturing jobs have left Latin America and
gone to Communist China.
According to the Inter-American Development Bank, up to $80
billion in annual imports from China to the United States could
be replaced by Latin American exports, and that's why I'm
drafting near-shoring legislation, to bring those jobs back,
working with leaderships of the IDB and DFC.
And, Mr. Secretary, I'd like to let you know that Mr.
Zuniga has been very cooperative and we have plans for
breakfast soon.
In addition to advancing economic opportunities, we must
stand up to oppressive socialist regime regimes in Cuba,
Venezuela, and the increasingly authoritarian government in
Nicaragua. Human rights are universal and America must support
freedom and democracy in the region.
Finally, we must work with our allies to combat corruption,
disrupt drug and human trafficking networks, and reduce illegal
migration.
Mr. Secretary, just one real quick question. No one's asked
you, that I've heard about----
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman is out of time. The gentleman
is out of time.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Susan Wild
of Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate that. And
welcome, Mr. Secretary. So proud and happy to have you here
with our committee, and I've been listening to your testimony
with great interest.
I want to ask you first, Mr. Secretary, in the year 2020,
China, for the first time, surpassed the United States as the
European Union's greatest or largest trading partner. And at
the same time, the U.S.'s overall trade deficit in 2020 reached
its highest point in 12 years.
So I'd like you to address, if you would, from the State
Department's perspective the priority for restoring our role
with the EU and others in terms of being trading partners and
the importance of it for our economic and national security.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I think it's fundamental and
central, and we're very, very focused on it.
Two things, very quickly. The president will be going to
Europe in just a few days and as part of that he'll be having a
very important meeting with the leaders of the European Union,
and I know he will focus on these issues.
We just reestablished a dialog with the EU on China, a
U.S.-EU dialog on China. I think that's particularly important
and timely, and we started that up again.
And I myself have engaged repeatedly, including going very
early to the EU to start to work on these issues. Our Trade
Representative, Katherine Tai, very focused on this as well.
So is Secretary Raimondo at Commerce, Secretary Yellen, all
of the different agencies and departments that have equities,
and I think we all agree on the centrality of that economic
relationship and the desirability on our--on our part to
strengthen it.
Ms. Wild. Well, thank you, and I really do hope that that
is a strong priority because I think it's so incredibly
important for our position in the world with our--with our
allies and adversaries, quite frankly.
My other great interest in addition to trade is human
rights, Mr. Secretary, and I know that many of my colleagues
will join me in welcoming your strong commitment to a foreign
policy that centers human rights concerns at its core.
And I'd like to ask you specifically about human rights
concerns as they relate to our relationship with the
Philippines.
We know that in March of this year authorities in the
Philippines conducted raids that led to brutal deaths of at
least nine labor activists and dissidents, only a latest
example of a pattern of mass human rights violations under the
Duterte regime.
So without going any further, can I just ask, has the
Administration taken any substantive actions in response to
these specific events and/or talked and conveyed to the--this
regime our view of their actions?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. In short, yes, and certainly
when it comes to concerns about human rights in the
Philippines, we and I, personally, have been directly engaged
on this including with my--with my counterpart.
This is very much a part of the conversation and engagement
that we have with the Philippines. And as you know, the
president has been determined and committed to put human rights
at the--at the center of our foreign policy and that's
irrespective of where we see these concerns arise, whether it's
the Philippines or anywhere else.
Ms. Wild. Well, can I ask you, is this Administration going
to review current military assistance to the Philippines?
Secretary Blinken. We will make sure whether it's, again,
with regard to the Philippines or anywhere else, that we are
effectively using whatever tools we have to try to make sure
that human rights are being respected, defended, advanced.
We have to make judgments based on the particular
situations in specific countries and--but in each case, we'll
look to try to make sure that we're doing and making the best
judgment possible on how to most effectively advance the
defense of human rights.
Ms. Wild. Well, thank you. I look forward to working with
you and the Administration on human rights issues, and I do
believe that it's important for the United States to leverage
its support and assistance to other countries to some extent
in, particularly, those countries that have a pattern of human
rights abuses.
But thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Andy Barr of Kentucky for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Secretary Blinken,
thank you for responding favorably to my letter to you that was
signed by over 60 of my colleagues requesting vaccines for
Taiwan.
Recently, the Administration announced 7 million vaccines
for Asia, including Taiwan. What is the status of delivery of
those vaccines to Taiwan and what more can the United States
and our partners do to help the Taiwanese stem the spread of
COVID within that island?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for that.
We are moving out as expeditiously as we possibly can
getting the vaccines out there, including to Taiwan. I think
work is being done on that as we speak, and I think things will
start to flow in the--in the coming days and, certainly, in the
next couple of weeks.
We're committed to getting the 80 million vaccines
allocated by the end of the month, early into July, but the
first 25 million should start to move soon.
We want to make sure that we're doing it, obviously, safe--
safely, effectively, efficiently, that as you know, the
logistics of this are not without complication. But I think
you'll see that happening in the--in the days and, certainly,
weeks ahead.
Mr. Barr. Well, Secretary, thank you especially for helping
the Taiwanese with COVID there. And building off of the topic
of strengthening relationships with Taiwan, I assume you're
aware Taiwan lifted a ban on certain pork imports from America
in the hopes of pursuing a broader trade agreement with the
U.S. I believe deepening trade ties with Taiwan is important to
countering Chinese malign influence.
Mr. Secretary, what is the Administration's position on a
bilateral trade agreement with Taiwan?
Secretary Blinken. So I'd have to refer you to Katherine
Tai, the U.S. Trade Representative. But I know we are engaged
in conversations with Taiwan or soon will be on some kind of
framework agreement, and those conversations should be--should
be starting.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
Secretary Blinken. But I would ask you to talk to the U.S.
Trade Representative.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
On climate diplomacy, the Chinese Foreign Ministry
spokesman recently warned the Biden Administration that
cooperation on climate change is, quote, ``closely linked with
bilateral relations as a whole,'' unquote.
Given China's clearly Stated intention to condition climate
negotiations on other issues and the Biden Administration's
prioritization of climate, which, according to a recent article
in Foreign Affairs magazine, has given the CCP significant
leverage to advance Chinese interests in other areas, will you
and Envoy Kerry fully commit to rejecting any demands from
Beijing to make compromises on economic, technological,
security, human rights issues as a means of extracting what I
would--what I would say are illusory commitments from China on
climate?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Barr. Great. Thank you very much for that.
Let me ask you about the Administration's position on
holding the CCP accountable on COVID and COVID origins. I do
appreciate the fact that President Biden has ordered an
intelligence community inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.
I also, by the way, commend the Administration for
expanding on President Trump's order banning U.S. investment in
Chinese companies linked to the military.
But I do remain mystified by why the State Department
terminated the Pompeo investigation into COVID origins and I
remain disappointed by news reports that President Biden has
yet to have a conversation with General Secretary Xi regarding
China's role in the origins of the pandemic.
There was a recent article--I think it was just over the
weekend--in the Wall Street Journal that says that the science
suggests a Wuhan lab leak. I commend it to your attention if
you haven't read it. It's a fascinating read, and evidence of a
lab escape is mounting.
Do you and the Administration remain open to the
possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic was genetically
manufactured and intentionally released by the CCP as a
bioweapon against the United States and the international
community?
Secretary Blinken. We remain open to most possible
explanations if the evidence is there to support it. The
initial inquiry that the president ordered back in March and
that reported out some weeks ago concluded that the two most
likely scenarios were a natural occurrence and transmission
from animal to human and a lab--a lab leak, and I think no one
has yet found conclusive dispositive evidence that makes clear
which one of those it is, which is why the president--you just
referred to this--ordered the intelligence community to do an
intensive whole of government 90-day review to see if we can
finally come to a determination of what happened, where it
happened, why it happened.
Mr. Barr. Well, thank you. And take a look at that article.
It's fairly interesting about this case.
Yield back.
Chairman Meeks. Gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Ted Lieu of California for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, and thank you,
Secretary Blinken, for your leadership.
At our last hearing, we discussed the issue of assignment
restrictions, which is the practice of the State Department to
prohibit certain employees from working on issues related to
certain countries.
This practice affects a number of current State Department
employees as well as, potentially, a number of there are 500
new employees that you seek to hire. We have asked for data on
assignment restrictions from the department including a
breakdown by categories such as race, gender, and ethnicity.
I'm wondering if you have an update as to when we might get
that data.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you, and I do--I very much
appreciate you putting a light on this. This was a concern of
mine when I actually served as deputy Secretary back in 2015 to
2017, and in the time since and under our Administration--and I
have to credit as well former Deputy Secretary Steve Biegun--
the department has focused on this, and we, basically, ordered
two reviews be conducted.
There's an assignments restrictions task force that is
looking at how to mitigate any security concerns in background
investigations, and then diplomatic security itself has been
conducting an internal audit on the effectiveness of the
restriction process.
We're basically looking at both the broader policy and
individual cases, and I am determined that we leverage
diversity and the skills of our work force in ways that make
the department and our foreign policy more effective.
I think we will be in a position to report out on this in
the next few weeks. The work is coming to--coming to a
conclusion and we should have more to say and I'll be happy to
make sure we're engaged with you on this in the coming weeks.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you very much. And what I would like to ask
of you is in addition to looking at making the process better,
I want you to consider eliminating the practice in its
entirety, and so I'm going to offer you at least three reasons
why that should be.
First, I do believe that this practice is offensive and
disrespectful. It's, basically, telling a number of State
Department employees that we believe you're going to be a
traitor, that given a choice between the United States of
America and the foreign country in which you've been given an
assignment restriction that we believe you are going to pick
that foreign country.
The U.S. military does not do this. I previously served in
active duty in the United States Air Force. I was granted a top
secret security clearance. The Department of Defense didn't
then come in and say, hey, we're going to give you an
assignment restriction and not let you serve in U.S. Pacific
Command because you have family Members that live in Taiwan.
Second reason is, as you have Stated, this does affect
recruiting and retention. We know that this policy kneecaps
immediately the career of State Department employees. They're
simply never going to rise to the highest levels of this
department.
I had a meeting last month at an event with former
Ambassador of South Korea, Harry Harris, who was appointed by
President Trump, and he agreed that this was a deeply
problematic practice. As you know, he also happened to have
been the first Japanese-American admiral of U.S. Pacific
Command.
If the Pentagon early in his career had gone to him and
said, hey, you cannot work on issues related to Japan, would he
have ever risen to the rank of admiral and commander of U.S.
Pacific Command? He would not. But the military does not do
that and that's a reason that the U.S. benefited from his
expertise and his talent.
And then finally, I just want to note that in the 21st
century virtually every country has interests beyond their
borders. So it makes little sense to have geographic
limitations with assignment restrictions.
Let's say a Russian-American employee is given assignment
restriction because she has an aunt that lives in St.
Petersburg. And so the State Department then decides to put her
in Azerbaijan, while Russia can still leverage that familiar
relationship and try to seek U.S.-Azerbaijan communications.
And so I just want to extend this policy to an extreme. It
would mean that virtually no State Department employee could be
stationed anywhere as long as they have a family member
stationed or living in a foreign country.
And I want you to look at, really, the entire conceptual
basis to see if it makes any sense in the 21st century. I know
the process is ongoing, so thank you for doing that.
And then I'm just going to briefly conclude on subnational
diplomacy. This is a practice that's been occurring for decades
where mayors, council Members, State Governors use their
tremendous talents and energies to engage with foreign
governments and foreign cities and foreign organizations.
The State Department, I think, would do well to try to
benefit from that expertise and help them coordinate it. I have
legislation with Republican Congressman Joe Wilson. We're
working with your department to get it done and I appreciate
you taking a look at that as well.
Secretary Blinken. First of all, thanks for the very
compelling comments on the restriction process. Very much
appreciated. And on the subnational piece, yes, we'd really
welcome working with you and Congressman Wilson on that.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize Representative Greg Steube of Florida for 5
minutes.
We cannot hear you.
Mr. Steube. My apologies. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I signed on to a letter urging President Biden not to
rejoin the JCPOA and provide sanctions relief to Iran. This
would directly and negatively affect not only our national
security but Israel's security as well.
Since President Biden took office, Iran has started
enriching uranium at its highest level ever and Israel was
under a multi-day assault from Hamas. Hamas is financially and
materially backed by Iran.
Lifting sanctions on Iran, a well-known financer of
terrorism, is a gift to Hamas, Hezbollah, and other terrorist
groups that will threaten both Israel and our troops in the
region.
I also co-sponsored a bill that would enable any remaining
funding appropriated for Gaza assistance to be repurposed for
Israel to support the Iron Dome. President Biden even mentioned
support for Israel's Iron Dome air defense system, which
receives U.S. funding. The system intercepted most of the 3,000
rockets Hamas fired in the recent conflict, keeping Israel's
death toll relatively low.
However, President Biden also promised $110 million to go
toward rebuilding Gaza with assistance and funding through the
U.N. efforts. Hamas controls Gaza through its security forces
and obtains resources from smuggling, informal taxes, and
reported external assistance from some Arab sources in Iran.
How do you plan on ensuring that Hamas does not benefit
from the $110 million in U.S. assistance?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I was just, I think as you
know, in Israel about a week, 10 days ago, meeting with
officials from the government across the board, and I think
there is an increased understanding that Hamas has fed off of
misery, fed off of a lack of hope, and if that is perpetuated
it's, unfortunately, likely to get stronger, despite the fact
that it itself has been responsible for bringing much of that
misery onto the Palestinian people.
There is an understanding and a commitment, I think, on the
part of Israel both to respond to the real humanitarian crisis
that exists in Gaza now--water, electricity, sanitation,
sewage.
If you look at what is--what is happening, it is, on a
human level and our Israeli counterparts agree with us,
unacceptable.
So we need to do something about that.
And when it comes to reconstruction, there is both a belief
and a commitment, I think, on the part of Israel, the United
Nations, Egypt, ourselves, and others, that we can do this in a
way that does not result in materials being siphoned off by
Hamas to rebuild tunnels or reconstitute more of their rocket
forces.
I agree with you, it's very important that we have a
mechanism that we are confident in, that the Israelis are
confident in, that allows us to do that and that's exactly what
we're working on.
Mr. Steube. Well, how are you going to do that if--if Hamas
controls Gaza how are you going to ensure that American
taxpayer dollars are not going to be inadvertently directed to
Hamas?
Secretary Blinken. We have worked in the past and others
have worked in the past, including Israel, with different
organizations, institutions, entities to make sure that, first
of all, we know exactly what needs to be legitimately rebuilt,
and then that the resources are allocated to do just that and
nothing more. And we, certainly, look forward to be able to
come to Congress as these plans develop with how that would
work.
Mr. Steube. Yes, I look--I would look forward to us doing
oversight on that after the resources are spent.
Mr. Secretary, you would not admit when asked during the
conflict that Hamas was getting their arms from Iran. But then
after the war ended, the head of Hamas, Ismail Haniyeh, thanked
Iran for the weapons.
The other terrorist organizations in Gaza, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, is a direct proxy of Iran. How can you say you
support Israel's security while wanting to enter a deal where
Iran is going to get billions in new weapons?
Secretary Blinken. Iran's support for Hamas has been a
persistent problem for a long time, a problem that existed
before the nuclear deal, that continued during the nuclear
deal, and continues today, despite the so-called maximum
pressure campaign when we're out of the deal, and that's a
problem that we have to address.
When I was--when I was asked about this, I needed to make
sure that I understood from our own intelligence, from the
Israelis, from others, exactly what was--what was going on.
I think Hamas has provided--has been provided by Iran in
the past with key components, technical knowledge for the
program. The best assessment, public assessment, that we have
is that in this most recent incident most of the rockets were
indigenously produced in Gaza by Hamas. It is not in any way an
excuse for Iran's support for Hamas, including very strong
rhetorical support in this most recent incident.
Chairman Meeks. Gentleman is out of time. Time is expired.
I now recognize Representative Dean Phillips of Minnesota
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Greetings, Mr. Secretary. Grateful for your service to our
country.
Mr. Secretary, do you agree that it's a net benefit to our
national security by addressing State fragility proactively by
providing assistance and helping reduce political instability
and reduce opportunities for nonState actors?
Secretary Blinken. I do.
Mr. Phillips. And as you surely know--and by the way, I
agree, of course--the FYI 2019 NDAA authorizes the Secretary of
Defense to transfer up to $75 million to other agencies in our
government for foreign assistance programs and activities that
are necessary for security cooperation.
However, as far as I'm aware, none of those dollars have
been released or utilized to date. The Fiscal Year 2020 NDAA
also allows for the DOD to support stabilization activities and
national security interests of the United States.
Clearly, the president's budget places a strong emphasis on
the need to address global fragility. So using the authorities
that Congress has already provided, are there ways for DOS and
DOD to better collaborate with one another on such important
strategies?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I believe there are. I have
constant dialog conversation with my friend and colleague, the
Secretary of Defense. We're talking about this every single
week, and we're all looking, not just Defense and State, but
all the departments to look at how we can both better
coordinate and leverage the resources that we may have in
individual departments to advance common objectives.
And I think Secretary Austin would be the first to agree
that State fragility is a real concern for him. I know it's a
concern for the president of the United States, and they both
know that if we do not address these things up front, then
we're likely to have to address them in different more costly
ways at the other end.
So we're all focused on this and we want to make sure that,
yes, we use the authorities that we have to focus resources
where they need focus.
Mr. Phillips. Great. I couldn't have said it better, and
grateful for your shared interest.
I want to talk about the world's kids, too. As you're well
aware, a surging global youth population around the world is
the opportunity for enormous potential, can drive
transformation and unleash quite a bit of disruption.
I would say also the effects of COVID-19 has
disproportionately affected kids around the world. 1.6 billion
students out of school, one in six have stopped working, social
political unrest in many nations driven by youth protests
spreading around the world.
And yet the global youth population hasn't even peaked yet.
It's expected to reach 1.4 billion by 2065. In the poorest
nations in the world, youth population is expected to increase
by 62 percent by 2050.
So with the largest youth population boom ever and COVID-19
robbing so many kids around the world of education, employment,
and engagement opportunities, what is the Department of State's
and USAID's strategy to ensure that young people around the
world are at the center of our pandemic recovery efforts?
Secretary Blinken. That's a really--that's a really great
question and an important observation, and I think both with
regard to COVID itself and recovery from that, but even more
broadly, we have to have this youth population front and center
in mind.
Africa is among one compelling and immediate example
irrespective of COVID but, of course, exacerbated by COVID.
You've got 1.3 billion people on the African continent. The
median age is 19, to your point.
That presents both a tremendous opportunity but also, I
think, a real--a real challenge, because if this population is
left unattended, without opportunity, then that inevitably is
going to produce bad results.
Conversely, if we can find ways to help countries maximize
the human potential that they have, then I think the
possibilities are almost endless.
So we--programmatically across the department, we are
looking for ways to make sure that we're engaged with young
people and/or engaged with countries and governments to make
sure that to the best of our ability they're pursuing policies
that address their needs and their concerns.
So I think it's hard to put it in any--in any one place. I
mean, I can point to, again, Africa. I can point to what was a
wonderful program that we continued, the Young African Leaders
Initiative that President Obama created.
But we have those kinds of programs. But this also goes to
our economic engagement, our diplomatic engagement, our
engagement on technology across the board. But I'd be happy to
and would welcome your thoughts on that, going forward.
Mr. Phillips. And I would encourage you to consider a
senior level advisor or youth advisor to help in these efforts.
I only know I have a couple seconds left.
I just want to make a statement quickly about Ethiopia.
We're all aware of our concerns there and the circumstances,
and pleased by the fact the president has brought Ambassador
Feltman as a special envoy for the Horn of Africa.
I just want to support your efforts to address what is
becoming a terrible humanitarian crisis in a country of great
importance. Thank you for your service. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Let me just ask the Secretary. I know you're not as old as
I am, Mr. Secretary, but I want to offer you a 5-to 10-minute
break if you need it.
[Laughter.]
Secretary Blinken. I'm happy to power through.
Chairman Meeks. OK, we'll continue.
So next I will recognize Representative Dan Meuser of
Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate that very
much, and my thanks to Ranking Member McCaul, and Mr.
Secretary, we all greatly appreciate you being here with us
today.
I represent Pennsylvania's Ninth. We are nationally
renowned in Pennsylvania's Ninth for many things, including
Christmas trees, candy, beer.
Chairman Meeks. You're muted.
Mr. Meuser. I hit it by accident. Thank you, Chairman.
But we're also in Pennsylvania's 9th and throughout
Pennsylvania renowned for our anthracite coal. Anthracite coal,
Mr. Secretary, is very rarely used as a energy product. It is
primarily used to serve as the most important raw material for
domestic steel production.
So anthracite coal is an almost pure form of carbon. Its
low levels of sulfur and other impurities make it the most
important raw material in the production of domestic steel.
Today, anthracite is the most efficient and cleanest type
of coal for this--for this purpose. A stable domestic
anthracite industry is critical to the resiliency of the steel
industry.
I'm concerned Russia is attempting to undermine our
domestic supply, which creates a national security well as a
threat to our economy, but also a threat to our national
security that does, in fact, need our attention.
Russia's systematic and exponentially growing dumping of
Russian anthracite coal to the United States steel industry
directly impacts anthracite production in my district,
primarily in our Schuylkill, Northumberland, and Luzern
counties.
Pennsylvania anthracite is, again, a key component of U.S.
steel production, and because it can be purified before its use
it represents, again, a very clean and efficient method.
But these numbers, Mr. Secretary, are actually staggering.
Over the last 5 years, Pennsylvania anthracite production has
shrunk from approximately 2.27 million tons of anthracite to
1.8 million tons. This reduction is 20 percent--a little over a
20 percent reduction in only 4 years.
Conversely, total sales of Russian anthracite have
increased from approximately 6,000 tons in 2016 to
approximately 22,000 tons in 2020, which is 12 times higher
than our domestic usage.
So 90 percent of the most important raw material in our
Nation's steel production comes from Russia.
So, Mr. Secretary--so, Mr. Secretary, I ask you, first, are
you aware of the enormous increase in Russian anthracite coal
that is being used in our U.S. steel production?
Secretary Blinken. No, I have to acknowledge this is--this
is news to me, not something I focused on, and I very much
appreciate you bringing it to my attention.
Mr. Meuser. That's great. I appreciate that as well. Are
you then aware or is the State Department or can you look into
what are--what are strongly considered to be very questionable
and, perhaps, illegal dumping of Russian anthracite into the
U.S.?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, and what I'd like to do,
Congressman, is, first of all, make sure that from your office
we have all the information you have.
Second, I will share that or make sure it's shared with my
colleagues who have direct responsibility for this, starting
with the U.S. Trade Representative and her office as well as
other departments like Commerce, and then go from there.
But I'd really welcome getting the information.
Mr. Meuser. That's great, Secretary. I will get you the
information, and it sounds as if you will be willing to work
with me and other stakeholders in trying to counter what very
well could be illegal dumping and help support the U.S. steel
industry.
Secretary Blinken. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Meuser. That's terrific. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of my time.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Representative Ilhan Omar of Minnesota for
5 minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, last time you were here I asked about the
Trump sanctions on the ICC staff. So I wanted to thank you
publicly for doing the right thing and lifting them.
I know you oppose the court's investigation in both
Palestine and in Afghanistan. I haven't seen any evidence in
either cases that domestic courts can--both can and will
prosecute alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity.
And I would emphasize that in Israel and Palestine this
includes crimes committed by both Israeli security forces and
Hamas. In Afghanistan it includes crimes committed by the
Afghan national government and the Taliban.
So in both of these cases, if domestic courts cannot or
will not pursue justice and we oppose the ICC, where do we
think the victims of these supposed crimes can go for justice
and what justice this mechanism is for?
Secretary Blinken. I'm sorry, Congresswoman. I lost you for
1 second there at the end of your question. Could you repeat
that, please?
Ms. Omar. Yes. I said in both of these cases, if domestic
courts cannot or will not pursue justice and oppose the ICC,
where do we think victims are supposed to go for justice, and
what justice mechanisms will you support for them?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. First, let me just say at the
outset that it is impossible not to be profoundly moved by not
just the loss of life in the recent violence and conflict but
especially the children whose lives were lost.
And we all have a tendency to throw statistics and numbers
out there. But we are talking about boys and girls, Israelis
and Palestinians, as well as men and women, and I think none of
us whatever--from whatever perspective we come can lose sight
of that. So that's one thing that's very important.
Look, you know our views on the ICC and its jurisdiction.
We continue to believe that, absent a Security Council referral
or absent the request by the State itself, that that's not
appropriate. I continue to believe that whether it is the
United States or Israel, both of us have the means and----
Ms. Omar. Mr. Secretary, I do understand that point. I'm
asking what mechanisms do you believe is available to them.
Secretary Blinken. I believe that we have, whether it's the
United States or Israel, we both have the mechanisms to make
sure there's accountability in any situations where there are
concerns about use of force and human rights, et cetera.
I believe that both of our democracies have that capacity
and we have demonstrated it, and we'll need to continue to
demonstrate it, going forward.
Ms. Omar. And in the case of Afghanistan?
Secretary Blinken. With regard to Afghanistan, if it's--our
objection, as you know, was to the assertion of jurisdiction of
the United States in the absence of a Security Council
referral, and I believe that we have the means if there are any
cases to be brought to adjudicate them and to find justice.
Ms. Omar. Appreciate that, and sorry about the connection
issues. There are now nine detainees at Guantanamo who have
been cleared for release. The State Department has a crucial
role in--to play in finally closing the prison, which
represents such a complete stain on our Nation's morality. I'm
wondering if you will prioritize reestablishing the Office of
the Special Envoy for Guantanamo Closure at the State
Department or create a similar position.
Secretary Blinken. The short answer is yes. We're working
actively on these cases, and I want to make sure that the
department has what it needs, both in terms of resources and
personnel and including someone who can focus on this full time
to do that. So we're actively looking into doing that, yes.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Claudia Tenney of New York
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member McCaul, and thank you, Secretary Blinken, for being here
for so long. We really appreciate your willingness to sit here,
and we know these are tough questions and we're grateful for
your leadership.
I just wanted to ask you a little bit about some of the
reports that we have seen where there's been alleged that State
Department has actively discouraged officials and employees
from referring to the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Israeli
normalization agreements as the Abraham Accords, despite that
being their official name. Do you support the Abraham Accords?
Secretary Blinken. Yes, I do.
Ms. Tenney. Have you heard any of this alleged activity
where State Department officials have discouraged the use of
the term Abraham Accords?
Secretary Blinken. I have not, and it's certainly not
coming from me. I'm happy to refer to them as the Abraham
Accords. I think they were an important achievement, one that
not only do we support, but we'd like to build on.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. That's my next question. I just
wonder if you could explain a few things that you may have in
the works that you could speak about, if possible, on how
you're going to build on the Abraham Accords and continuing
with the six--you know, with a comprehensive plan building on
the success of those accords?
Secretary Blinken. I think they are two things,
Congresswoman. One is that with regard to the countries that
have already engaged in this normalization process with Israel,
we want to look to see how we can be helpful in moving things
along and supporting those efforts, and that's actively
underway. It's come up in a number of conversations that I've
had.
And then separate from that, we're looking at countries
that may want to join in and take part and begin to normalize
their own relations with Israel. That, too, has been very much
part of the conversations I've had with several of my
counterparts.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. I really appreciate that. That's
going to be great for us in the future, I'm sure.
One other question just dealing with the Three Seas
Initiative, just the regional effort between Central and
Eastern Europe to extend cross-border energy, transportation,
digital infrastructure, and to help boost economic development.
This initiative will help a lot of our Members diversify
away from Russia's energy supply dominance and serve as a
powerful counterbalance to the influence of China on the
financial investments, diplomatic engagement in the region,
including the Belt and Road Initiative.
And thank you for your comments on explaining a little more
in depth on Nord Stream 2. I know it's not an easy issue. Is
the Biden Administration prepared to robustly support this
Three Seas Initiative, and if so, how would you be doing that
similar to how the Trump Administration did?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. Thank you for flagging that. The
short answer is yes, I've had--I had the opportunity to
actually speak to countries involved in this. I've, in my own
engagements and diplomacy, encouraged their engagement and our
own, and as you know well, we have our own tools that I think
can strengthen that including the DFC, and so we're very much
focused on that and making sure that we're bringing to bear the
tools that we have to strengthen it, to advance it.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. I really appreciate that. Also, just
want to say thank you to you and your team for meeting with us
and keeping us abreast, along with Representative Castro, on
the situation in Burma. We hope you continue to focus on those
so we can find some kind of peace and some kind of resolution
to this situation.
Obviously, we have introduced legislation for an arms
embargo against China and against Russia in the Security
Council. We know that's hopeful, but we hope that you'll
continue to support that and the Burmese people in our
communities will have some kind of relief and restore democracy
there and restore the government that was democratically
elected. But we appreciate your efforts and really grateful for
your comments today.
And I yield back my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Representative Colin Allred of Texas for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allred. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Secretary
Blinken, it's great to see you again so soon. I want to thank
you for coming before us again, and I'll just mention how
impressed I've been with your responses on a wide range of
topics.
There's so much going on in the world and so many things I
would love to discuss with you. But I wanted to try and drill
down on two things, and then perhaps we can find time for the
other things another time.
The first is about the direct access program for U.S.-
affiliated Iraqis. A constituent of mine, Allen Bach, who
bravely served our country and fought in Iraq, wrote to me for
assistance with his interpreter, Abdul Salam Muhammad Jamil al-
Basri, or Sam for short.
So let me just tell you a little bit about Sam. Sam had
applied for refugee resettlement through the direct access
program and had been cleared through the process. When
President Trump suspended the program in 2017, Sam had to
reopen and start over from the beginning with his case, and he
has once again made it to the final stage of the process only
to find that the program has been suspended again due to an
ongoing fraud review.
And although I certainly understand and appreciate the need
for a full review into any fraud committed by U.S. officials or
anyone else, the suspension was supposed to end in April and it
seems as though the suspension has been now extended
indefinitely.
With the humanitarian and security concerns, do you have
any updates on when this program will be able to continue or
when consular operations will resume at the U.S. embassy in
Baghdad?
Secretary Blinken. Thanks for flagging that because, look,
I share your strong commitment to doing right by the people who
did right by us. We have to do that. And I am going to go look
into the status of this.
I do not--I do not know exactly where it stands. We did
have a concern related to fraud. We wanted to make sure that
the program is fully secure and not take any chances. So there
was a review. I do not know the status, but we'll come back to
you on that.
Mr. Allred. Yes, I appreciate that and I--you know, I was
going to say you need to get back to me on this. I'm happy to
work with you on it. You know, I think there's a lot of us who
are concerned both with Iraqis and Afghanis who served with us
and we're happy to work through anything that the Congress can
help you with there.
Turning now to a totally different topic, Mr. Secretary, I
want to just quickly discuss the G-7 summit, the upcoming
summit, and ask about cooperation among our allies to combat
the misinformation campaigns perpetrated by countries like
China and Russia that we all have discussed today and at
length.
Now, this is something that I've actually been working on
with my colleague from across the pond, a member of Parliament
named Stephen Morgan who represents Portsmouth, and it's deeply
concerning to both of us.
And it was, of course, great to see the development of the
rapid response mechanism that found that misinformation is one
of the key tactics used to undermine democracies in the West
and around the world.
These campaigns also have negative effects on vaccination
rates, as you know, and have led to extremist violence, and I
want to see if you could speak to what work the U.S. is doing
with our allies to disrupt these misinformation campaigns both
at home and abroad and whether or not that's something that
will be discussed at the G-7.
Secretary Blinken. Yes. The short answer is yes, and again,
I really appreciate you flagging that. There was a preparatory
meeting of the foreign ministers for the G-7 that I took part
in a few weeks ago in advance of the president going, and this
was very much on the agenda. It'll be on the agenda for the
leaders.
I'm very proud of the fact that the Global Engagement
Center here at the State Department is the premier platform now
for sharing information, including among our G-7 partners, on
misinformation of one kind or another. When we see it we're
able to share it, and to your point, and I know you've been
focused and leading on this, having in place this rapid
response mechanism is really important to be able to turn that
information about misinformation into a practical way of
countering it.
And so we're--the department, the Global Engagement Center
very focused on this, and yes, it will be on the agenda for the
president in a few days.
Mr. Allred. Well, great. I just want to say I appreciate
the leadership that you and President Biden have shown in not
only protecting American democracy but trying to be a beacon,
as we always have been, for democracy around the world.
Of course, as a former voting rights attorney, I can say
that the best medicine for us and our foreign policy is to get
our own house in order, and I'm working on that as well.
But thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being with us. I'll yield
back my final 30 seconds and say congratulations on nearly
getting through this hearing with us. We appreciate it.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Representative August Pfluger of Texas for
5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Ranking
member, thanks for holding this, and, Mr. Secretary, thank you
for being here. I appreciate the conversations we have had
about my constituent, Trevor Reed. It's, obviously, very
important that we bring him back home to Texas.
Just in the past couple of weeks, he was diagnosed with
COVID, reportedly tried to get medical care and help from the
prison that he is unlawfully being held in, and was refused
that service until several days afterwards.
So in the upcoming--and thank you for your efforts publicly
to bring him home, among others--will President Biden be
bringing this up with his counterpart, Mr. Putin, in the
upcoming summit?
Secretary Blinken. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. I appreciate that. Anything that you can do
publicly to continue to apply pressure is very important.
Moving to the next topic, I'm very concerned--continued
concern, and a lot of my colleagues have talked about the Nord
Stream 2 and the project there.
Just a few days ago, Vladimir Putin threatened that the
Ukraine must show good will if it wants Russian gas transit.
This underscores what we have been saying about the pipeline
the whole time, that Putin will exploit the Nord Stream 2
pipeline as a coercive tool to render the Ukraine more
vulnerable to Russian influence and aggression.
And given the Ukraine president's comment yesterday he
basically said, how many Ukrainian lives does this relationship
have to cost us. It sounds like Kiev feels somewhat abandoned,
and I want to also say that the Baltic States--Latvia,
Lithuania, and Estonia, among others--feel the same way.
So when it comes to some of the--some of the insurers and
other folks that we previously had as sanctionable, what is the
Administration going to do at this point in time to give our
allies, especially our Baltic allies and those on the front
lines the reassurance that we're with them?
Secretary Blinken. I appreciate those comments very much. A
couple things on that.
First, I think President Biden was going to be speaking
with President Zelinsky today. That may already have happened.
But that was on the books.
As you know, I think in Ukraine about a month ago, I
strongly reiterated our commitment to Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and to defend Ukraine against aggression
in all forms coming from Russia to include using energy as a--
as a tool of coercion, and we're determined to do that.
We had a conversation a little bit earlier about Nord
Stream 2 and the reality that the pipeline began construction
2018. It was more than 90 percent complete by the time we took
office, and as a practical matter, preventing its physical
completion, in our judgment, was at that point not likely to
happen, irrespective of sanctions.
We did sanction more entities under PISA than had ever been
sanctioned before just a couple of weeks ago. But we waived,
and the waiver can be revoked, sanctions on the--on Nord Stream
2 AG, the corporate entity behind it, and the CEO.
But as said to our partners in Germany, that they now need
to work with us and work with others to make sure that any of
the potentially bad consequences from this pipeline going into
operation are mitigated and averted and that means making sure
that Ukraine is made whole for any transit fees that in the
future it may lose as a result of the pipeline going around
Ukraine, that Russia cannot use energy as a coercive tool
against Ukraine or anyone else in the region, and to put in
place various mechanisms to do that.
So we're actively engaged with Germany on that. The outcome
that we wanted to avoid was pipeline complete, poisoned
relationship with Germany because of sanctions, and no prospect
for actually doing something practical and concrete to help
protect Ukraine and the others.
So we all share the same objectives, and we're working to
get there.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, thank you very much.
And I've said this many times, especially because the
district that I represent includes the Permian Basin, but
energy security is national security and there's not a single
Ambassador that I talked to that are on the front lines with
Russia that do not wake up every single day thinking about how
they're going to provide energy and how they're going to ensure
that they're not dependent on malign actors around the world.
They're very fearful and concerned that Russia is going to
hold them hostage through coercive and malign activity, and I
would just ask the Administration and urge the Administration
strongly to continue to give our allies, especially those in
that geographic position, the utmost confidence that we're with
them and that we continue to hold their security in the utmost
of importance.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Andy Levin of Michigan for 5
minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hi, Mr. Secretary. Good to see you. Thanks for your service
and sticking with us today.
On May 24th, the managing editor of the news outlet
Frontier Myanmar, Danny Fenster, was arrested at Yangon
International Airport where he was heading home to visit his
family in Huntington Woods, Michigan, in my district.
He has been transferred to Insein Prison, which, according
to CNN, is one of the country's most notorious political
prisoner prisons known for its deplorable conditions.
Journalists like Danny put their lives on the line because
they believe in truth telling. His case hits home because it's
about our fundamental values on democracy and good government,
and it literally hits home for me because Danny and his
brother, Brian, went to my high school. They're Berkeley Bears.
His loved ones and his many supporters are in pain and I just
cannot rest until he arrives home safely.
My staff and I have been on the phone with your department
staff, embassy officials, and Danny's family every day doing
everything we can to draw attention to his case and make sure
his immediate and unconditional release remains a top priority.
I want to thank you, the State Department, and especially
our Ambassador in Burma, Tom Vajda, for your hard work. I'm
truly grateful for that.
Nevertheless, Danny remains in prison with no charges and
no consular access. We need him freed immediately and
unconditionally.
Mr. Secretary, I need to ask you to redouble your efforts.
What can you do more and what can we do in Congress to support
the State Department's efforts to bring Danny home?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I appreciate everything
you've said. We share the deep concern for Daniel Fenster. We
have another American citizen journalist, Nathan Vaughn, who is
also being detained--arbitrarily detained. We have had access
to him. We have not had access to Daniel Fester.
That's a violation of, among other things, the Vienna
Convention. We are pressing this in every way that we can. We
have very limited, if any, contact with the military regime,
but certainly through others. We're pressing this as best we
can and we will--we will continue to do so.
I think we have--other countries also have detained
citizens in Myanmar. Deep concern there as well. And we are all
working together as well to try to get our people home.
And it's, as you point out, even extremely egregious in the
case of journalists who are doing their jobs on behalf of all
of us.
So all I can tell you--all we can commit to is the doubling
down on our efforts to do this. I wish I had a--you know, a
sort of silver bullet answer here except to say we are very
focused on this, very engaged. We want to get them out, get
them home.
Mr. Levin. Great. Well, we're here to help you in any way.
Let me ask you about Haiti. As you know, an OAS delegation
is visiting Haiti this week, and while I certainly welcome all
efforts to bring about a Haitian-led solution to the current
political and constitutional crisis, I'm concerned by reports
that the delegation does not plan to discuss the constitutional
referendum plan for June 27th.
This referendum is widely considered, almost universally
considered, illegal, and any discussion that sidesteps it
cannot produce workable solutions. In addition, I'm worried
that our Administration is focused on pressing for elections at
any cost, even though elections held under the auspices of the
de facto President Moise's regime would not be free or fair.
Instead, we should be tackling the corruption, the
violence, the impunity, and other conditions fueling this
crisis, and pushing back on this planned referendum forcefully.
What is the Administration doing to make clear that this
illegal referendum should not take place?
Secretary Blinken. Well, thank you. And our position is,
indeed, that it should not. That is the position of our
government. We're making that position known. I believe we're
part of the OAS delegation that is in Haiti or is about to be
in Haiti, and----
Mr. Levin. So you believe the OAS delegation will raise
this? Because we have heard they're not even going to raise it,
sir.
Secretary Blinken. Well, let me come back to you on that
because I'm not sure. All I can tell you is our own policy,
which would be reflected in anything that we say or do, is to
oppose the referendum for the reasons you cite.
We're supportive of other pre-election activities. We still
think there's a possibility and an opportunity if the
appropriate steps are put in place to have an election. But the
referendum we oppose for the reasons that you cited.
Meanwhile, we are trying to provide additional assistance,
including to the--to the police to more effectively do their
jobs and deal with the profoundly, profoundly troubling
insecurity that exists in Haiti.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Nicole
Malliotakis of New York, who's the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on International Development, International
Organizations, and Global Corporate Social Impact, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Malliotakis. Just reading my title took half my time
away. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for
your time today.
As you know, we give hundreds of millions of dollars to the
World Health Organization. We are actually paid for about a
quarter of the assessed fees more than any other nation, and
I'm concerned about their transparency, their accuracy, and
their willingness to truly investigate the origins of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
As you know, the report that they had issued recently had
said that the laboratory leak was the least likely hypothesis,
and certainly this was something that where the Communist
Chinese Party had a lot of influence in putting together this
report.
I'd like to know what are you doing, working with our
international partners to demand accountability and
transparency on the origins of this virus, and what can we do
as Members of the World Health Organization to demand that they
work with us to provide these answers to the American public?
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. I share your share your
concerns.
First, it was important for us to reengage with the World
Health Organization in order to actually be in the room and at
the table to advance reform and to help deal with the deficits
that are manifest in the organization.
In our absence, others fill the void and others may have no
interest in actually seeing the World Health Organization
become effective and have the tools it needs to deal both with
this pandemic and future pandemics.
So we're now actively engaged in doing that. And to your
point, the first report that was issued, the so-called Phase
One report, was not meant to be the final answer. We strongly
support moving forward with the Phase Two report, which the WHO
is committed to doing, although the PRC is resisting that.
And, as we have said on many occasions, we have deep
concerns about the methodology used on Phase One to include the
inappropriate role that officials from China apparently played
in that report.
In parallel, though, to pushing with other countries to
move forward with Phase Two, we have, as I think we talked
about a little bit earlier, the president has ordered the
intelligence community and the whole of government to dig into
everything we know and can find about the origins of the virus,
and he's given us 90 days to do that.
We had an initial study that was done at his instruction
back in March that concluded that there were two likely ways by
which this happened. One was natural occurrence and
transmission from animal to human. The other was a leak from
the lab.
But the report did not--could not conclusively say it was
one or the other. What we want to do now is see if we can make
a better determination with some more certainty.
So that's what we're working on. We're working both on the
WHO track to make sure that they are doing what they need to
do, and we're doing what we need to do.
Last thing I'd mention, very quickly, is that it's so
important, going forward, that, one, we get an understanding of
the origins, that we get accountability, but, vitally, that we
get change, and by that I mean the responsibility of countries
in real time to share information, to give access to
international experts, to have transparency--everything that
was absent in this case, and that is not acceptable, going
forward, and the WHO needs to be, among other things, in the
lead on insisting on those norms and making sure that they're
implemented.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you. One other question I have is
many Americans have expressed to me I, myself, was unhappy with
this decision, and I wanted to know if this is a change in
policy of yours and the Administration to fly flags of
organizations--political organizations--at our embassies.
I believe that it should be the United States flag only
that flies above our embassies, with the exception of another
government flag or military flag. But I would like to just know
from you if this is a change in policy and we're going to
expect this, going forward.
You know, political organization should not have their
flags flying above our embassies and that is something that I
believe strongly and I believe many of my colleagues also
believe, and I believe most Americans believe that as well.
And so I would just ask that you reconsider this because I
think it is really setting a bad precedent, going forward, in
how we represent our Nation and on foreign lands.
Secretary Blinken. I appreciate that and I understand the
perspective. We have given chiefs of mission the authority and
discretion to make these decisions, and I think that, in fact,
it actually puts our best foot forward, especially in countries
that do not allow different groups, constituents, citizens, to
express themselves freely.
We do, and I think that's actually a very important thing
for the United States to do, and I believe that most Americans
would support that as well. It's at the essence of our
democracy.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize Representative Chrissy Houlahan of
Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I just want to confirm that you
all can hear me OK.
Chairman Meeks. Yes, we hear you.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you very much, Secretary Blinken, for joining us.
I want to kind of circle back to something that happened a
little earlier in the conversation and affirm that the State
Department has verified time and time again that the UNFPA does
not support China's harmful coercive family planning policies,
and I'm really, really pleased that the Administration has
requested now record levels of funding for this critical
program, the UNFPA.
Fifty-six million has been requested in this budget and
that's the highest level that's ever been requested by a U.S.
Administration.
It has been a little while since that's been the case that
we have been funding the UNFPA. So my first question is, how do
you envision working with the UNFPA to support its core work as
well as the important assistance of girls and women in
humanitarian settings? In short, how will we be able to
reinvigorate our commitment to the UNFPA, sir?
Secretary Blinken. Well, we're--I think we're just getting
started, and as you pointed out, we have made taking these
steps to resume the funding consistent with the law, and I
think that's very important.
And what I'd be happy to do is make sure that our teams
link up both to get your own thinking and ideas about how we
can most effectively engage and also to share our own.
Ms. Houlahan. I would very much welcome that opportunity.
I'm very enthusiastic about the purpose and mission of the
UNFPA and very grateful that we are once again reclaiming that
important responsibility that we have to the globe.
Similarly, unfortunately, that while I am happy to see the
Administration is reengaging with UNFPA after quite a lot of
years of absence, unfortunately, it looks as though the UK is
doing the exact opposite. The current UNFPA's biggest donor is
now making severe cuts to its own assistance programs.
So if I could, sir, I was wondering if I could ask for you
to engage with other donors at your upcoming June 30th
Generation Equality Forum in Paris to coordinate a funding
response to fill that gap that will be created by these cuts by
the United Kingdom. Is that something that I can ask for you to
do?
Secretary Blinken. Happy to take that up.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And then in my final couple of minutes, I'm really also
passionate about global learning and learning loss,
particularly over the last 15 or so months with the pandemic.
Ninety percent of our world's learners have been impacted
by COVID-19-related school closures, and history definitely
teaches us that the longer that students are out of school, the
less likely it will be that they can return.
And so as the lead sponsor of the Global Learning Loss
Assessment Act, I would love--I very much believe that the U.S.
foreign assistance should address long-standing inequities that
are exacerbated by this pandemic, especially access to
education and especially for girls.
I am concerned that the budget requests that you all put
forward does not include sufficient funding for education and
would result in the United States scaling back our support for
children and youth at the very time when we most need to be
stepping up.
So if you would not mind, sir, speaking to how our foreign
assistance can help students and education systems recover from
the pandemic, and improve the delivery of quality education,
especially for girls, and other marginalized children in need.
Secretary Blinken. First of all, I very much share your
concern. We had a preexisting concern, obviously, about the
fundamental importance of education and gaps that we see around
the world, and that concern has been dramatically exacerbated
by COVID-19, and of course, we have experienced that ourselves.
But we know that it's even--the impact is even worse and much
greater in many other countries.
I'm happy to look at this and would welcome getting any
information or ideas that you have. I believe that in a variety
of ways and through very different--and different programs we
are adequately resourced to advance this mission. In some
cases, there are, as a result of technology, greater
efficiencies that we can bring where we can actually do more
with less. So in some cases, that's the case.
Having said that, I'd welcome looking at anything you have,
your office has, and we can take a closer look at that.
Ms. Houlahan. You have gotten three for three. I really
appreciate all of your feedback to me and all of your
commitments to me. I will look forward to our teams connecting
so that we can move forward on all of us.
And with that, I yield back the remainder of my time.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Representative Pete Meijer of Michigan for
5 minutes.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin my
question, I would like to yield 1 minute to Representative
Young Kim of California.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields.
Ms. Kim of California. There. Thank you, Congressman
Meijer.
Secretary Blinken, it's good to see you again. I want to
quickly touch on the recently announced international vaccine
distribution plan. While this is a welcome start to reasserting
U.S. leadership on global health, 25 million doses are not
nearly enough to compete with the vaccine diplomacy of China
and Russia.
So I would hope and expect the Administration to send even
more doses abroad soon and update this committee regularly on
expected time lines for delivery and to which countries.
So let me now move on to an issue from your last visit to
this committee where you assured me that President Biden was
interested in appointing a special envoy on North Korean human
rights issues.
That was 3 months ago, and human rights issues in North
Korea have still not been substantially addressed by this
Administration. So can you now provide a time line for when
President Biden plans on appointing a special envoy on North
Korea human rights as required under the North Korean Human
Rights Act?
Secretary Blinken. Two things. First of all, let me answer
your second question first.
We will be coming forward with that. I cannot put a time
line on it. We're determined to do that. I think, as you know,
the vetting process has become ever more complicated, ever more
time consuming, ever more laborious. We want to make sure that
all of that is done properly.
But we will do that, and if I--as soon as I have a better
sense of timing, I'm happy to share that with you and your
office. But we're committed to doing that.
And second, with regard to COVID, it's not just these 25
million. It's 80 million vaccines between now and early July.
We will have shared more vaccines by a factor of five than any
other country on Earth, including China. And it does not stop
there.
There will be excess vaccines going forward beyond July,
and as I noted, we're also working very hard on increasing
capacity to manufacture vaccines so that there's a much greater
supply and that we can be the leader in getting the world
vaccinated as quickly as possible.
Ms. Kim of California. Thank you very much. I'd like to
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman reclaims--the gentleman
reclaims his time.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member McCaul,
and Secretary Blinken for joining us here today.
I just want to reemphasize what several of my colleagues
and what the Ranking Member said about the Special Immigrant
Visa Program for especially our Afghan interpreters who served
with and under the United States military during our conflict.
As that conflict comes to a close, Mr. Secretary, I know
you mentioned that we will continue some of the processing
ability even after the troop withdrawal. But I would like to
continue to emphasize the need to explore options in a third
country or in Guam, as was done with Operation New Life in 1975
under President Ford's Administration at the conclusion of the
Vietnam War. Within a matter of weeks, over 100,000 folks were
able to get settled, processed, and prepared.
I know we have spoken with DHS on the vetting side, and
that chief of mission approval does seem to be the major
backlog. So we are fully here to support what we can do to make
sure we are doing right by our allies.
And I also wanted to emphasize what my colleague, Mr. Levin
from Michigan, said about Danny Fenster, the Michigan
journalist who was arrested by the Tatmadaw on May 24th. I know
you've already spoken to those efforts.
I just wanted to, again, emphasize our need to make sure
that American citizens who are being held in custody overseas,
especially those in an evolving conflict as in Myanmar, are
being taken care of and that we're doing everything we can to
get and secure their safety.
I have a large Burmese population in my district. I've
spoken with them on multiple occasions. I was heartened to see
that Chevron and Total have suspended some dividend payments to
the MOGE pipeline and the Yadana field.
But I just wanted to ask, Mr. Secretary, has the State
Department had additional conversations or work with our ASEAN
allies and others to locate and freeze Tatmadaw assets located
offshore, such as in Thailand and Singapore?
Secretary Blinken. Yes. First of all, I appreciate all of
your comments very much and agree with you.
Second, yes, we're looking at various ways to--both to make
sure that the military regime does not enjoy the benefit of
assets that allow it to keep going. For example, we're
encouraging countries that are invested in enterprises that
directly support the military regime to reconsider those
investments, and we're in close conversation with many
countries, ASEAN Members, focused on Burma.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Please let us know of
any additional assistance we can provide. We do not want to see
Myanmar become a failed State with ethnic armed groups
throughout the region looking to exploit that security
situation with them.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back, the time
allotted for questions has now expired. I want to thank the
Secretary for giving us three and a half hours. I know that
there's one or two other Members that were waiting for
questions.
I apologize to you. I know how awkward it is to be on the
bottom row. I've been there. I was there for a while. But the
Secretary has given a tremendous amount of his time, and so I
thank--I just wanted to ask the Ranking Member McCaul and thank
him for his cooperation in putting this hearing together.
Do you have any quick closing additional comments before we
close?
Mr. McCaul. No, just thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Secretary, for your three and a half hours. I know you're
a busy man.
And I just want to conclude with if there's anything
Congress can do to help you, again, with these Afghans who were
so loyal to our troops and put theirselves in harm's way that
when they're put in harm's way we protect them from the
Taliban.
I think the worst thing I could think of would be if the
Taliban took over and slaughtered them.
And also, force protection at the embassy is very important
as well, and I've had several briefings on that and I know
you're acutely aware of that as well.
So if there's anything that we can do, I think this is an
issue the Chairman and I are in agreement on and as with most
issues we are, and we thank you for your time today, sir.
Secretary Blinken. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member McCaul. I really appreciate all of
this time with the Members. I especially appreciate the, I
think, very good, important conversations we have had about so
many different issues and I really appreciate the spirit in
which we're having those conversations.
I apologize to colleagues who didn't get a chance. I have
obligations to another committee in the House in just a short
while. But I'm happy offline to try to speak to folks who
didn't get a chance to get questions in today and followup that
way.
So, again, thank you.
Chairman Meeks. Let me thank you for that, Mr. Secretary,
because it's been a short time since you last testified before
this committee and your work has taken you, among other places,
from Tokyo to Brussels to Kabul to Reykjavik, and most recently
back to our own hemisphere in San Jose.
So we know that your schedule is jam packed and itinerary
is proof positive of the urgent challenges that U.S. foreign
policy must address from nonproliferation to conflict
resolution, from migration to climate change, from rebuilding
democracy-based alliances to countering malign or corrupt
actors.
So in your first appearance before this committee in March,
you laid it out at a high level for foreign policy and matters
of priority that you're going to measure.
But this budget request puts the Administration's money
where its mouth is, and I look forward to continuing to engage
with you and the Administration as we move forward with the
activity identified by Fiscal Year 1922 and the budget request,
including on our priorities I and the other Members have.
I'd like to, again, thank Ranking Member McCaul for his
partnership and working in a bipartisan way on this committee.
Good luck with your next committee hearings, and thank you
for appearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee in
such a short period of time. We look forward to the next time.
As of now, the committee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:36 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
