- WHAT'S NEXT FOR LIBYA? THE PATH TO PEACE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHAT'S NEXT FOR LIBYA? THE PATH TO PEACE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
MIDDLE EAST, NORTH AFRICA, AND GLOBAL COUNTERTERRORISM

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

December 9, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-96

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-228 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California              MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia       CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida       STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California       SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island       ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California       LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas               ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada       BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California       BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania       KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota       TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota       MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan       GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia       DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey       PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey               NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California       RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina       YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California       MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California       JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism

THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida, Chairman

GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         JOE WILSON, South Carolina,
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island            Ranking Member
TED LIEU, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      LEE ZELDIN, New York
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina      BRIAN MAST, Florida
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
BRAD SHERMAN, California      GREG STEUBE, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California      RONNY JACKSON, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois      MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida

Casey Kustin, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Sasahara, Karen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for North
Africa, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     7
Doherty, Megan, Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau for the
Middle East, U.S. Agency for International Development.........    11

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    31
Hearing Minutes..................................................    32
Hearing Attendance...............................................    33

STATEMENT SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Statement submitted for the record from Representative Connolly..    34

WHAT'S NEXT FOR LIBYA? THE PATH TO PEACE

Thursday, December 9, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa and Global Counterterrorism,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., via
Webex, Hon. Theodore E. Deutch (chairman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Mr. Deutch. The Committee on the Middle East, North Africa,
and Global Counterterrorism will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any point. All members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and questions
for the record, subject to the length limitation of the rules.
As a reminder to members, please keep your video function
on at all times, even when you're not recognized by the chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves, and
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking,
consistent with H. Res. 8 and the accompanying regulations.
Staff will only mute members and witnesses as appropriate
when they are not under recognition to eliminate background
noise and not to prevent embarrassing statements.
I see that we have a quorum, and I will now recognize
myself for opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we are holding a hearing on the current
situation in Libya and U.S. policy toward Libya.
I want to extend a warm welcome to Ms. Sasahara and Ms.
Doherty. Thank you for joining us today. This is a momentous
time for Libya. The stakes for U.S. interest in the Libyan
people are very high.
Since the events of the Arab Spring and the subsequent fall
of Muammar Gaddafi, there's been so much hope for the Libyan
people as they attempted to transition to democracy. The
fracturing of the country in 2019 resulted in violent conflict
and good hopes of progress on pause as foreign actors seized
attempts to jockey for influence in Libya.
However, significant progress has been made over the past
year and a half: an effective cease-fire since October 2020,
the establishment of a joint military commission to address
security disputes, the restoration of oil production, and the
establishment of the U.N.-led Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
which generated a credible political roadmap and led to the
inauguration on March 15th of an interim Libyan government of
National Unity that had parliamentary support.
I commend the Libyan people and their representatives for
taking these important and necessary steps, and I would note
that these achievements are in no small part thanks to the
efforts of the U.N. Support Mission in Libya--UNSMIL--and the
engagement of the State Department and USAID.
When the interim government was inaugurated, there was a
renewed glimmer of optimism about Libya's future. For the first
time in years there was hope that Libya's divided institutions
might find a way to unify and usher lasting stability to the
country and that Presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for later this month would mark a pivotal turning
point on Libya's path to peace and prosperity.
But the positive developments do not tell the full story
and much of the promise of the political process has not yet
materialized.
Libya's elections are, indeed, scheduled to begin on
December 24th. But the long-awaited vote faces numerous
challenges, including unresolved questions about the relevant
election laws and the eligibility of candidates.
Despite their enthusiasm for holding a vote, some Libyans
and analysts have called for postponing the election to allow
more time for legal and logistical preparation.
Meanwhile, the U.N.'s top envoy for Libya announced his
resignation last week. Against the backdrop of such
uncertainty, I hope our witnesses will address what the U.S.
sees as the challenge of ensuring free, fair, and credible
elections in such a compressed timeframe.
There are two remaining long-standing challenges that have
festered over the last year: decrepit public services, more
than half a million migrants, many of whom are still kept in
inhumane detention centers, nearly a million people in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance, and persistent human
rights abuses, which seemingly occur with impunity.
We need to press harder for a humane migration policy in
Libya, including through quick implementation of the U.N.'s
plan for closing migrant detention centers.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about this
and, in addition, the tools the Administration is using to
promote accountability for human rights abuses, fight
corruption, and improve governance, public services, and
economic recovery in Libya.
These are all essential ingredients for promoting national
reconciliation and sustainable peace. Progress in securing the
withdrawal of foreign actors and mercenaries from Libya remains
elusive.
The estimated 20,000 foreign mercenaries including the
long-reported presence of the Russian Wagner Group and fighters
who remain on Libyan soil are in violation of the cease-fire
agreement and the U.N. arms embargo. Their presence aggravates
the conflict, exacerbates humanitarian needs and human rights
abuses, and it undermines Libyan sovereignty.
On this front, I encourage the Administration to apply all
necessary leverage to allow for the swift departure of foreign
mercenaries from Libyan soil. We must ensure the terms of the
U.N. arms embargo are enforced.
As we know, foreign weapons have long found their way into
Libya, and I hope our witnesses will confirm that tough
bilateral and multilateral diplomacy has been used and will be
used to pressure all outside powers involved to respect the
arms embargo.
More fundamentally, we are faced with the stark reality
that Libya's lawless armed groups have entrenched themselves
and expanded their influence over the past year, placing
themselves in a strong position to shape the election's
aftermath based on their interest rather than the people's
will.
We need not wait until December 24th to find examples of
what this looks like. Already we have heard accounts of judges
handling election-related cases being threatened. Bearing all
these challenges in mind, I would like to call attention to the
bipartisan Libya Stabilization Act, which I introduced with
Ranking Member Wilson, Mr. Lieu, and Mr. Malinowski. The bill
passed the House in September and is now awaiting consideration
in the Senate.
Our legislation authorizes significant U.S. support for
good governance, anti-corruption, elections, and economic
assistance. It also seeks to impose targeted sanctions on
individuals who commit human rights abuses in Libya, violate
the arms embargo, or support foreign military intervention and
militias.
The bill demonstrates Congress' interest in ending foreign
intervention, consolidating Libya's political gains, and
encouraging long-term peace and stability, and I hope our
Senate friends move swiftly to take up this legislation.
I was glad to see on October 26th the Administration
sanctioned Osama Al Kuni Ibrahim, a migrant-smuggling kingpin
who is responsible for the systematic exploitation and abuse of
African migrants.
I'm encouraged by this action. I look forward to hearing
from the witnesses about further employment of the
Administration's existing tools and the identification of areas
where greater congressional support may be needed.
Finally, Libya's progress over the past last year, year and
a half, is fragile and situation remains tenuous, I commend the
Administration for returning U.S. attention to Libya and
deploying significant diplomatic and economic tools to help the
government of National Unity succeed.
But, clearly, there's much work to be done and I look
forward to hearing from our two qualified witnesses about how
the Administration views these challenges and is prepared to
work with Congress and the international community to address
them.
I will now recognize our acting ranking member, my friend,
Mr. Burchett, for purposes of making an opening statement.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you to my good friend, Chairman Ted
Deutch, and I want to thank you for holding this important
hearing today. There's much optimism for the future of the
Libyan people, but the next steps, I feel like, will be very
critical.
As Libyans prepare for elections this month, it is critical
that these be undertaken without the presence, of course, of
interfering efforts by foreign governments. There are far too
many foreign fighters, mercenaries, and other foreign forces
still in Libya, each asserting the interests of specific
regional and global powers.
Russia, in particular, continues to exert its malign
influence through private military contractors despite denying
any involvement. A political solution is the only way forward
in Libya. Prolonged fighting only empowers Russia and fosters
conditions for conflict and chaos.
Unfortunately, Russia is not interested in solutions and
continues to back the warlord, General Khalifa Haftar, of the
Libyan National Army, whose forces continue to be involved in
serious human rights abuses and war crimes.
I'm also more than concerned about human rights abuses by
the Turkish-backed Syrian mercenaries. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about how the Administration
is approaching this challenged set of issues.
I thank our witnesses for their services and I also want to
thank, again, my good friend, Chairman Ted Deutch, for putting
on this meeting for us, and thank you all very much.
And I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Burchett.
I will now turn to our witnesses. Let me remind the
witnesses to limit your testimony to 5 minutes. Without
objection, your prepared written statements will be made part
of the hearing record, and we're really grateful for your being
with us today.
First, Ms. Karen Sasahara has served as the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for North Africa since November
2020.
She is an accomplished member of the Senior Foreign
Service, previously served as the charges d'affaires at the
U.S. Embassy in Oman as well as Consul General in Jerusalem.
Ms. Sasahara holds a Master's degree from the George Washington
University, a Bachelor's degree from University of Wisconsin
Milwaukee.
Ms. Sasahara, many of us have had the pleasure of seeing
you in the region. It is great to welcome you to the committee.
Also with us today Ms. Megan Doherty. Megan Doherty has
served as USAID's Deputy Assistant Administrator of the Bureau
for the Middle East since February 2020. In this position, she
provides management and oversight of USAID programs across
Libya, Tunisia, and the Palestinian territories.
Before this current position, Ms. Doherty served as
director for North Africa on the National Security Council as
well as Senior Advisor in the State Department's Near Eastern
Affairs Bureau.
Ms. Doherty, you have previously testified before this
subcommittee in a personal capacity, and it's a pleasure to
welcome you back as part of the Biden Administration.
Thanks to everyone for being here today. I recognize the
witnesses for 5 minutes each and without objection, again, your
prepared statement will be made part of the record.
Ms. Sasahara, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREN SASAHARA, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR NORTH AFRICA, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Sasahara. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Burchett and members of the committee for this
opportunity to discuss Libya's path forward.
As we mark the 1-year anniversary of the Libyan cease-fire
agreement and approach the upcoming Libyan Presidential and
parliamentary elections, Libya is at a critical turning point.
A decade of civil conflict has deepened Libya's
fragmentation and exacerbated local tensions. The United States
has partnered with Libyan government institutions, the private
sector, entrepreneurs, and civil society groups to mitigate
drivers of violence, preserve the momentum of the political
process, and improve Libyan lives.
The United States stands with the Libyan people as they
work to establish lasting peace, security, and prosperity. We
share their aspirations for a sovereign, inclusive, stable, and
unified country in control of its own affairs.
Vice President Harris, Secretary Blinken, and U.S. Special
Envoy and Ambassador to Libya, Richard Norland, have rallied
the international community to support Libyan plans for free
and fair elections, which is critical to establishing a pathway
to peace.
With over 2.8 million Libyans registered to vote, there was
an overwhelming desire to hold elections. Libya's High National
Election Commission is aiming to hold the first round of
Presidential elections on December 24th.
We expect the second round of Presidential elections to be
held simultaneously with parliamentary elections in late
February.
In addition to the technical support the United States has
provided to the commission to promote free and fair elections
with broad participation, the United States is also engaging
closely with our international partners and Libyan political
leaders to make clear that there will be consequences for any
actors who undermine the elections or incite violence.
While the October 2020 cease-fire remains in effect,
certain foreign powers continue to exploit the conflict and
undermine Libyan sovereignty. The United States and
international partners oppose all foreign military intervention
in Libya.
The U.N. Security Council passed the U.N. Security Council
Resolution 2570 In April, which calls for the departure of all
foreign forces without delay. This includes Russian mercenary
proxy forces, Turkish forces and their proxies, and all other
foreign military forces, mercenaries, and foreign fighters,
including those from Syria, Chad, Niger, and Sudan.
Russia's Wagner Group has been involved in facilitating
multiple violations of U.N. Security Council resolutions and
has been connected to human rights abuses in multiple
countries.
Wagner continues to both destabilize Libya and use it as a
platform to expand Russia's destabilizing influence in Africa.
During the Libyan-led Stabilization Conference held in Tripoli
this past October, the East and West military leaders
comprising the 5+5 Joint Military Commission announced an
action plan for the withdrawal of foreign fighters,
mercenaries, and forces. The United States strongly supports
and commends the efforts of the 5+5 and encourages the swift
implementation of its action plan.
Successful Libyan elections beginning on December 24th and
a transition to a new government offer the best opportunity to
curtail Russia's expansion into the Sahel and to remove Wagner
mercenaries from Libya.
The United States continues to actively engage with our
international partners in support of the withdrawal of all
foreign forces. This will give the new Libyan government a
chance to reestablish its sovereignty and rebuild a balanced
range of security cooperation partnerships that will serve
Libyan interests and promote regional stability.
We support the inclusion of Libyan civil society and women
leaders in the ongoing political process, including to ensure
stronger accountability for crimes committed in the country.
We were appalled by reports earlier in the year of mass
graves in Tarhuna, and recent allegations of violence and abuse
against migrants are similarly shocking. We need to make clear
that those who commit human rights violations and abuses such
as unlawful killings, torture, and forced disappearances must
be held accountable.
Accountability for all responsible actors is key to
strengthening the durability of a political solution, providing
the Libyan people a genuine path to national reconciliation and
justice.
Our commitment and partnership are demonstrated through
long-standing U.S. assistance. Since 2011, the United States
has provided approximately $900 million in foreign assistance
for Libya, including nearly $400 million in U.S. stabilization,
economic, and development support, $160 million in security
assistance, and over $350 million in humanitarian assistance.
Libya also participates in the U.S.-funded International
Organization for Migration Africa regional migration program,
which builds national capacity to manage migration and increase
regional cooperation on migration issues.
The challenges that remain are daunting, but it is hard not
to be moved by the Libyan people's determination. After
everything that they have faced, the Libyan people now have the
best opportunity in a decade to lay the foundation for a stable
democratic society.
Now is the time for Libyan political leaders to seek
consensus, finalize preparations for national elections, and
fulfill their commitment to the Libyan people to hold the vote
on time.
Thank you once again for this opportunity to speak with you
today and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sasahara follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Ms. Sasahara.
Ms. Doherty, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MEGAN DOHERTY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR THE MIDDLE EAST, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Doherty. Chairman Deutch, Ranking Member Burchett,
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today about Libya's path forward and the role of
the U.S. Agency for International Development.
Libya's political transition is neither easy nor direct.
The Libyan people have now endured a decade of insecurity,
declining public services, and economic and government
dysfunction.
But despite these challenges, the Libyan people want to
move forward. The nationwide cease-fire that was agreed to in
October 2020 has, largely, held and today nearly 70 percent of
Libyan support holding elections. In fact, 90 percent of
Libyans who registered to vote have already collected their ID
cards.
And while the challenges should not be understated and
there are deep political divisions, it is worth noting that
those disagreements are taking place in courtrooms instead of
battlefields.
That said, significant challenges remain in Libya. The
United Nations estimates that nearly 900,000 people are still
in need of humanitarian assistance. There are more than 600,000
migrants and 41,000 registered refugees and asylum seekers who
are uniquely vulnerable and subject to egregious human rights
abuses.
The recent conflict caused severe declines in services and
access to water and sanitation, and COVID has further worsened
the country's struggles. In some places, food costs for basic
items more than doubled their prepandemic levels.
So in response to all of this, USAID's goal is to advance
Libya's ability to establish a unified government capable of
transparently managing its resources and serving its citizens.
Thanks to the generosity of Congress and the American
people, USAID has partnered with the Libyan people to address
these challenges to improve conditions and to strengthen
prospects for longer-term stability.
In the last decade, USAID worked with the Libyans people to
unify Libyans eastern and western power grids, decreasing
blackouts. Following the liberation of Sirte in 2016 from ISIS,
U.S. assistance helped stabilize the city and helped 90 percent
of the people who had been driven from their homes by terror
and conflict return.
USAID has also trained and empowered thousands of women,
young people, and civil society activists to participate in
politics and make their voices heard. Most recently, in
response to COVID-19, USAID has helped Libya's health sector
fight back.
Right now, we are working to support the Libyan people with
their aspiration for national elections. While elections alone
are insufficient, they are a crucial step forward for Libya and
we are committed to ensuring that they are held as
transparently, credibly, and securely as possible.
To that end, USAID has partnered with the High National
Election Commission--HNEC--on all aspects of the election
process from voter registration and ID cards to cybersecurity.
USAID has equipped HNEC field offices and polling stations
across the country. We have worked with interior ministry
officials on risk mitigation and election security planning,
and we have trained judges and lawyers on election dispute
resolution.
In addition, to counter a dangerous uptick in
disinformation, we have worked with the Election Commission to
set up a voter information hotline and with civil society to
make sure that Libyans are able to fact check rumors in real
time and have access to credible information.
Several challenges remain. Threats of violence and
intimidation have risen against HNEC, against judges, and
against candidates, particularly women, and spoilers continue
to try and disrupt the process. And all of this reinforces just
how important U.S. assistance and advocacy are to enable
compromise.
In addition to supporting elections, USAID is committed to
supporting the Libyan people in their broader aspirations for
stability, accountability, and inclusive governance. Beyond
elections, Libya will continue to face an array of challenges.
Government institutions will need to act swiftly to build
trust and deliver improvements for the Libyan people. USAID
stands ready to support these efforts.
Thank you for your time today and for your continued
support for our work in Libya. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Doherty follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Deutch. Thanks so much for your testimony, Ms. Doherty.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each, and
pursuant to House rules all time yielded is for purposes of
questioning our witnesses. Because of the virtual format of
this hearing, I'll recognize members by committee seniority,
alternating between Democrats and Republicans.
If you miss your turn, please let our staff know and we'll
circle back to you. If you seek recognition, you must unmute
your microphone and address the chair verbally.
And I will defer to later and I will start by yielding to
Mr. Cicilline for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman Deutch and Ranking
Member Wilson, for holding this hearing and thank you to our
two witnesses. This is very useful.
Ms. Sasahara--I hope I'm pronouncing it correctly--in
October, the Human Rights Council voted unanimously to renew
the mandate of an independent fact-finding mission, which has
investigated and reported on extensive allegations of war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Libya. As part of this
work, the mission has assembled a list of perpetrators
responsible for gross human rights violations in the country.
Would you speak a little bit to how the United States is
working to support these efforts to really hold individuals
responsible for committing international crimes in Libya and
how our new reentry into the Human Rights Council in January
2022 after 3 years of absence might facilitate that effort and,
you know, just sort of what is underway and how we can make
certain that it is successful?
Ms. Sasahara. Thank you very much for that question, sir.
This is very much at the core of our policy in Libya. It is
a deviation and distraction from the real task at hand.
In the Berlin Two and at the Paris Conferences that were
held this past June and in November, respectively, we called on
the Libyan authorities to respect and fulfill their obligations
under international rights and humanitarian law, and we have
condemned all violations and abuses of migrants, migrant
smuggling, and human trafficking.
We do support the U.N. fact-finding mission on Libya and
its unhindered access to all Libyan territory to carry out
their work. This also includes support for the Berlin Process,
the international followup committee for Libya, humanitarian
law, and the Human Rights Working Group to promote
accountability through direct engagement with Libyan leaders.
We are also providing funding to the U.N. agencies and
civil societies to document human rights abuses through our
department's annual reporting on human rights trafficking and
religious freedom.
It is extremely important that we have rejoined this body
in Geneva. It is very much at the heart of this
Administration's foreign policy.
I believe the President said that, Secretary Blinken had
said that, and this enables us to get back at the table to be
able to put some action behind those words, and Libya is
definitely on our screen.
We continue to have discussions through the Ambassador's
Special Envoy Norland directly with the most senior Libyan
leadership and to consult constantly with our partners, whether
it's the closest partners, the Berlin Conference, and those to
continue for a full court press.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you very much.
Ms. Doherty, thank you for your testimony as well. You
noted in your testimony more than 900,000 people are still in
need of some form of humanitarian assistance in Libya, and
while USAID and the U.N. are leading the effort to help supply
aid on the ground, instability caused by the election could
further jeopardize vulnerable populations in the country.
And so would you speak to USAID's preparation to work with
the U.N. to really scale up humanitarian activities in Libya if
fighting does break out during or after the election and do you
have the resources you need to provide the level of assistance
that will be necessary if that does happen?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you for your question. There's always a
risk that elections can stoke tensions or be exploited by
spoilers and, as we noted earlier, the environment is fragile.
But we are doing everything in our power to ensure that the
Libyan elections are set up for as much success as possible,
and our goal is to minimize the potential for violence.
So we, to that effect, are working with the Election
Commission and the Interior Ministry on a joint elections
security operations center. We have helped establish a national
election security plan and provided training on election
security for HNEC officials.
We have also helped the Interior Ministry set up an
election violence monitoring dashboard to provide early warning
of potential violence and to help them respond.
In addition, on the civil society side we are supporting
strong anti-violence messaging and public awareness campaigns
throughout the country. So our goal is to keep Libyans
participating in the process and keep the process peaceful.
Now, these are all technical solutions, and the drivers of
violence are inherently political. So this makes the diplomatic
efforts that DAS Sasahara was speaking to and our support for
the U.N.-led negotiations even more important.
And in addition to all of this, we will continue to provide
robust humanitarian assistance as needed to the Libyan people;
and beyond that we have flexible assistance so we're able to
support conflict resolution in local communities, early
warning, and in addition, public information campaigns and
significant support to Libyan civil society to encourage peace
and resolution.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much for your work, and thank
you, Mr. Chairman. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Burchett, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to note that
it's pretty cool that you wait to the last to go for the
questioning. You miss all the good--then all the good questions
are taken. You've just got to kind of get involved in casual
conversation.
Mr. Cicilline. If you're as brilliant as Ted Deutch you do
not have to worry about them.
Mr. Deutch. All right. Everyone stop.
Mr. Burchett, you're recognized.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Deutch. This is eating away your time. Go ahead.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, brother.
Ms. Sasahara--I think I said that right. I do not know if I
did, but my name gets murdered all the time anyway.
So does Libya have a chance at remaining stable should
Gaddafi or Haftar win the election? What is the outcome should
Gaddafi win and what about Haftar?
Ms. Sasahara. Thank you for that question. That, I think,
is the million-dollar question and I think it's one that every
Libyan is asking themselves, whether it's the Libyan population
but also the powers that be.
I think they are surprised, I think, but they're also
contemplating what that could mean and whether that is good for
the country. I think that the chairman alluded to it before
about the judiciary rulings and I think that that is underway.
The High National Election Commissioner is looking at that as
well and there is a lot of intense consultation that is going
on in terms of the qualifications of the candidates.
Mr. Burchett. Ma'am, also, but do you think we should be
concerned with Turkey's extensive presence and influence in
Libya?
Ms. Sasahara. I think that--in our consultations with
Turkey directly they understand that foreign forces need to
withdraw, to leave from Libya. That is in the October 23d,
2020, cease-fire agreement. It's in the UNSCR's 2570.
We believe that they are aware of that and we continue to
discuss that with them and as well as our other partners about
that.
They understand how the Libyan leadership and the Libyan
people feel about the withdrawal of all foreign forces,
militaries, fighters, and proxies.
Mr. Burchett. OK. I think you sort of answered this, but
could you describe in a little further detail our efforts to
negotiate Turkey's exit? Should other international forces exit
as well?
Ms. Sasahara. I think what we're doing is just talking to
the leadership in those capitals to try to coordinate a
balanced and a synchronized withdrawal of all of the foreign
forces. It's quite a task, as you can imagine. I think there's
a little bit of distraction by some people from the political
developments.
But we have to continue on this track. All of these tracks
are crucial--the political, the military track. There are
certain things that you cannot do on one track if certain
things on another track do not happen.
And so we feel very, very strongly that this must happen.
But I think, as you know, there are senior levels of leadership
that are questioning that. But we continue to work with them
very intensely on a sequenced balancing synchronized withdrawal
process.
Mr. Burchett. How do you feel the State Department is
planning to counter the increased Russian involvement and
influence in Libya, ma'am?
Ms. Sasahara. Yes. It is a destabilizing force. We have
said that binationally. We have said that in multilateral fora.
We have--the United States itself has sanctioned Yevgeny
Prigozhin and the Wagner Group.
We will continue to push and to consult with our partners.
The Libyans themselves want it. Their senior leadership has
traveled to Ankara and to Moscow to relay that directly. I
cannot think of anything more definitive and authoritative than
the Libyan people and the Libyan leadership making that
request.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Real quick, Ms. Doherty, can you describe
how the U.S. is working to help combat the human trafficking in
Libya in North--excuse me, North Africa, overall?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you. I'll actually redirect that
question to DAS Sasahara, given the State Department's role in
human trafficking.
Ms. Sasahara. Thank you. Again, as I've said, we worked on
that binationally or nationally just in terms of the programs
that we have that--to provide funding to Libya to provide
humanitarian services.
We have partnerships with UNHCR as well as IOM to provide
humanitarian services and assistance to the migrant population.
It is appalling what is going on, as I've said in my testimony.
We have talked and will continue to talk and press the
Libyans to abide by international humanitarian law. I was happy
to hear that they did restart or reestablish the repatriation
flights, which I think is very, very important for those that
have decided they would like to return home. They can do so in
a safe manner.
But for those that are left behind, as my colleague at
USAID has said, it's far from over. We work with our colleagues
to provide assistance. We work to ascertain or to monitor what
is going on in the detention centers.
I think it's not just a question of talk, though. We have
sanctioned one of the directors of the migration center, Mr.
Kuni Ibrahim, for the horrible abuses--physical, sexual
abuses--that were going on in that migration center. We will
continue with that. We will continue to use that tool as the
most effective way to stop these odious practices.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, ma'am. I believe I've gone over
now and if I haven't, I yield back my time, Chairman Deutch.
Thank you, brother.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Ranking Member Burchett.
Mr. Connolly, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask a devil's advocate question. I will stipulate
that U.S. policy favors having an election and the withdrawal
of foreign forces who might have a malign impact on those
elections.
But sometimes having elections in countries that do not
have any democratic tradition can actually lead to more
instability because they're not ready and can, frankly, empower
and embolden those forces that want to control the central
government.
And so how do you answer--you know, with the best of
intentions, the United States may find itself here supporting a
actual element of instability by having elections, even though
our motives are, presumably, good, but the unintended
consequences may, in fact, contribute to further instability in
a place like Libya?
Ms. Doherty. So we will support our Libyan partners. If
their expert determination is that a delay is necessary, we
will support them and we will work with them to address
whatever the technical issues that they identify are.
Mr. Connolly. Excuse me. Excuse me, Ms. Doherty. My
question isn't what their intention is or what--you know, we're
going to support whatever our partners support. It is, do we,
in fact, spend any time looking at the unintended consequences
that could occur and how do we address that?
Ms. Doherty. Yes. It's our responsibility to identify any
number of outcomes and to proactively plan for them. And on the
assistance side, we have maintained flexible approaches.
We're supporting violence prevention. We're working in
local communities on conflict resolution, on early warning
mechanisms. We're also providing support to the U.N.-led
process to make sure that if there are any disruptions we can
also help the process get back on track.
Mr. Connolly. And is it our understanding that other armed
groups operating in Libya are going to allow an election to
take place in the territory they control and/or abide by the
results of those elections?
Ms. Doherty. So our goal with our assistance is to make
sure that Libyans continue to participate in the process
peacefully. That's why----
Mr. Connolly. Yes. That's not my question. My question
isn't about our goal. My question is about our analytical
assessment of the situation on the ground.
Ms. Doherty. We're clear eyed about the challenges and we
do expect that actors will continue to disrupt the process, and
that is why we have been doing the contingency planning. But I
know my State Department colleague has more.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Sasahara?
Ms. Sasahara. Right. No, this--thank you very much,
Congressman. That's a really good question and this is
something that we do spend a lot of time with, you know,
particularly those that have kind of seen this show before in
other countries in the region where we have been.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Sasahara. And you're right, this isn't a question of
just here's a ballot box, let's have an election. This is a
profound transformation, that Libya is going from a system of
single dictatorial strongman model from 1969 with Gaddafi up
until 2011, and then a little rough ride forward.
So you're right. What are the contingencies that are going
to happen here? How can this go wrong when you--how can it go
right if you do not have that history there.
This is actually what's been really actually kind of
gratifying and a little bit surprising, not to be
disrespectful. But you saw, as I said before, just under 3
million Libyans, they registered to vote.
They know what's going on with the militias, all of that.
They've seen it. They've lived through this and they're, like,
I am going to vote. I'm going to have this right. They know
what it means.
The High National Election Commission has been working with
the assistance of USAID to get down all of the logistics of an
election that you would see, something--I was really surprised
to hear how far along they had been because I hadn't heard
anything. And I'm, like, yes, they've got the observers.
They've got the polls. They've got the security. Every single
thing, checking every box down there.
So the logistics, the administrative, was really right on
target. They know what they want. We have seen this
anecdotally, we want to vote, and they're actually quite--
they're watching what we say. They're watching what every
Libyan politician says about the elections because they want it
to happen.
So we think that they want it, they've work toward it, they
are continuing to work toward it. Even with surprise
candidates, the desire is still there. But the leadership--the
Libyan leadership is very much aware of what the public
sentiment is and, by turn, the militia leadership is aware of
what the public sentiment is.
So you're looking at kind of a pause and a quiet, a little
bit of uncertainty as people look around. But that electoral
process machine is moving forward.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. That's very helpful and
reassuring. Because, you know, the United States needs to be
very clear eyed when we decide to do something like this and
get behind it.
We cannot engage in magical thinking. There's a difference
between what we want and the reality we face, and our foreign
policy with respect to Libya or anywhere else needs to be very
clear eyed, and I'm reassured by your answer. Thank you. I
yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Mast, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast, I think you're muted.
Mr. Mast, are you talking to us even----
OK. Mr. Malinowski, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to our
witnesses.
First, I just want to say in general that I applaud your
efforts both at the State Department and USAID to support these
elections and the Libyan people as they try to emerge from a
decade of conflict.
I would recall that the last time we supported the Libyan
people in holding elections they did an absolutely marvelous
and spectacular job, surprising virtually every skeptic,
including me, at that time. So let's hope that happens again.
I do want to come back, though, with you, Ms. Sasahara, to
the question of foreign interference and our determination to
hold people accountable for human rights abuses.
We talk about Russia, we talk about the Wagner group, and
we should, but it's also easy to do so because it's easy to
beat up on Russia. It's easy to sanction Russian entities. We
have been doing it across the board for many years.
But let me ask you some tougher questions in this regard.
Has the government of the United Arab Emirates ever
acknowledged to us that they misused U.S.-provided equipment,
including C-17 transport aircraft to ship weapons and supplies
to the Haftar forces in Libya?
Ms. Sasahara. I'm not aware of any conversation that they
would have had with us about that issue.
Mr. Malinowski. Well, would we have had a conversation with
them about that issue?
Ms. Sasahara. I do not know.
Mr. Malinowski. So it's been reported to the U.N. Security
Council, acknowledged by DOD Inspector General reports, that
the UAE was using our equipment to funnel masses of military
equipment to the Haftar forces alongside Russia and we have
never had a conversation with the UAE about that?
Ms. Sasahara. I'm not saying, sir, that we didn't have a
conversation. I just--I myself am not aware of that.
Mr. Malinowski. Well, I hope you would get back to us on
that, because that's surprising. I mean, would it be
appropriate for us to fulfill additional requests from the UAE
for that kind of equipment including, for example, C-17s if
they do not acknowledge having misused them in the past?
Ms. Sasahara. No, I that's a good question.
Congressman, all of our sales come with a lot of conditions
and a lot of discussions beforehand, and there are a lot of
legal requirements, as you know, everything from the SU-35 that
we sell, and that's all part of the discussion, and I'm going
to assume that all of that is part of the discussion. It's not
just an assumption. It is a legal requirement how our equipment
is sold and how our technology is used.
Mr. Malinowski. OK. Well, I'd like to ask you to followup
with us specifically on the C-17s and what they have
acknowledged to us because I think that's important.
The U.N. Panel of Experts, as you know, has also
extensively reported to the Security Council about the role of
private companies, including those based in our Gulf allies,
including the UAE, in having illegally funneled weapons to
warring parties in Libya, and, you know, some of those
companies include Emirati companies like Lancaster 6, Opus
Capital Assets, which funded and directed provision of
helicopters, drones, cyber capabilities to the Haftar forces.
There was another company called Black Shield Security,
which deceived Sudanese men into--by telling them that they
were going to just do private security work and in the Emirates
but, in fact, they were flown to fight alongside the Haftar
forces in Libya.
The Administration has authority to sanction arms embargo
violators and the House-adopted version of the NDAA asked you
all to review companies listed in the Panel of Experts' report
under that sanctions authority.
Is that something you are looking at, and if not, why not?
Ms. Sasahara. I think that we're always looking at that,
particularly the Panel of Experts' reports, and looking at
sanctions, sanctions busters, and how we can remedy that. There
is no role for those kinds of companies in Libya. There's no
role for that exploitation of Sudanese to be used as cannon
fodder. That's--it's not acceptable. That is not going to bring
peace and stability. So we work----
Mr. Malinowski. OK.
Ms. Sasahara [continuing]. Through U.S., United Nations,
with the Panel of Experts. We work with our colleagues to
monitor that, and I do want to get back to you, as you said
before, about the conversation with the UAE and find out. But
that's----
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you.
Ms. Sasahara [continuing]. There's no role for them.
Mr. Malinowski. Could I ask you to get back to us on
companies specifically listed in the Panel of Experts' report
and just to update us on whether there is serious consideration
of using the sanctions authorities?
Again, it is always easier to sanction a Russian than
somebody from a country that we consider a partner. I get that,
diplomatically. But I hope you would agree that in this case it
shouldn't matter.
If there's a private entity that was involved in these arms
embargo violations it should be treated equally, no matter
where it comes from. Would you agree with that?
Ms. Sasahara. Well, I understand your point on that very,
very clearly. You know, sanctions are sanctions. So we will get
back to you. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski. I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Malinowski.
Before we go to Ms. Manning, we'll see if Mr. Mast would
like to be recognized.
[No response.]
Mr. Deutch. Ms. Manning, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Manning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing, and thank you to the witnesses.
Ms. Sasahara, can you talk to us about how the
Administration is working to address and remove the presence of
Russian-backed forces from Libya?
Ms. Sasahara. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, as I mentioned
a little bit earlier, what we have done directly the United
States has sanctioned the Wagner Group.
We have sanctioned the group itself and, of course, its
leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin, and I believe there are other
countries that have done that as well. I think the U.N. has. We
are going to continue to push and to support the Libyan efforts
to do such.
I mentioned a little earlier that shortly after they were
sworn in, I think, that they foreign minister and the prime
minister themselves traveled to make that point that they want
all foreign forces out of Libya, and that actually is a direct
reflection of what the Libyan people themselves want.
They want everybody gone. They want the opportunity to
rebuild without having these kind of nefarious forces that are
just pushing their own agendas or using Libya for their own
regional purposes. So we will to push on that.
Ms. Manning. OK. Are those efforts having any impact? Are
you seeing any result of what you've just described?
Ms. Sasahara. I think that they are. I think that there
is--it is not a wide open space or free fire zone that Wagner
works in there. There are limits on what they can do and there
are, certainly, limits and the Libyan people themselves have
been very vocal about what they do or do not want to see in
their country.
Ms. Manning. Can you talk to us about the extent to which
the arms embargo on Libya is being enforced and what actions
we're taking to get countries, including some of our partners,
to stop sending arms to Libya?
Ms. Sasahara. We are working with the Panel of Experts at
the U.N. to monitor who is doing the sanctions busting, what is
it that they're bringing in, and how we can stop that. It's
hard. It's hard with all of--we have so many different forces
that are on the ground there and it's difficult to monitor all
of that.
So we do work with the United Nations and the partner
nations to implement asset freezes, for example, travel ban
measures on violators of the arms embargo.
In July 2020, the United States imposed sanctions on three
individuals and five entities that are linked to the Wagner
Group after the group placed land mines in civilian areas in
Tripoli.
So we do have a number of concrete instruments and steps
that we can take and that we have taken them.
Ms. Manning. So, again, are those steps having any impact
that you can see so far?
Ms. Sasahara. They are not spreading their activities
further throughout the country unimpeded and at free will.
Ms. Manning. Thank you.
Ms. Doherty, I want to ask you about the status of women's
rights and women's political involvement in Libya. The
provisional government includes women but it still falls short
of a minimum of 30 percent women in leadership roles that's
called for in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum Roadmap.
Of the 98 registered Presidential candidates in the
upcoming election, just two brave women have stood for
election. What sort of threats do they face and how do we plan
to monitor and prioritize the greater inclusion of women in
Libya's political and civic life, going forward?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you for that question. Empowering Libyan
women is a major priority for USAID and you've noted well the
challenges that they face. We have seen brave Libyan women
stand up to run as candidates and community leaders, and we
have seen them be met with harassment.
We have seen them face actual in-person bullying. We have
seen horrific online attacks. We have seen falsehoods spread
about women candidates. We have seen their integrity
challenged. We have seen violence and we have also seen
abductions of women candidates.
So our goal in all of this is to make sure that women in
Libya have the support and the protection that they need to
stand up and to run for office and to be empowered civil
society activists.
So right now through our programs we are supporting women
as advocates, as candidates, and as election observers. We're
partnering with the European Union and with U.N. Women on a
number of training programs for candidates and campaign
managers.
We have trained many women to safeguard the polls as
domestic election observers and we have supported a 30 percent
quota campaign, which is a women-led advocacy initiative
pushing for a 30 percent quota in parliamentary elections.
And, in addition, we're also working beyond the elections
themselves with the education ministry on a ``Not Before 18
"campaign to raise awareness of the dangers of child marriage
and, more broadly, supporting elected women leaders.
Ms. Manning. Thank you. Thank you both. My time has
expired. I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Ms. Manning.
Mr. Vargas, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and, again,
I want to thank the ranking member, Tim, as well as the
witnesses today.
I do have some questions about the elections themselves
now. Listening today, I understand that you have great sympathy
and encouragement that the elections will be held, that the
elections will work, and the Libyans want to vote, and I'm with
you on that.
However, we do see from the congressional Research Service
that they may not be aligned with that. They may think that, in
fact, there will be delays and that there will be problems with
the vote.
Could you explain here the difference? There seems to be a
little bit of a different take on this issue of the elections.
Ms. Sasahara. Yes. I think in terms of a delay, I mean, the
target is still December 24th, as I mentioned just a little bit
earlier, that election preparations--the technical, logistical
and administrative tasks--are still being carried out.
But it's--there has been kind of a compressed time in which
for that to happen, and I think people want to make sure that
the elections are carried out well. There is an expectation, a
public expectation, that they are going to happen.
If there is any kind of a delay in the elections, it's
going to be because of technical issues. People want to make
sure that everything is in place, that people have their voter
registration cards, that they know where they're supposed to
show up and that there is real security and integrity in terms
of securing the ballot boxes and the counting.
So there are still a lot of technical steps that need to be
carried out. But the intention is to hold it on the 24th.
Mr. Vargas. OK. Let me read what they have written here
because I think it's interesting. ``These challenges may be
compounded by the absence of an agreed constitutional framework
proscribing the relative powers of newly elected entities.''
I mean, it sounds like they're saying when I was reading
this and looking at it, that, OK, we may have the elections but
once we do all of a sudden we're going to have all these other
problems because we really do not have a framework set up for
these entities.
What can you tell me about that?
Ms. Sasahara. Well, in early October, the House of
Representatives actually did come up with a legal framework in
which to hold the elections. I know that that had been
something that had been dragging on for months and months and
months.
But the speaker did announce and present a framework in
which the elections could be held and that there was--there
were a couple of rival power personalities, frankly, that did
voice their opposition and I know that there was concern about
whether this was good enough, whether this was legit, so that
you could go ahead and go forward.
But it's December. Preparations are still going forward.
The candidacy registration opened up in early November. The
candidates registered. It's been closed. So all of the steps
are moving forward.
Mr. Vargas. OK. I hope you're right. It seems to me, too,
that there's so many other groups that are trying to frustrate
these elections that the elections may not work.
The reason I bring all this up is, of course, there's no
history of elections there, really, that work, in my opinion.
As you have noted yourself, you've had a strong man there,
Gaddafi, for so long, and all of a sudden, we want these
elections to work. I mean, we're democrats in the larger sense
of the word.
But there's really no good history of this and it does seem
to be that there's a lot of issues we may be pushing that may
not work, at the end of the day, and we have a cease-fire right
now that could fall apart because of these elections.
Ms. Sasahara. No, that's a good point. Actually, I want to
make the point. Congressman Malinowski corrected me when he
pointed out that there were elections in 2014. So there
actually--there is--there is a history there.
So I stand corrected. You're right, it is fraught with
peril. It's a--there's a lot of firepower there. But there is a
strong desire to do this, and I think the political elites are
finally realizing that the Libyan people are going to hold them
to an account.
Even through all of the doubt, all of the debate, all of
the shenanigans, Libyans, millions of them, continued to
register, continued to say, you know, I want to vote. I want
this vote to happen.
So I think there is a realization there. But it is correct
to say that there are still some technical aspects about the
actual voting that still need to be worked out. But----
Mr. Vargas. I just have 10 seconds left. I want to thank
you. But I do want to just thank USAID. I appreciate the work
that you do everywhere around the world, especially in these
difficult locations, and thank you for what you're doing there.
I wish you the best. I do. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Vargas. I echo your sentiments
about USAID.
And I yield to Mr. Schneider for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'll echo the
same sentiments about USAID and I thank the witnesses for
joining us today.
I'm going to build on some of the things said by my
colleagues, Mr. Connolly, Mr. Vargas.
You know, Ms. Doherty, you said in your opening statement
the United States has a strategic interest in a stable and
prosperous Libya, which is certainly true.
You later went on to say that while elections alone are
insufficient, they are a crucial step forward for Libya. And,
Ms. Sasahara, you just said a moment ago elections are fraught
with peril.
So I have three kind of related questions. First is what do
you see as the necessary steps besides elections for a stable
and prosperous Libya? What is the sequence of those steps?
Specifically, what has to happen before we can have success
or expect successful elections, and how should we measure
progress and readiness to increase the likelihood that the
elections will be successful and the outcome after the
elections will lead us to that stable and prosperous Libya that
we're all hoping for?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you for that question.
DAS Sasahara, do you want to go and then I'll weigh in?
Ms. Sasahara. Oh, sorry. No, I didn't mean to take your
time, Megan. My apologies.
I think that the elections are a huge sign--signal of
success that we were able to do this. We are truly making the
transition from the strong----
Mr. Schneider. I agree, but what steps have to happen? And
we're on a short timeframe, but what do we need to see in place
to have the confidence or to help ensure that these elections
and the post-period after the elections will put us on that
path toward a stable and prosperous Libya?
Ms. Sasahara. OK. I think what we're seeing--what we need
is what we're seeing now is that the cease-fire that was broken
October 23d, 2020, is still in place.
Yes, there are militias. Yes, there are other armed
factions. But the cease-fire is holding. It is in place and
that's very, very important. You know, people are allowed to--
you know, they're making their statements. They're campaigning.
They're traveling around.
As I said, the registration is going on. There has not been
harassment, anything of that matter. People continue to
register. They're able to pick up their voting cards. That's a
very, very strong signal and I think that bodes very, very
well, despite a lot of the things that are in the background
there.
When you're talking about after the elections, and that is
going to take a little bit--as I said, you have sequenced
elections. You've got the Presidential one. The first round is
going to be on the 24th. The second one is going to be
simultaneously with the parliamentary elections.
So that's when you're really going to see what is this
government going to look like. It's, obviously, going to take a
couple few days for the final results to be announced.
And so I think getting back to your question, the next
thing has to be that those results are respected, that a
credible election has occurred. There is a winner. Those
results have to be respected, and then a government needs to be
formed.
There needs to--it needs to be the government not just of
the west, not just of the east or the south, but it has to be a
unified government in which they believe that they are better
united than they are divided into these two factions. Foreign
forces----
Mr. Schneider. And I'm sorry to interrupt but just to----
Ms. Sasahara. Yes.
Mr. Schneider. Are there are things that we, our allies,
the international community can do to increase the opportunity
and the likelihood of a government forming? There will be
winners and losers in election, by definition. But at the end
of the day, the Nation has to be the beneficiary of the outcome
of that election.
Ms. Sasahara. Right. So we have already seen what that
looks like. When the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum selected
the interim government--February 25th or 26th it was--the
government was then sworn in in Tobruk in Libya on March 15th
and they immediately went to work.
So there is proof of concept that's already happened, and
they continue to do their work to carry out their tasks based
on their ministries. So it's already happened. What we're
looking at now is a permanent government.
What we're looking at is then good budget execution,
services to people, and a more long-term vision, focus on the
economic track. The security track is going well and we have to
give a lot of credit to the military leaders of the east and
the west that have actually come together in a group called the
5+5, kind of like, in my mind, sort of the unlikely heroes that
realize that they are better united together. They themselves
came up with a foreign forces withdrawal plan on October 8th.
Mr. Schneider. OK. And----
Ms. Sasahara. Yes, please.
Mr. Schneider. And I'm sorry to interrupt you. I only have
a few seconds left. I want to make sure Ms. Doherty has a
chance to talk about what she envisions as the other steps as
well.
Ms. Doherty. Thanks so much. I appreciate that.
In addition to what Karen mentioned, the key point here is
that elections need to lead to something. They need to lead to
governance and they need to lead to change.
So your question of what are we doing to make sure to set
this up for success, the answer is that we are working to plan
robust governance support to make sure that any future
government can deliver services and improvements for the Libyan
people. We're working on conflict resolution in many
communities throughout the country to make sure that Libyans
who lose at the ballot box know that the government that is
elected will respond to their needs and address their concerns.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you both. I wish we had not 5
minutes but hours to talk about this. There's so much here. You
guys are dealing with this day in and day out, and I appreciate
your commitment to it. As you said, we're all hopeful for a
stable and prosperous Libya. We look forward to having further
conversations.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Schneider. Thanks once
again to all of the members for outstanding questions.
I will yield myself the time that I need. I would like to
followup on something that Ms. Manning asked about earlier.
Ms. Sasahara, the March 2021 Panel of Experts report says
that the arms embargo remains totally ineffective. It said
violations are extensive and blatant with complete disregard
for the sanctions measures.
Do you agree with that? And clearly, whether it's a total
failure or not, the massive flow of arms is a huge problem.
What do we do to strengthen the enforcement?
I think you're muted.
Ms. Sasahara. Sorry. Thank you for that. I do not think
it's a total failure. I think if it were, we would see an
incredible amount of weapons and we would see, I think, a lot
of really dangerous behavior.
We do not see that now. It is difficult policing up all the
borders. But we try to partner with the Libyans as well as with
others to make sure that we keep as much out of Libya, off the
battlefield. Again, I go back to the fact that the cease-fire
continues to hold.
That took some doing, but it has been respected by all
sides, which I think is the real success, that they realize
that they're better off in a peaceful place than trying to win
on the battlefield.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks.
Ms. Doherty, let me ask a question about politics as we
approach the elections. There still seems to be this disunity
at the national level and having municipal governments cope
with the instability. What does USAID programming do? How do
you work to strengthen and build capacity at the local level?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you, Chairman. The local governments in
Libya have been bright spots over the past decade. We have
worked with them for years. They have been great partners. And
our goal in supporting the local councils has been to improve
their service delivery and also help them build trust and
credibility with their citizens.
So to give you a few examples of our work, we have helped
18 municipalities across Libya become financially self-reliant,
helping them with financial planning and things like revenue
collection.
We helped 24 local councils improve their budgeting and
promote transparency, which is sometimes a radical concept,
through things like town halls and publishing, sending
information.
And, more broadly, we have supported 22 peaceful successful
local elections for municipal councils, and we have been
providing training and support to local elected officials
including targeted support to elected women councilors.
And through all of this work across the country and with
these local councils and in the communities, we have actually
seen perceptions of local governance improve.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that.
I see Mr. Sherman has joined. So let me--let me just move
on and go back to Ms. Sasahara. The House, as I mentioned
earlier, passed the Libya Stabilization Act, which, among other
things, seeks to impose targeted sanctions on individuals who
commit human rights abuses in Libya, violate the arms embargo,
and support foreign military intervention that threaten peace,
security, and stability of Libya.
We want this to be a helpful tool. I'd like your thoughts
on that and what else Congress can do to bolster the
Administration's work on this issue.
Ms. Sasahara. Thank you for that, sir. I think we agree. We
want to have the right tools in order to make some concrete
progress on that.
Now, I understand that the Administration hasn't yet taken
a position on that legislation. But we welcome any legislative
initiatives that contribute to further stabilizing Libya.
We believe that we do need those types of tools that have
the broad range from, you know, pressure all the way up to
something that has some teeth in it, as we have used before
with that--the director of that migration center, Mr. Al Kuni
Ibrahim.
Those are helpful tools and it does help to put those
actors on notice that they have been used and they will be used
and can be used.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that. In addition to the tools
that we're trying to give you, if you could, finally, just
speak to additional measures you may be considering to compel
foreign forces to leave and tell us about any conversations--
ongoing conversations, pressure, on--there's been a lot of talk
about the Russians and Emiratis, but the Turks as well.
Ms. Sasahara. Yes. I think we--I think particularly
following the elections. There's no pretext there. You're going
to have a permanent government, a government that is going to
want to decide what are the most appropriate military
relationships that it is going to have with other countries,
large and small, ourselves included, any of them.
So I think that that is going to be a very key point. We
all know that every embassy has an attache and security
assistance and these types of things. But we're looking at
something that is very, very different. It is not even under a
flag. There's a pretext that it's not linked to a government.
So I think that continuing to support and work with the
Libyan people and the Libyan leadership in their often-stated,
publicly stated, desire we want all foreign forces out. I think
it would be very difficult for any country to try to defend its
extensive military physical presence there.
Mr. Deutch. It would indeed. Thank you very much. Thanks to
both of you. And Mr. Sherman has joined. Mr. Sherman, I'm happy
to yield 5 minutes to you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding these hearings. I want to focus on the involvement of
Turkey and Russia and focus on what each country would hope to
gain.
Turkey, obviously, ruled the area for hundreds of years--
hundreds of years ago, or a hundred years ago, although the
level of Turkish control was never all that great.
Does Turkey aspire to have military and naval bases in
Libya? Does it see itself as a regional power and does Turkey
imagine that it will somehow get a big chunk of the oil
revenues from Libya 1 day?
Ms. Sasahara. I think that--I think there's always an
element of looking at what how one can strengthen or, you know,
project political influence and form new commercial
partnerships, and Libya is an oil-rich country.
Libya is part of the Southern Med. So I think that there
are a couple of different reasons why you would have a country
like Turkey that's interested in Libya.
Like any other country, they have the right----
Mr. Sherman. But we haven't seen Turkey try to establish
naval bases outside of its own region. It's not like they're
talking to Algeria about putting naval bases there. Do they--
are we aware of any plans that would provide tens of billions
of dollars of profit to either Russia or Turkey as a result of
their involvement?
Ms. Sasahara. No.
Mr. Sherman. And now, Russia, the strategic--you know,
their desire for warm-water ports and a revision--a return to
great power status would, obviously, be helped if they could
have a naval base in Libya.
How much effort is Russia and Turkey putting in in terms of
their own money? Or is this being funded by Libyan oil? Is
Libyan oil paying for the 20,000 mercenaries, et cetera, or are
Turkey and Russia dipping into their own revenues to pay for
this involvement?
Ms. Sasahara. No. Libyan oil isn't used to fund that
activity. I think that, alluding back to what I--in my spoken
remarks the Russians are definitely looking to get a foothold
into the continent and Libya is an extremely attractive
launching pad for them. And so it is in their interest to have
a physical presence there.
That is not compatible with what the Libyan people have
stated that they want. That is not----
Mr. Sherman. I'm just trying to see this from Moscow's
perspective how expensive is this for them and are they dipping
into their own pockets.
Let me ask another question about the Libyan people, and
that is at various times in history this has been two
countries, an east and a west. How much patriotism is there in
the east and the west that this be one country, particularly
when the oil is only--is predominantly in one section?
How strongly does--along the entire east-west coast is
there a belief in Libyan unity? Or is there a separatist or,
what I'd say, a de facto separatist support--there is support
for de facto separatism?
Ms. Sasahara. Yes. I think--like a lot of people, I think
they recognize themselves as Libyans whether that's outside the
country or whether it's inside the country, and it is true--you
have touched on something--that it's, you know, where the oil
is.
But I think that there has been equitable distribution. I
think that, getting back to remarks about the occasional, you
know, winner take all aspects of Libyan policy, this is where
that can come into play. Oh, he's a westerner or, you know,
he's an easterner.
Mr. Sherman. OK. I do want to squeeze in one question and
that is are the various forces in Libya willing to accept
international observation of elections from credible observers?
Ms. Doherty. Thank you. Yes. The Election Commission has
invited international groups to observe and, in fact, we are
currently exploring what we can do to support.
Already the African Union and the EU are preparing small
missions as is the Arab Organization for Human Rights and also,
I believe, the Arab Organization for Electoral Management
Bodies.
Mr. Sherman. It is so important that the Libyan people
accept the outcome of this election, and I could say that for
another country that's important to me as well.
And I'll yield back.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Sherman, and I thank all--I
thank the witnesses, first of all, and all the members for
being here today for participating.
Ms. Doherty, Ms. Sasahara, your insight is much
appreciated. Your efforts are really significantly impacting
Libya, and, as you can tell, the subcommittee has a keen
interest in what happens in Libya, particularly at this
critical juncture and we intend to continue to maintain our
focus to ensure that post-election, we move toward a unified
Libya with a government that functions well without the outside
intervention of military groups.
And we acknowledge that this is going to require a
concerted effort and ongoing focus from this committee, from
Congress, and from the Administration. We look forward to
working with both of you, going forward, on these important
issues.
And I would remind the members of the subcommittee that to
the extent they have additional questions for our witnesses we
ask them to submit those and that the witnesses will have the
opportunity to respond in writing, and any witness questions
for the hearing record should be submitted to the subcommittee
clerk within five business days.
And, again, I thank you both so much.
And without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD SUBMITTED FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
