- RESTORING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN THE INDO-PACIFIC

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

RESTORING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN THE INDO-PACIFIC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 6, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-116

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-348PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California               JOE WILSON, South Carolina
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        DARRELL ISSA, California
AMI BERA, California                 ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                LEE ZELDIN, New York
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California                 BRIAN MAST, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             KEN BUCK, Colorado
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                  MARK GREEN, Tennessee
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         GREG STEUBE, Florida
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
SARA JACOBS, California              PETER MEIJER, Michigan
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
JIM COSTA, California                RONNY JACKSON, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California              YOUNG KIM, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

Sherman, Ms. Wendy, Deputy Secretary of State, U.S. Department of
State..........................................................     8

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    54
Hearing Minutes..................................................    55
Hearing Attendance...............................................    56

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Representative Connolly............    57

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    59

RESTORING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN THE

INDO-PACIFIC

Wednesday, April 6, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:11 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gregory Meeks
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Meeks. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come
to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point. And all members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and questions
for the record, subject to the length limitations in the rules.
To insert something into the record, please have your staff
email previously mentioned address or contact full committee
staff. As a reminder to Members, please keep your video
function on at all times, even when you are not recognized by
the chair. Members are responsible for muting and umuting
themselves.
And consistent with House rules, staff will only mute
members as appropriate where they are not under recognition to
eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum. I now recognize myself for
opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to examine the Biden
Administration's Indo-Pacific strategy, the blueprint unveiled
on February 11 to ensure a free and open Indo-Pacific and
advance broader U.S. policy and strategic interests in the
region.
As a Pacific power, United States has enjoyed a long
history of deep ties to the broader Indo-Pacific. And the Indo-
Pacific is home to more than half of the world's population. It
is home to two-thirds of the world's economic output and 7 of
the 15 largest economies.
The region boasts 7 of the world's largest armed forces and
6 of our key allies. It is the source of half of the world's
greenhouse gas emissions. Indo-Pacific is becoming the center
of gravity for international relations and will have the
disproportionate ability to shake the trajectory of global
affairs.
It is essential that not only we pursue a strategy that
acknowledges the centrality of the Indo-Pacific to core U.S.
interests but also reflects the growing importance of the
region to global affairs. And throughout history in the Indo-
Pacific, though our history in the Indo-Pacific goes back
centuries, the shifting geopolitical and strategic environment
as well as emerging challenges emanating from the region makes
it critical that the United States continues to upgrade and
expand our engagement in the region.
The United States is far from the only player vying for
influence. Revisionist autocratic actors seek to disrupt and
displace the current system and set the rules of the road where
they become the sole beneficiaries. Russia's premeditated an
unprovoked invasion of the Ukraine demonstrates its disdain for
the rules-based international order.
And China has woefully abdicated its self-proclaimed role
as a responsible stakeholder by failing to condemn Russia's
illegal war. And in the Indo-Pacific, China routinely coerces
our friends and allies, uses military aggression to gain the
upper hand in broader maritime and territorial disputes. It
steals technology, bends the rules to protect its domestic
industry, and commits human rights abuses on a grand scale,
whether through its genocide in Xinjiang, its destruction of
Hong Kong's autonomy, or its surveillance and repression of its
citizens throughout the mainland.
As we witness this ongoing assault on democratic norms and
the rules-based international order, America must work with our
partners and allies to counter the PRC's problematic policies
and preserve a free and open Indo-Pacific. An effective
approach to the region will allow us to tackle 21st challenges,
including the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change, the rise in
disinformation, and supply chain disruptions, none of which can
tackle effectively alone.
The previous Administration's America Alone policies set
high level and consistent engagement back. And it is critical
that we put diplomacy back at the center of our foreign policy
to address complex and urgent challenges emanating for the
region. This is particularly important given North Korea's
nuclear and missile provocations and China's increased economic
coercion and aggression and the ongoing crisis in Burma. We
must also ensure that we bring our partners in ASEAN and those
in the Pacific Islands with us and help them to recover from
and build resiliency to deal with the transnational challenges
such as climate change and the ongoing pandemic.
The Biden Administration Indo-Pacific strategy demonstrates
that the United States' commitment to build in the capacity of
our allies and our partners for a more stable and inclusive
region and invokes tangible resources to the region to restore
or global leadership.
America must commit deeper. America must be more expansive
diplomatically and expand our diplomatic ties and engagement in
the region. And that is exactly I see that this strategy and
plan does.
I now yield back the balance of my time and I now recognize
the ranking member of this committee, Mr. McCaul of Texas, for
his opening remarks.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary. I know you have probably been working day and night
and dealing with Congress. I appreciate all your efforts,
though. I know it is not an easy job right now.
Republican and Democrat Administrations are in agreement
that this region is America's top foreign policy and national
security priority. This region has been a battleground between
democracy and tyranny for decades. Today, the Chinese Communist
Party is trying to dominate the region and push the U.S.
military out through military expansion and debt trap
diplomacy.
Mr. Chairman, you tell this hearing of restoring American
leadership in Indo-Pacific. And so I would like to make two
points on American leadership in the Indo-Pacific because the
Americans watching might be under the mistaken impression that
we may have left. But first, we have been in Indo-Pacific for
over 120 years since the end of the Spanish-American war.
Second, American's legacy in the Indo-Pacific is freedom
and prosperity. In the Second World War, my dad's war, and
other conflicts, Americans sacrificed their lives to keep this
region free. And the results speak for themselves, an
independent Philippines, thriving democracies in Japan, Korea,
and Taiwan, and a strong ASEAN.
But the CCP is undermining this hard-won freedom and
prosperity. Chairman Xi and Mr. Putin have formed this as we
saw at the Beijing Olympics this unholy alliance of two
dictators obsessed with rebuilding their empires. Their recent
no-limits partnership endorsed each other's territorial
aggression.
Putin has made his move. The question is will Chairman Xi
make his. Taiwan is the front line, on the front line to
maintain a free Indo-Pacific. A CCP controlled Taiwan would be
an unprecedented blow to our economic and national security.
It would threaten the homeland, weaken our alliances, allow
the CCP to hold the world's economy hostage by controlling
supply chains, including semiconductors. I believe they control
about 90 percent of the semiconductors in Taiwan.
So I'm glad you are here today. I know you're busy and you
have got a lot of other things on your plate and to answer our
questions.
Just before and during Putin's invasion, the President, the
national security advisor, and Administration officials at all
levels including yourself, Madam Secretary, went above and
beyond to engage the CCP. But instead of joining the
international community, I believe they double down on their
loyalty to Vladimir Putin instead. And rather than condemn
Russia, they helped spread Russia's disinformation. Rather than
sanction Russia, they helped Russian banks avoid U.S.
sanctions.
Mr. Chairman, our response to the CCP threat needs less
talk and more action. Soon I will be introducing the Taiwan
Deterrence Act to stand up a security assistance program for
Taiwan. Putin's invasion of the Ukraine has shown us how
critical it is to get our allies the weapons they need before
an invasion and not after.
The invasion of Ukraine is also a reminder that we have the
power to lead our allies in punishing and deterring our
enemies. We can cripple our adversary's economy. We can use
export controls to cutoff technology they use to build their
military and that they use to murder innocent people.
We can restrict the outbound flows of American investments
into their brutal regime. Quite frankly, we have had crippling
effects on Russia. I think we need to look at China and their
quest for aggression.
If we truly want the United States to lead in the Indo-
Pacific, we need to deal with the CCP from a position of
strength. And I would be remiss if I did not mention the Iran
nuclear deal and in particular the possibility of lifting the
foreign terrorist organization designation on the IRGC. This is
a terrorist entity that has blood of over 600 Americans on its
hands, and it continues to plan and launch attacks around the
world.
Delisting this organization is part of a political deal
with Iran would undermine our sanctions around the world and it
would give a free pass to terrorism. I know this is one of the
options on the table, Madam Secretary. But I would urge you to
resist that temptation. I think that would be a terrible
mistake.
So I look forward to our discussion. And with that, I yield
back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. And I would like
to turn to our distinguished chair of the subcommittee of Asia
and the Pacific. I yield 1 minute to Chairman Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It has been a busy year,
year and a half in the region, starting with the ongoing
pandemic to the coup in Myanmar to the collapse of the Afghan
government to now the invasion of Ukraine by Russia. And more
recently, we are paying close attention to what's happening in
Pakistan and Sri Lanka, real issues there.
That said, I think the Administration has done a lot that
we can be proud of, restoring multilateral coalitions,
elevating the Quad to a leader's level, AUKUS, which will
really help us with maritime security in the region. And we
look forward to building off of all of that without mentioning
China as we deal with what we see as an autocratic regime. But
I'm optimistic about the region.
I think we're putting a lot in place foundationally that
will help us address many of those crisis but also will lay a
framework for a thriving, peaceful, prosperous 21st century.
But it really will take American leadership, American
engagement. And I think in a bipartisan way, I have enjoyed
working with my ranking member, Mr. Chabot.
And we have got to have a long term American strategy for
the region. So thank you and I'll yield back.
Chairman Meeks. Gentleman yields back. And now I recognize
the subcommittee ranking member who I have the pleasure of
working with very closely. And I would like to acknowledge how
closely both the chair and the subcommittee and the ranking
member works together in the spirit of this community.
So I yield to Ranking Member Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We do enjoy
working together in a bipartisan manner for the most part in
this committee. And we appreciate that.
It's hard to overState the significance of the Indo-
Pacific. Not only is it home to over half the world's
population, but it also produces more than a third of the
globe's economic activity.
Over the upcoming decades, the region will steadily grow in
importance, making it absolutely critical that we get our
strategy toward it right. While most of the countries in Indo-
Pacific are focused on peaceful development, the Chinese
Communist Party is seeking regional hegemony, dominance over
the rest of us. Bewilderingly, however, powerful voices in this
Administration seem to think that the CCP is just one
conversation away from being a responsible stakeholder or the
solution of the crisis in Ukraine.
Let me be clear. The CCP is not a potential friend, not a
responsible stakeholder, not a misunderstood partner. The
Chinese Communist Party is a strategic and ideological
adversary. They are our primary challenge in the Indo-Pacific.
So I look forward to discussing whether or policy toward
the region recognizes that fact. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. It is now my
distinct pleasure and honor to introduce our witness. And I
want to say first to our witness, thank you. Thank you for your
service to our country.
Thank you for being available to this committee anytime
that we call. You always rise to the occasion. And the House,
you've been able to testify a number of our classified
briefings and keeping us informed on what has taken place
around the world. So I want thank you for your service.
The Honorable Wendy Sherman was confirmed by the Senate on
April 13, 2021 and sworn in as the twenty-first and first
female Deputy Secretary of State on April 14, 2021. Prior to
assuming this position, Deputy Secretary Sherman was professor
of the Practice of Public Leadership and director of the Center
for Public Leadership at the Harvard Kennedy School. From 2011
to 2015, Deputy Secretary Sherman served as Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs.
Among her many diplomatic accomplishments, she was awarded
the National Security Medal by President Barack Obama. She
previously served at the State Department as counselor and
special advisor to President Clinton and policy coordinator on
North Korea and as Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs
under Secretary Warren Christopher.
So without objection, all the witness' prepared testimony
will be made part of the record. And I will now recognize the
Honorable Deputy Secretary Sherman to make her testimony. And
she will recognized for 5 minutes to summarize her testimony.
Let me just say this early on to Members afterwards because
when we get to questions, I know the Deputy Secretary has a
hard 1 p.m. stop. So I am going to be strict with the gavel
when we get to the questions and answers to allow as many
members as possible to ask questions.
Madam Deputy Secretary.

STATEMENT OF WENDY SHERMAN, DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Chairman Meeks, Ranking
Member McCaul, Subcommittee Chair Bera, and Ranking Mr. Chabot,
distinguished members of the committee all. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today about the Biden-Harris
Administration's Indo-Pacific Strategy.
Even as we work every day, in lockstep with our Allies and
partners, to support Ukraine and the Ukrainian people and to
impose severe, coordinated costs and consequences on Russian
President Vladimir Putin and his enablers, we are also
continuing to advance our foreign policy priorities in every
region of the world through sustained diplomatic engagement.
The United States is a proud Indo-Pacific nation. Our
future is entwined more closely with the Indo-Pacific than with
any other part of the world. The Indo-Pacific, as the chairman
said, is the fastest-growing region on Earth. And it will be
decisive to addressing virtually every priority issue--from
promoting strong economic growth, to combating the climate
crisis, to strengthening global health security, to upholding
the rules-based international order.
Our vision--a vision we share with our Allies and partners
across the region--is to ensure the Indo-Pacific remains free
and open, and becomes more interconnected, prosperous, secure,
and resilient.
These priorities are all reflected in the five pillars of
the Indo-Pacific Strategy released by the White House in
February.
First, advancing a free and open Indo-Pacific. We have seen
increasing challenges to democracy, the rule of law, and human
rights in the Indo-Pacific--all of which threaten stability,
transparency, and prosperity. To combat these trends, we are
working to build the capacity of Indo-Pacific nations and
regional institutions to build strong civil societies, combat
corruption, and promote good governance, strengthen democratic
systems, and promote human rights and a free and independent
press.
We are also working to uphold and strengthen the rules-
based international order, so that nations in the Indo-Pacific
and elsewhere can make decisions free from coercion; ideas and
people can flow freely; problems are dealt with openly and
according to a transparent set of rules; and the seas and skies
are governed according to international law.
Second, building connections in the Indo-Pacific and
beyond. America's network of alliances and partnerships is one
of our greatest strengths. That is why we are prioritizing
strengthening our collaboration in a variety of forums--
including with ASEAN, at the Pacific Islands Forum, and through
the Mekong-U.S. Partnership. We elevated the Quad, created
AUKUS, appointed a Special Presidential Envoy to lead our
Compacts of Free Association, COFA, negotiations with the
Freely Associated States, and reinvigorated trilateral
diplomacy with Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Third, driving Indo-Pacific prosperity. The Indo-Pacific is
home to more than half the global population and 60 percent of
the global economy--which means the prosperity of the American
people is linked to the Indo-Pacific. We are proud the United
States was selected to host APEC in 2023. As President Biden
announced last year, we are working to develop an Indo-Pacific
Economic Framework with our Allies and partners. We look
forward to continuing to consult with Congress as we refine our
economic approach to the region.
Fourth, bolstering Indo-Pacific security. Threats to our
security are evolving. Members have spoken to that this
morning. And our security approach must evolve with them. We
are strengthening and deepening our five treaty alliances and
other vital partnerships across the Indo-Pacific and working to
enhance our capabilities--as well as those of our Allies and
partners--to keep the peace, defend our interests, deter
aggression and other threats, including in the maritime domain.
Fifth, building regional resilience. America's security
depends on working with our Allies and partners to address
shared challenges--like the COVID-19 pandemic and the climate
crisis. In partnership with COVAX, we have donated more than
180 million doses of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines
across the region. We are investing in clean energy and climate
resilience across the Indo-Pacific--creating good jobs in the
region and supporting jobs at home, as well.
We look forward to working with Congress to ensure our work
advancing the Indo-Pacific Strategy continues to be
appropriately and fully resourced. I know there are many issues
that members already have addressed today, including the PRC.
And I will be glad to address your questions and our approach
in our questions and answers. Obviously, it is core to what we
are doing here.
I want to end, though, where I began, which is with
Ukraine. What happens in Ukraine will have a bearing on the
Indo-Pacific. Indeed, it already is, as countries battered by 2
years of the COVID-19 pandemic now must contend with rising
prices for grain, energy, and fertilizer, all as a direct
result of Putin's war of choice. These trends underscore the
urgency of our work to build shared prosperity and resilience,
including by accelerating the transition to clean energy.
We are also deeply concerned about the growing strategic
alignment between Russia and the People's Republic of China, as
represented in their February 4 joint statement. We have
expressed those concerns directly to the PRC, as have our
Allies and partners.
The strong and coordinated response from the international
community--including nations in Indo-Pacific--to Russia's
flagrant violations of international law and principles like
sovereignty and territorial integrity sends a strong signal
that such actions will not go ignored.
Thank you again for having me. I have been briefed here to
ensure time for questions. I look forward to answering those
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Meeks. Thank you for your testimony, Madam
Secretary.
I am now going to recognize members for 5 minutes each. And
pursuant to House rules, all time yielded is for the purpose of
questioning our witnesses. I'll recognize members by committee,
seniority, alternating between Democrats and Republicans.
If you miss your turn, please let our staff know and we'll
come back to you. If you seek recognition, you must unmute your
microphone and address the chair verbally and identify yourself
to let me know who is speaking. I'll start by recognizing
myself for 5 minutes.
Madam Secretary, ahead of Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
Putin and Xi released a joint statement announcing closer
strategic cooperation. And while China has maintained publicly
that it did not know about the invasion, it has tried to
distance itself from Putin's war, it has refused to condemn
Russia and has engaged in disinformation that supports Russia's
justifications.
So my question, Madam Secretary, is, what is the
Administration's assessment on whether China actively supported
Russia and its invasion of Ukraine? And the President's call
with Xi Jinping, he told the PRC that there would be
consequences if China is found to be materially supporting
Russia's war efforts. Could you tell us what such consequences
would entail?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think
when we all saw the manifesto before the Beijing Olympics, we
were quite concerned. We were already concerned, but that
increased the concern about what this partnership was really
about.
It's interesting that the PRC has said publicly that this
is a partnership, not an alliance as part of Xi Jinping trying
to distance himself somewhat from what President Putin has done
with his premeditated, unjust, and unprovoked invasion of
Ukraine.
President Biden has been very direct with President Xi, as
has Jake Sullivan with Yang Jiechi, as has Secretary Blinken
with Wang Yi, as have I been with the Ambassador here in
Washington in quite long meetings, that if China in any way,
shape, or form provides material support to Putin in this
premeditated unjust and unprovoked invasion, there will be
consequences.
I think one only has to look at the range of sanctions,
more to be announced today, against Putin, against the economy,
against individuals who are enablers, against elites, against
oligarchs. Export controls, designations, sanctions that are
not only from the United States but in unprecedented fashion,
coordinated with our allies and partners, not just in Europe
but throughout the world, gives President Xi, I think, a pretty
good understanding of what might come his way should he, in
fact, support Putin in any material fashion. This is a very
serious matter that we take quite seriously.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. And I concur. One of the things
that the Administration should be absolutely praised upon is
unity between not only as you said our European allies but our
allies all over the world.
But a key component of our Indo-Pacific strategy in South
Asia hinges on developing a more purposeful relationship with
India. There are clearly obstacles to overcome and questions on
both sides that must be adequately addressed for the promise of
this partnership to be fulfilled.
But the potential of consequential U.S.-India relationship
to me is worth the effort, although I have concerns when I
looked at what took place in the abstention that India made in
the U.N. So strategy says India is an engine for regional
growth and development. And aside from its role in the Quad,
how does the Administration view India's role within and
outside of South Asia, and how are you working through some of
the immediate term obstacles like one that I just mentioned?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I quite
agree with you that our having a strong relationship with India
is critical to our goals and objectives in the Indo-Pacific for
our own prosperity, security, and to address all of the
challenges in front of us, including local health and the
climate crisis.
India by 2030 is going to be the largest everything--the
largest democracy in the world, the largest middle class, the
largest wealthy class, the largest poor, the most elderly, the
most young people, the largest everything. And they are a
democracy, not perfect but neither are we, quite frankly.
Our relationship is complex. I think it's been quite
important as many of you have mentioned that India now engages
with us, Australia, and Japan, in the Quad, to try to move
forward a set of objectives, particularly around things like
global health and climate and ensuring prosperity for the
region and economic prosperity. These things are quite
important and we have an important defense relationship with
India.
India has been in a tough place, and I agree with you. I
would prefer them to have voted yes on the resolution at the
United Nations, and we have said as much to them quite
directly. Secretary Blinken talks to External Affairs Secretary
Jaishankar on quite a regular basis. I talk with my
counterpart, Shringla, who is about to be replaced with a
terrific diplomat who will succeed him.
So we've been very direct about our concerns. But India has
a history of a relationship with Russia. Most of its defense
equipment originally was from Russia. They rely on Russia for
fertilizer which is critical to their agricultural development.
That's not to say we're happy with the choice they've made.
And we have pointed out to them that given the sanctions,
they're not going to be able to get Russian equipment. They're
not going to get to be able to repair their equipment or their
weapons.
And indeed, we have built a very strong defense
relationship with Russia, very important to our defense
community and our defense sales, our joint cooperation with
India. So they are a strategic partner for us and quite
critical that we continue to develop this relationship. And
they are a critical member of the Quad.
Chairman Meeks. Thank you. My time has expired. Now I'll
recognize Mr. McCaul for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Madam Chair, thanks
so much for taking the time.
First of all, this committee marked up yesterday a war
crimes bill to hold Putin accountable, defining it for what it
is. I want to thank the chairman for working with me. And we'll
be on the floor today, and it will pass to send a message to
Putin and the world that these are horrific war crimes.
And after Bucha, my God, the images that came out of there,
horrific. And I'm quoting President Zelensky after he gave his
tour of Bucha. And he says, quote, if we had already got what
we needed, all these planes, tanks, artillery, anti-missile,
anti-ship weapons, we could've saved thousands of people. I do
not blame you. I blame only the Russian military. But you could
have helped, Zelensky said in his speech.
I agree with him. I think we waited too long to get these
weapons in. I know you cannot discuss the S-300 in this open
environment and the anti-aircraft, anti-missile capability and
systems. But I hope we are making progress because that is what
they really need right now.
Shifting to Taiwan, I had breakfast with the Taiwanese
Ambassador this morning. And just like Ukraine, we're worried
that Chairman Xi, after the chairman of this committee
mentioned, this unholy alliance at the Beijing Olympics
standing hand in hand together denouncing aggression from the
West.
The same issue arises. Is Taiwan able to defend herself? I
think the answer is no right now, and I am worried about that.
I do not want to make the same mistake of waiting till after
invasion because that's going to be too late.
And so I would like to just very quickly go through all the
foreign military sales that the chairman and I have signed off
on and the dates of notification going back to July 2019 all
the way to August 2021. This includes Stinger missiles,
aircraft. It includes torpedoes, Patriot systems, these high
mobility artillery rocket systems, these Standoff Land Attack
Missile-Expanded Response missiles, the harpoons which are very
effective against anti-ship, field information communication
systems, and the self-propelled howitzer system.
Her biggest complaint to us is that while we have notified
and signed off on these systems, they have yet to be delivered
to Taiwan. Can you provide some clarity to this and what is the
cause of the backlog? Because if Chairman Xi is on the same
timetable here, I'm concerned about what could happen.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much. First of all, kudos to
the committee, to you and the chairman on your not just
acknowledgment but condemnation of the war crimes that have
been committed.
Second, I want to share with this committee that the White
House has just announced the following sanctions in addition to
everything else we've done: full blocking sanctions on
Sberbank, Russia's largest financial institution, and Alfa-
Bank, Russia's largest private bank, prohibition of new
investment in the Russian Federation, full blocking sanctions
on critical major Russian State owned enterprises, full
blocking sanctions on Putin's adult children, Lavrov's wife and
daughter, and members of Russia's security council and many
more.
So we have taken very decisive and very tough action today
as you all did yesterday in your mark up. The acts in Bucha are
so horrifying. And I think we all appreciate that there is
probably more horror to come. So thank you very much for what
you did in the committee.
And I also want to add, Congressman McCaul, that between
the United States and allies and partners, for every Russian
tank in Ukraine, there are or soon will be in Ukraine more than
ten anti-tank systems for every Russian tank. So we have heard
what President Zelensky has called for. And we are working day
and night to offer whatever we possibly can along with our
partners and allies. And if I were him, I would want everything
and I would want it yesterday. So I certainly understand.
On Taiwan, terribly important as you point out. The United
States sold more than 30 billion dollars' worth of arms to
Taiwan since 2009. And thank you for outlining the authority of
this committee.
We have more than 400 foreign military sale cases in
implementation in Taiwan. We are looking at the entire defense
trade enterprise to see where efficiencies can be made and how
delivery timelines of defense articles can be improved. We are
outlining defense trade priorities to Taiwan and to industry to
increase transparency and predictability, expediting third
party transfers, reviewing possibilities for arm sale exports
from other countries, pushing for the conclusion of defense
agreements related to defense trade, and looking at
opportunities to improve Taiwan's indigenous industrial defense
capability.
So since 2017, the U.S. has authorized with your actions
over 18 billion dollars in foreign military sales for Taiwan.
In addition, direct commercial sales authorizations for end use
by the Taiwan authority during this period has totaled 2.3
billion dollars.
So I certainly understand that President Tsai wants to see
everything delivered as quickly as possible. And we are doing
that. We are also urging Taiwan to focus on capabilities that
would deter the PRC from taking Taiwan by force. This means a
focus on capabilities that are cost efficient, mobile, lethal,
resilient, and capable of operating and surviving in a
contested environment.
Mr. McCaul. Just these asymmetrical weapons are vitally
important. This is a backlog, and it's real. I would urge you
to get those out.
In closing, RIMPAC, she also requested the Rim of Pacific
Exercises. I would hope the Administration would maybe consider
Taiwan being a part of that.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. And at
that point, I allowed myself to go a little over, allowed Mr.
McCaul go a little bit over. But I'm not going to allow anyone
else to go a little bit over.
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Chairman Meeks. And so make sure I'd ask my members and the
witness to be mindful of the time. I now recognized
Representative Ami Bera of California who's the chair of the
subcommittee of the Asian Pacific for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll watch the clock.
I'm going to focus on other parts of the Indo-Pacific. But by
no means is that to express that I do not wake up every morning
with sadness about the tragedy that we're seeing take place in
Ukraine and with concern of the lessons that China and others
may take out of this or the concerns of the security of the
people of Taiwan.
But a lot happening in the region. And Madam Deputy
Secretary, we've had a chance to talk about what's unfolding in
Myanmar. And I try to look for a path forward and how we can
get to a cease-fire. And I just do not see a clear direction.
If you could give us an update on what you're seeing there,
it seems like the junta is really digging in as well as the
resistance. And I've talked to Ambassadors in the region and
others and appreciate ASEAN's leadership here. But what would
you like to see out of Congress and what can we do working with
our ASEAN colleagues?
Ms. Sherman. [Audio malfunction]--horrifying tragedy.
Indeed, Secretary Blinken recently looking back all the way to
2017 named what has happened to the Rohingya in Burma as
genocide. So we did that because we believe that accountability
of the past is critical for accountability for the present. And
shining a light on the crimes of Burma's military in the past
also speaks to what they're doing in the present.
The work with ASEAN and the travels that you all have made
to countries in Southeast Asia who were part of ASEAN to urge
them to follow through on the five-point consensus in a way
that is real and inclusive. There have been forays to the
capitol, but often to meet with junta leadership, not to meet
with democratic opposition.
And so I would urge you to continue to press countries in
ASEAN to move forward in a very pressing kind of way. Cambodia
is the current chair. They have mixed ambitions here, and they
need to be encouraged to say the least by other members of
ASEAN to take the action that is necessary.
Both myself and Counselor Derek Chollet have tried to put a
special focus on this. Derek has traveled maybe three times to
the region. I have gone twice myself because we want to make
sure that this does not last forever and that the world does
not forget what is happening here.
Mr. Bera. Let me touch on another subject that does not get
as much coverage but is no less important. You touched on it in
your open, the second island chain, the Pacific Islands, and
the importance of getting COFA completed. I'm glad to hear
there will be a special envoy focused on this.
If you can give us an update, and then obviously we're
watching the Solomon Islands very closely. And again, the South
China Sea is much more complicated today than maybe had we
resolved some of this back in 2014. But we do not want to see
that happen in the Pacific Ocean. If you could give us update
on COFA.
Ms. Sherman. Right. The Pacific Islands are incredibly
important. The Secretary even after the start of Putin's
premeditated, unjust, and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, went
to Australia and to Fiji and went to Fiji for a meeting of
Pacific Island nations.
All of these islands are under tremendous stress, not only
economically and in terms of COVID, but they are barely above
sea level. And so when we look at the climate crisis, these
islands are quite, quite at risk.
We were very glad to just name as a Special Presidential
Envoy a very seasoned foreign service officer, Ambassador Joe
Yun, to be the Special Presidential Envoy for the COFA
negotiations, and he will go forward. It's not that the folks
who were doing this before weren't capable. They were. But we
felt that we needed to raise the level of attention and our
concern about this. In addition, we have an Our Ocean
Conference coming up just in a few days to focus, co-hosted by
the United States in Palau to bring attention to these global
issues.
Mindful I have 5 seconds left. Let me say on the Solomon
Islands that we are very concerned about the relationship with
the PRC. We will be taking some action shortly to remind the
Solomon Islands how important----
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. And I
will recognize Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey who is
the ranking member on the subcommittee of Africa, Global
Health, and Global Human Rights for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Deputy Secretary Sherman,
thank you for testifying and for your work at the State
Department.
Let me just ask you if I could. I just left a major
conference of the OSCE. I'm the Special Representative for
Human Trafficking. And so I gave speech. That's why I was late.
But the UNHCR representative made a very powerful statement
about the fact that we're not doing enough. He says it's not
big enough and it's not effective enough to help the many,
maybe millions, but certainly tens of thousands of
unaccompanied minors and women who are vulnerable to the
traffickers. And it's getting worse by the day.
And I hoping you can take back the importance of scaling up
the efforts among governments and NGO's because it is a crisis
with few precedents. And we're going to find out later all
those women and children who are trafficked. People are holding
up signs, this way if you want to get to a hotel. Next thing
you know, they disappear.
So please scale that up. That was the message from the
UNHCR. And my message was similar, but he had some very
actionable information about that.
Second, if I could, on March 8, I chaired a hearing of the
Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission on war crimes against Putin
to bring an action against him. And David Crane, as you know,
the special prosecutor for Sierra Leone, he talked about four
options that are available to us.
One is the ICC, but he notes that using this takes the
United States pretty much out of the picture because we are not
signatories to that. We signed it originally but not ratified
it.
But he had a second possibility that he stressed very, very
hard and that is that the U.N. General Assembly has the
authority where there's no veto power by the Security Council,
by Russia and China or China. And he said these hybrid
tribunals like he headed up, they put Charles Taylor behind
bars for 50 years, could also be done. And the key is to indict
Putin now, right now.
So people around him will know that they too could still be
indicted. But every time we have done tribunals, the
indictments come long after the hostilities have largely
ceased. So it is accountability, but it has no chilling effect
on the ongoing commission of those crimes.
And finally, if you could, I am concerned by reports that
our embassy in Guatemala, the apparent intervention and the
selection of the country's Prosecutor General and the continued
heavy had by Ambassador, now Assistant Secretary Todd Robinson
in violation of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
The current Prosecutor General Consuelo Porras has been very
cooperative with regards to our anti-narcotics efforts. Last
year, she extradited 63 Guatemalans to the U.S., including 54
drug dealers. DEA, Drug Enforcement Agency, has praised her for
that.
And yet the apparent reason for the animosity against the
current Prosecutor General is that she fired a political ally
of Todd Robinson, Juan Francisco Sandoval. Ms. Porras has twice
offered through official channels to provide the State
Department with evidence as to why she fired him, yet the State
Department is reportedly refused to receive it.
Why has that been the case, and will you accept it now? And
hopefully, even if it's in a confidential way, share that
information with us about that.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congressman. And thank
you for your many years of advocacy on human rights. You have
long been a leader in this arena and very grateful for it.
On the human trafficking, I could not agree with you more.
It is a terrible, terrible problem and a growing one. We
actually had a meeting on this yesterday to see what else we
can do.
Uzra Zeye, the Under Secretary for this arena is very much
focused on it as Julieta Noyes, our new Assistant Secretary for
PRM. So please note that we completely join you in this concern
and are upping our game and all of our partners and allies in
doing so as well.
In terms of war crimes, yes, the ICC is one vehicle.
Although we are not a signatory, we can provide information.
But there are other venues as you point out. The U.N. General
Assembly is certainly one, but there are other accountability
mechanisms, including the Human Rights Council. So there are
many ways that we can increase accountability.
And I think the fundamental thing which Secretary Blinken
has said again and again is we will hold Putin and his enablers
accountable for these actions. We all believe that Bucha is
just the beginning of what we are going to see. And even before
Bucha, this Administration had said that war crimes had been
committed in Ukraine. So I know this will be a high priority.
On the issue regarding Guatemala, I do not know the
details, Congressman. But we'll get back to you on it.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. And I'll
recognize Representative Andy Levin of Michigan who's the vice
chair of the subcommittee on Asia, Pacific, and Central Asia
Non-Proliferation for 5 minutes. And I'll ask Mr. Malinowski to
chair for a few minutes till I can return.
Mr. Levin. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing today. It's great to see the committee
continuing to focus on Indo-Pacific as a critical region for
U.S. interests. Deputy Secretary Sherman, thank you so much for
being here today.
I want to focus on the Biden Administration's goals for the
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework and which countries the
Administration intends to include to meet the goals involved
for us. My understanding of the IPEF is that we would like to
bring countries together to counter China's influence in the
region, rebuild more robust and reliable supply chains, and
promote universal values such as labor rights and environmental
protections.
Yet countries that might be aligned with the U.S. human
rights like Australia and New Zealand previously express
consternation about past trade agreements like TPP being framed
as countering China and countries that might be more willing to
embrace a counter China posture like Vietnam, Malaysia,
Indonesia, or India would seem to be improbable partners for an
agreement based on strong human rights and climate provisions
according to the State Department's annual human rights reports
for those countries.
So how does the Administration plan to reconcile these
competing interests and how you prioritize adherence to strong
human rights standards, particularly labor rights, and climate
protections, when considering participants in the IPEF?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congressman. There are
four pillars to the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework: fair and
resilient trade, including labor, environmental, and digital
provisions; resilient supply chains; infrastructure, clean
energy, and decarbonization; and tax and anti-corruption. We
have no made final decisions on membership. The framework will
be open and inclusive to those partners that share our
ambitions and commitments to high standards.
So I think, Congressman, the bottom line here is we are
interested in things that will advantage and support American
workers in everything that we do and the values of the United
States of America. And so the concerns that you have raised are
certainly ones that are on our minds as we proceed to fill out
this Indo-Pacific Economic Framework.
Mr. Levin. All right. Well, thanks. So let's drill down a
little on the human rights standards and how they will work in
practice in the framework.
I feel too often we think of human rights protections as in
competition or conflict with our security or economic interests
when in reality strong human rights protections can be an
essential enabling factor for sustainable security and
equitable economic growth, the kind of American values you were
talking about. And strong labor protections for workers in each
country can ensure that all workers within the framework won't
be exploited for cheaper wages or harsher working environments,
thus preventing a race to the bottom in helping economic
security grow for everyone.
So how will the Administration's framework build in strong
rights protections at the foundation of the agreement? And what
will happen if participating countries are found to be in
violation of those standards, particularly standards for
workers?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congressman. All of the
details of how we are going to fill out the IPEF are not fully
resolved yet. But I can assure you that ensuring that this is
high standard agreements, understandings, projects, work
together will be at the foundation of everything that we do.
We are about making sure that there is a free and open and
interconnected Indo-Pacific with high standards that ensure the
prosperity, security, and stability of the United States of
America and our interests in them. And certainly, workers'
rights, labor rights, human rights are at the core of that.
President Biden said at the beginning Administration that human
rights would be at the center of our foreign policy, and indeed
they are.
Mr. Levin. All right. Well, so in the little bit of time I
have left, I just want to--I assume that the framework is going
to be non-binding. So I think we really have to figure out ways
to have mechanisms to enforce labor standards. I'd certainly
encourage us to look to what we did with USMCA as kind of a
floor in this regard so that we can really make sure that we
are raising the votes for all people and certainly the workers
of this country.
Thanks. Mr. Chairman, I think my time has expired, so I
yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. I will now recognize
Representative Chabot of Ohio, ranking member of our Asia-
Pacific subcommittee. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, and thanks for being here
today. As you may know, I'm one of the co-chairs of the
congressional Taiwan Caucus and one of the founders of that
caucus about 20 years ago. And as we all know, Taiwan faces a
very serious threat from the Chinese Communist Party and has
for some time now.
And as the ranking member already talked about, there are
currently substantial delays in the delivery of key weapons
systems to Taiwan, many of which were approved by Congress and
which the United States encouraged Taiwan to buy in the first
place. And I do not want to go through all that again. But I
know in communicating in various ways with the Taiwanese
officials that it is very frustrating, and we need to do
something about that.
It's very serious. Congress and the Administration have to
work together on that. We've seen in Ukraine how critical it is
that we get the weapons to who has threatened Ukraine--in the
case of Russia and Taiwan, in the case of the PRC--ahead of
time, way ahead of time. Hopefully, that will deter the
military action from ever happening, just as nuclear weapons
have prevented nuclear wars from happening over time.
You need to have these things ahead of time. And I'm not
promoting nuclear weapons. But we've got them and the Russians
have got them, the Chinese, and others. But we need to make
sure that we stop whatever the log jam and whatever the delays
have been. We've got to get the weaponry to Taiwan. But I'm not
going to ask you to respond to that. Let me get to something
else.
One of the many reasons that the world has condemned
Russia's invasion of the Ukraine and almost universally is
because it's a clear violation of a State's sovereignty, in
violation of the U.N. charter. Now it might be more difficult
potentially to build a similar coalition around Taiwan if China
would invade because the Chinese Communist Party and the PRC
has spent years promoting the lie that Taiwan is part of the
PRC which it is absolutely not part of China nor has it ever
been.
What actions is the Administration taking now to build a
coalition in support of Taiwan's freedom?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congressman. For over
four decades, for over 40 years, the U.S. One China policy has
been guided by the Taiwan Relations Act, the Three Joint
Communiques, and the Six Assurances. President Biden himself
voted for the Taiwan Relations Act.
And I mention it because it has some critical principles to
the points you are making. The United States will continue to
assist Taiwan in maintaining a sufficient self-defense
capability. And I take your opening points about making sure
that we get weapons to them to be able to do that.
The United States would regard any effort to determine the
future of Taiwan both other than peaceful means a threat to the
peace and security of the Western Pacific and of grave concern
to the United States and that the United States will maintain
the capacity to resist any resort to force or other forms of
coercions that would jeopardize the security or the social or
economic system of the people on Taiwan.
That's what the Taiwan Relations Act is all about. Our
commitment as you know is rock solid and it is bipartisan. We
encourage all U.N. member States to join us in supporting
Taiwan's robust and meaningful participation throughout the
U.N. system and in the international community.
Taiwan's exclusion undermines the important work of the
United Nations and specialized agencies and related
organizations. When, in fact, countries like Lithuania and
Australia are coerced to not recognize Taiwan, not to engage
with that economy, with that region, jurisdiction, they, in
fact, are really trying to stand with those countries----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Chabot. Let me cut you off there for a second. I'm
almost out of time. I wanted to get in one more----
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Chabot [continuing]. Question here. When the U.S.--both
candidates for both parties were opposed to TPP, the
Administration is now working on the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework. Taiwan is such a strong ally of ours and an
important country, and I do not say that by accident, in the
region, absolutely should be part of that framework.
Will Taiwan be invited to join the Biden Administration's
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework?
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Chabot. If not, why not?
Ms. Sherman. As I said, we just haven't made final
decisions on membership, and the framework will be open and
inclusive to those partners that share our ambitions and
commitment to high standards.
Mr. Chabot. You absolutely should invite Taiwan.
Ms. Sherman. I hear you. I'll take that back.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. The chair now
recognizes Representative Susan Wild of Pennsylvania for 5
minutes.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Deputy
Secretary Sherman, good morning.
In 2021, the International Trade Union Confederation, the
ITUC, once again named the Philippines as one of the ten worst
countries in the world for working people. According to the
ITUC report, workers and their representatives in the
Philippines remained particularly vulnerable to violent
attacks, intimidation, and arbitrary arrests. Twenty-eight
union representatives were illegally arrested and detained in
March and December, and seven union leaders were killed between
March 2020 and April 2021.
And to be clear, these attacks are sanctioned by President
Duterte's government which both targets the labor movement
directly and allows attacks against labor organizers to occur
with impunity. Given the Biden Administration's very strong
support for the labor movement here at home, does the
Administration agree that the systemic attacks on the
Philippines labor movement are completely unacceptable?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. Counselor
Derek Chollet was just in the Philippines and covered a wide
range of issues, including our concerns about such actions. And
that will always be something of concern to us, absolutely.
Ms. Wild. Well, thank you. My next question was going to be
whether the Administration had taken any explicit steps to
raise these concerns at the highest levels of the Philippines
government. I assume from that answer that your answer would be
yes?
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Ms. Wild. And what was the response, if you know, of the
Philippines government to raise these concerns?
Ms. Sherman. I think as you probably well know,
Congresswoman, this is an ongoing conversation with the
Philippines which is about to see an election and not sure how
it will go. But I think some of these challenges are likely to
continue no matter how it goes.
And look, Philippines is a very important treaty ally of
the United States. And we need to build a strong relationship
given what they do, their strategic position in the world. They
are part of the Indo-Pacific, the basing and their key
importance to us in terms of our defense.
And so this is a complex relationship and one that we have
to work at very hard. And it's why Secretary Blinken asked
Counselor Chollet to make sure that we actually had sent a 7th
Fleet principle there. And I suspect before many months are
over I will be going there myself.
Ms. Wild. Well, I appreciate that. I will say that this is
an ongoing source of concern for me. I recognize the great
importance that the Philippines has to us in all of the areas
that you just described. But I also think that if we are going
to be a leader in human rights, we cannot ignore human rights
violations occurring in our Allied countries around the world.
I would like to propose that the Administration consider
hosting an international summit on labor rights that would
feature representatives of the labor movement from the
Philippines and other countries around the world where labor
organizations are most at risk in order to highlight the U.S.
commitment to the right to organize. And I do not expect you to
respond to that on the spot until you're willing to do so. But
I would respectfully request a written response to that
proposal.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you for that idea, Congresswoman. We
will give you a response. And I should also mention that we all
support Maria Ressa, a really extraordinary journalist who has
not only gotten a Nobel Peace Prize but has met with Secretary
Blinken and continues to be a tremendous person to bring
transparency to the system in the Philippines.
Ms. Wild. And I commend the Administration on that. I just
do not ever want us to lose sight of the fact that there are
still grave human rights violations occurring. And I maintain
that the best way for us to be a leader on human rights issues
is to demand that our allies exhibit a recognition of human
rights and that they abstain from infringing--infringing is a
mild word--systemic attacks on labor and journalists and so
forth.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much,
Secretary Sherman.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. And now I
recognize Representative Joe Wilson of South Carolina who's the
ranking member of the subcommittee on the Middle East, North
Africa, and Global Counterterrorism for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Greg Meeks, for
your bipartisanship. And this is truly a time we all need to be
working together. And Madam Secretary, thank you for your
service.
I'm so grateful that we now have the Indo-Pacific, not just
the Pacific. It was a recognition by President Donald Trump of
the significance of India, the world's largest democracy. And
today, I had the extraordinary opportunity to host a breakfast
delegation of the new transition government of South Korea, Dr.
Jin Park and Tae-yong Cho.
How fortunate we are. What an example of the difference
between democracy in South Korea and the failure of Communist,
Socialist, Totalitarianism of North Korea. And I'm the only
Member of Congress and I want to give credit to former
Congressman Curt Weldon. He had me on a delegation. I've been
to Pyongyang and Seoul. Gosh, what a contrast. And working with
them, I'm very happy for you.
Now at the same time, it's so inspiring to see the people
of Ukraine defending themselves and their families against the
mass murdering Putin regime. And then Volodymyr Zelensky, what
an incredibly courageous person and the Winston Churchill of
our time who deserves a bust, I believe, in the Capitol just
like Winston Churchill has a bust in the U.S. Capitol.
And the allies are working together. But a problem has been
that our allies want to be back-filled for whatever Soviet
equipment that they have. And we have extraordinary allies--
Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Slovenia--that want to provide. But of
course, they have to have a back-fill. And what is the effort
made to facilitate back-fill for their protection?
Ms. Sherman. So thank you very much, Congressman. And I met
with that transition team as well. And I think that President-
elect Yoon of South Korea will be a terrific partner, an ally
of the United States. And I too have been to Pyongyang and to
Seoul.
And so I understand exactly the point that you are making
about the difference. And let's remember, at one point, the
Republic of Korea had authoritarian leadership. And they,
instead built a democracy that is just getting stronger and
stronger every year.
In terms of back-filling, we are talking with our partners
and allies of each of these requests and seeing what is
possible. We understand that countries want to support Ukraine
but do not want to leave themselves vulnerable. So we are
taking this on a case-by-case basis and seeing what is doable.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you, and please facilitate that.
It's so mutually beneficial for the people of Ukraine and the
world. And additionally, as you indicated that South Korea went
from an authoritarian regime to the democracy that it is today,
I actually have faith in Russia and the Russian people.
And that's why I've introduced bipartisan legislation that
would provide for immediate refugee status for any person in
the Russian military or diplomatic corps or Russian Duma that
would defect that they would be given immediate refugee status
to the United States. And if they brought over military
equipment and delivered it to Ukraine, they could get up to
100,000 dollars. And so we should not give up on the people of
Russia.
But sadly--and I cannot believe it, and I appreciate
Chairman Meeks bringing this up. India, the world's largest
democracy, should be standing firm with the other democracies.
We're in a conflict that has been identified by President Biden
of totalitarianism against democracies.
So either we stand for democracy's rule of law, or we'll be
facing around the world destabilization by governments' rule of
gun. And so how can we make an effort to replace the oil that
India depends on and the military equipment that they've
depended on from Putin? This is just so illogical for the
extraordinary country of India, the wonderful people of India
to be overlooking, abstaining. That's incredible. That's such
an insult to the people of India.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congressman Wilson. I addressed
this a little bit earlier to say that our relationship with
India as you point out, the world's largest democracy is
critical in so many areas. We've had very direct conversations
with them about how we can address their very legitimate needs
for their country.
And I think that there's progress being made to see what we
can do to be supportive to them while at the same time urging
them to be more forthright regarding what's happening in
Ukraine. I did note that they made comments, not surprising,
about the horrors that have taken place in Bucha.
And so I think we just have to keep working at this
relationship and understanding the complexity of it and helping
to support India to really understand what is in their national
security interest.
Mr. Wilson. With three million Indian Americans, the most
successful immigrant group in the United States----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative Dina Titus of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, thank
you for being here. I often meet with Ambassadors from some of
these other countries. And they tell me when they're working to
develop infrastructure projects or defense investments that
they often turn to China instead of the United States. We saw
this with the recent agreement with the Solomon Islands in
China.
They always say, well, if we had an alternative with the
U.S., we would do that. Could you talk a little bit about maybe
the Development Finance Corporation and the Millennium
Challenge and what maybe Congress can do to make those programs
more flexible and more attractive to some of these places as an
alternative to China?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congresswoman. It's a really good
and important question about why countries turn to the PRC when
we really would like them to turn to us. And I want to say that
although I expect that the Solomon Islands has been very
straightforward that it's going to sign this agreement, they
have not done so yet.
And we certainly want the Solomon Islands to know their
importance to us. And we have done investment in the Solomon
Islands. So we hope this is an ongoing conversation.
On the DFC, I think we've done some very important things.
We were just talking about India, half a billion dollars for
solar farms project, other investments in India, terrific DFC
investments in other places in the world. MCC just got a
compact signed in Nepal, even after a very aggressive effort by
the PRC to stop the Nepalese from signing that MCC compact. So
these vehicles are terribly important.
The DFC has a lot of steps that countries have to step
through. And I think we all should look at whether in fact all
of the steps in each of these arenas are what they ought to be
to make sure we are agile and flexible. It is why we've
introduced the B3W effort which is bringing private investment
to the area of high standard, climate-aligned, transparently
financed infrastructure to Indo-Pacific economics, mobilizing
private capital, why the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework is
important to, again, raise up understandings and work together
with countries.
I think too that countries are finding that the PRC comes
with some strings that end up not being in their interest where
they take out a loan, default on it, and then the PRC seizes
the assets. And it turns out to be a liability for a country,
not an asset. That certainly has been experienced in Africa
where the PRC brought in its own people, did not transfer
technology, did not transfer capabilities.
And so African countries ended up with large debt without
the infrastructure they needed or infrastructure that was
regulated in a way that it did not crumble 5 years later. So
we've got work to do to become more agile, to become more
flexible, to be able to move faster in the ways that you
suggest. But we do have tools. We do have vehicles. And we have
diplomats all over the world in all of our missions working
very hard.
And the last point I'll make which I make in the Senate
more than I make here which is please, please, please get our
Ambassadors confirmed. Because when we have a Senate-confirmed
Ambassador, they are seen differently by countries. They are
more aggressive. They advance our interests. They push the
envelope.
We need all of our Ambassadors in place. And so urge your
Senate colleagues to get the job done. Thank you.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you. If as you look at these
different programs and you see that they need some flexibility
or some changes in all these steps and red tape that are
required, please come to us if there's something that Congress
can do that you cannot do internally. Maybe we can work
together to be sure that they are used to their maximum
potential and that countries do not have to choose China as an
alternative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'll yield back. And I look
forward to working on this with the Department.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I'll recognize
Representative Darrell Issa of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Secretary, a couple
of quick observations and a number of questions. As you know,
as the JCPOA as we exited it, it did not change the fact that
Iran was bound by the JCPOA and continued with our European
partners.
So if that's the case, then the fact that just a few months
or just about the time President Biden was being sworn in when
Iran announced that it had achieved 20 percent refinement or
continued on past the 3.67 that it contractually bound to.
They, by definition, are not trustworthy to keep the JCPOA
which they were bound by with our European partners. Clearly,
they continued terrorist attacks. They continue even till today
with the recent attacks, both in Iraq and of course the attacks
on Saudi Arabia using their proxies.
Having said that that's who we're dealing with, can you
assure us as a representative of the State Department that you
will, one, become transparent as to the details of the
agreement? Because at this time based on both classified and
open briefings, as far as I can tell, the deal will be
identical to the original deal, recognizing that that's Iran's
stated position and that appears to be where we're negotiating
is from a position of weakness where we cannot get any
improvements or further assurances.
But can you commit that you will not lift sanctions on the
Uranium Revolutionary Guard Corps? Can you commit that you'll
work with Secretary Blinken and the President not to waive
weapon sales from Russia to Iran? Can you commit to advising
Secretary Blinken and the President not to waive oil sales
transferred between Russia and Iran?
Could you commit as part of this process that you would not
allow transfers of nuclear materials between Russia and Iran as
part of this deal? And could you commit that you would at least
use your efforts not to have reactor plans, schematics, or
blueprints moved between Iran and Russia? Last, could you
commit that the JCPOA, if it's reentered, would not allow for a
continued activity such as the enrichment of uranium which now
exceeds 20 percent?
I know I gave you a lot. But I would prefer to give you all
of them and then you can just say yes to all of them that you
would commit to.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Issa. And Chairman, I'm glad that was funny for you
because, on one hand, I know the answer is probably no. But I
do sincerely believe that these are the areas that Congress
should insist that some aspect of this, particularly relative
to Russia as a partner, be included since we are currently
effectively defending a country at war which means we
effectively are involved in a war with an actor that our own
President has called a war criminal.
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, you raise very serious concerns,
and I take them very seriously. And I will say this about the
JCPOA. President Biden said that his interest is to return to
compliance for compliance if Iran would be compliant with the
JCPOA.
And those negotiations are not over. And when I was a
negotiator for the original JCPOA leading a phenomenal team and
working with then Secretary Kerry and with my European
colleagues and the PRC and Russia at the time, it was very
critical for people to understand that nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed, that it's about are you 20 percent there
or 90 percent there. It's binary. You either get there or you
do not.
And so I do not think we know the outcome yet of whether in
fact we will get a return to compliance for compliance. I
absolutely believe that we should be transparent with Congress.
And I know that Rob Malley who now is the lead negotiator with
the team and Bret McGurk from the White House. I've done
briefings up on the Hill, and I'm sure they will do many more
and share those details as this comes together.
And I want to make one--I agree that the situation with
Russia is now very complicated. I would note that at the time
we were negotiating the original JCPOA, Russia took Crimea. And
so it was a very bizarre situation where we were negotiating
with the Russians at the same time they were doing things that
were horrible and certainly not as unspeakable as what they are
doing now.
So yes, it's complicated. But we will be transparent with
you. We will take the concerns you've raised with great
seriousness.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Meeks. I now recognize Representative Dean
Phillips of Minnesota for 5 minutes.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Greetings, Madam
Secretary. I want to associate myself with the remarks of my
colleague, Mr. Issa, relative to the JCPOA. None of us what to
see a nuclear armed Iran for obvious reasons. I think that's a
comprehensive statement for Congress and I know for the
Administration.
But we already have a nuclear armed tyrant in the Indo-
Pacific and that's North Korea, of course. What is our strategy
relative to containment? They just tested their first ICBM
since 2017. Saber-rattling continues, and I'd like to hear from
you about what our strategy for containment is vis-a-vis North
Korea but a little bit more broader proliferation.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congressman. There's no question we
share your deep concern about the DPRK. There have been 13
launches. The last one as you noted, all believe was an
intercontinental missile, ballistic missile.
We expect that there are likely to be more. And as one of
your colleagues mentioned earlier, the transition team for
President-elect Yoon of South Korea is here. And this is very
much been part of their discussions with everyone with whom
they have met which is to ensure that we take some strong
action to let the north know that they cannot just keep doing
this without any consequences, that we take actions that shows
we have a credible deterrence against any attack by North
Korea.
At the same time, we, the South Koreans and the Japanese,
all believe that we should make it clear we also have an open
channel for dialog without preconditions to end the specter of
what the North Koreans are doing. So it's practical. It's
calibrated.
We are moving on all of those vectors simultaneously and
critically in a trilateral fashion with Japan and the Republic
of Korea because strength comes from partnerships and
alliances. It's true where Ukraine is concerned. It's true
where the DPRK is concerned.
Mr. Phillips. And in your estimation, these strong actions
that might still be in the toolkit, are any of them actionable
or achievable without Chinese support?
Ms. Sherman. I think they are. But I also believe that the
PRC believes above all else that stability is critical. And so
we have said to them and will continue to press on them and
have our allies and partners press on them, that this is not
taking action that will lead to a stable and prosperous Indo-
Pacific.
This is not good for the PRC anymore than it's good for all
the rest of us. And having a nuclear armed North Korea is not
in China's self interest. So I cannot tell you, Congressman
Phillips, that we have an answer today because it's evident
that the North Koreans right now are intent on spending what
little money they have while their people starve, probably
facing another famine, probably having a horrendous COVID
outbreak that none of us really know about because they've kept
it so quiet.
So I cannot tell you today we have solved this problem or
will tomorrow. But we're working at it quite hard. Ambassador
Sung Kim is here for consultations. We'll be consulting with
his Japanese and South Korean colleagues in Seoul shortly and
their ongoing consultations as well to see what else we can be
doing.
Mr. Phillips. And can you share any specific examples of
other, quote-unquote, strong actions that remain in the toolkit
that had not been employed yet vis-a-vis North Korea?
Ms. Sherman. Well, I think they're a whole range,
everything from sanctions, some of which we have imposed
already, to actions like the South Koreans took after the most
recent launch to do their own missile launches to say we have a
deterrent, the exercises that we do, the trilateral
relationship statement and actions at the U.N. Security Council
to hold the North Koreans accountable in the committee that
looks at non-proliferation, to make sure that we stop any
material going into North Korea that can be used for the
development of missile technology or nuclear technology.
We have done a good job as I must say Steve Biegun who was
my predecessor. Good professional, worked very hard to ensure
that North Korean workers who went abroad and sent remittances
back that we got to countries and told them to send those North
Koreans home. Don't allow them to have that chain of financial
support for North Korea. So we try to work this in every
domain.
Mr. Phillips. I just got 10 seconds. Any carrots that you
contemplate relative to changing behavior?
Ms. Sherman. Any what?
Mr. Phillips. Carrots instead of sticks----
Ms. Sherman. Well, I think we have----
Mr. Phillips [continuing]. To change behavior?
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. Said to them that we are open to
diplomacy. We have let them know in appropriate ways things
that might come their way if we can get to a different place.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative Scott Perry of Pennsylvania for 5
minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary,
for being here. Is the Biden State Department policy regarding
China a failure?
Ms. Sherman. No.
Mr. Perry. It's not? OK. I want to go through a timeline
with you. Last July, you were on a trip and you were handed a
list of 16, as alleged, erroneous U.S. policies toward China,
10 cases of concern to be rectified before ties could improve.
So that's July 2021.
The in October, China and Russia for the first time ever
conducted joint naval drills in the western Pacific around
Japan. And then in November--no. Well, November 15, the
President and Xi had a virtual summit where the President tried
to wind support for our position vis-a-vis Ukraine. Then in
November or later in November, China and Russia sent bombers
into Japanese and South Korean ADIZ.
Vladimir Putin and Xi have met more than 30 times since
2013. And I suspect you're aware that Xi calls Putin his best
friend. Subsequent to that, the Department of State held a one
and a half hour meeting with China's Ambassador, Qin Gang,
where he was given U.S. intelligence regarding Russian armored
unit placement.
And then December 2021, there was more information
exchanged throughout December regarding U.S. intelligence which
was given by China to Russia. There were four of these meetings
including one where you, Madam Secretary, were present.
February 4, Putin arrived in Beijing for the winter Olympics.
And then on February 7, Xi and Putin announced that the two
nation's friendship has no limits and issued a joint statement
pledging what is described as unprecedented cooperation. And
then on the 24 of February, Russia invaded Ukraine.
Whose idea was it to give China the intelligence we had on
Russia?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I do not think this is probably
the appropriate forum to talk about intelligence matters.
Mr. Perry. I'm not talking about the intelligence itself. I
want to know who made the decision.
Ms. Sherman. I understand. But you are presuming that we
shared intelligence in a particular manner. And I'd rather have
that conversation----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Perry. I'm happy to have that conversation with you
behind closed doors. But it's also been reported that methods
and sources were compromised. Did the State Department
compromise sources and methods?
Ms. Sherman. We never compromise sources and methods,
Congressman.
Mr. Perry. In determining whether the policy is correct, it
says in the most recent release of the Indo-Pacific Strategy
that we're competing with the PRC, competing and managing
competition. Admiral Luo Yuan in 2019 said sinking two U.S.
aircraft carriers would kill 10,000 American soldiers. What the
United States fears the most is taking casualties. We'll see
how frightened America is. And of course, you probably know
Ambassador Qin Gang just this year said it's most likely if we
support Taiwan independence or continue to will involve China
and the United States, the two big countries in a military
conflict.
I've heard your testimony here this morning and you talked
about climate change on numerous occasions. Do you know that
the Chinese already claim to have success in elevating
Presidential climate on John Kerry who's a genocide apologist
to be in charge of the Biden overall China strategy? Is that
true?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I appreciate that you have a
perspective on the Biden-Harris Administration policy toward
the PRC. Let me be clear. As Secretary Blinken has said, there
are three elements to that policy. Yes, to compete and to win,
to invest in our country so that we can win the future vis-a-
vis the competition in a responsible manner.
Second, that we challenge China where we must. That is in
areas like the South China Sea. There are more aggressive
action toward Taiwan and very many other areas. And third, to
cooperate in those areas where it is in our self interest to do
so to ensure that we have a planet for my grandchildren----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Perry. Do I do not want you to be responsible. I agree
with you about that. But a central demand in the list handed to
you was that the United States no longer challenged China's
domestic Marxist-Leninist political system. Now for my whole
life or at least since Kissinger went to open up China
allegedly and then their entry into the World Trade
Organization, et cetera, et cetera, we've had a policy in the
United States that somehow open markets and relations with the
West would change China.
Has the U.S. Government lied to or been wrong about that
policy that whole time? Because it's not happening.
Ms. Sherman. I hear you loud and clear, Congressman, and
I'd urge you to sit down and have that conversation with
Secretary Kissinger. I think that we all understand that life's
a lot more complicated.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time, and I try not to
intercede as the chair of the committee. But it's hard for me
not to just say that President Xi gave PRC's first ever
friendship medal to Mr. Putin in 2018. Donald Trump was
President. Didn't hear anything about that.
President Trump invited Mr. Putin to the White House.
Didn't hear anything about that. The Foreign Minister Lavrov
visited the White House in 2017 when he was President and
allegedly gave information to him that no one else that was
classified. No one said anything about that.
But I will try to refrain. And I'll recognize Mr.
Representative Gerry Connolly of Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. And yes, there's so much
to remember from those momentous 4 years. Hard to get it all
in, in one hearing, like taking Clorox to cure COVID. I seem to
recall President Trump--actually, one you left out there maybe,
Mr. Chairman--praising Xi Jinping on his management of COVID
and the virus coming out of Wuhan early on.
Welcome, Ms. Sherman. So glad to have you here again. A
couple of questions. One is what's your view about what China
is taking away from what Russia is doing in Ukraine? I'm the
co-chair of the Taiwan Caucus. And there's concern that China
could take away from our point of view the wrong lessons.
What's your view? What's the State Department's view about
that? And presumably, we're communicating warnings to the
Chinese Government appropriately.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congressman. Indeed, we are. The
President in his conversation with Xi Jinping, Jake Sullivan
with Yan Jiechi, Secretary Blinken's with Wang Yi, mine on my
trip as well as when I met with the Ambassador here.
We want to try to make sure that PRC takes away the right
lessons. And I hope that what they have seen is that United
States has partners and allies throughout the world and that we
all believe in sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the
right of countries to make their own foreign policy choices and
decisions, that we believe in an international rules-based
order that has added space, a belief in human rights and making
sure that everybody plays by the same rules.
That if, in fact, we have said quite clearly that we
believe stability across the Straits is critical, that
certainly no country should be taken by--not country, no
entity. We see Taiwan as a jurisdiction. We have an unofficial
relationship with them. So we do not see in our One China
policy that the mainland taking Taiwan by force is acceptable
and certainly does not lead to stability along the Taiwan
Straits or stability in the Indo-Pacific.
And so we hope that the PRC understands that any such
action would see a response from the international community,
not just from the United States. That most countries in the
world--in fact, two U.N. General Assembly resolutions, one, 141
countries, 140 countries at the time of this invasion
premeditated, unprovoked, and unjust invasion by Putin voted in
support of Ukraine and in support of those principles and of
the international rules-based order and the need for President
Putin to bear consequences. So we hope the PRC takes the right
lessons from that.
Mr. Connolly. We hope so. As you know, NATO is updating its
strategic concept and the intention is to adopt revisions, new
strategic concept in May in Madrid.
The current strategic concept that's been in place for the
last decade still refers to Russia as a strategic partner--
clearly, that's not true--and does not even mention China.
Apparently, China does not exist in our orb in terms of
anything to be concerned about. Clearly, that has to change.
What guidance is the State Department, the U.S. Government,
providing NATO with respect to how to formulate the
relationship we ought to be having and how we ought to be
looking at the Chinese challenge?
Ms. Sherman. There's a lot of discussion going on about
that, Congressman. And the Secretary of State is in Brussels
today for a NATO meeting. Some of the discussion will be about
heading toward Madrid in the strategic concept for 2030.
I think everybody understands that we're in a different
world, that what has happened has scrambled the geopolitics of
this world. And we all are going to have to think about where
we are and what that means for the future. So I think you're
quite right that things are going to change.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. And my final point, yesterday, the House
of Representatives in an overwhelming bipartisan vote voted for
a resolution calling on NATO as part of that strategic concept
to create a center for democratic resilience within NATO
itself. I commend it to you and I urge the State Department,
and Julie Smith has been doing a great job in Brussels. But we
need to get behind this, especially after what's happening in
Ukraine. I thank the chair.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Representative Ann Wagner who's the vice ranking
member of the full committee for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, for hosting this
critical hearing. And Deputy Secretary Sherman, it is good to
see you again. And we want to thank you for your time and
service.
The United States and our allies are navigating an
inflection point in world history. Russia's war on Ukraine has
demonstrated the high stakes of the struggle between the
democratic world and its authoritarian adversaries. But we need
to be clear that China, Russia, Iran and their partners sowed
the seeds of this conflict long ago.
Authoritarian governments have made a deliberate choice to
attack foundational practices, beliefs, and laws of the free
world. And today we are seeing the tragic consequences of that
decision. Our adversaries are watching our responses to
Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
They had hoped to see a fractured, weak West. And instead
they learned that the U.S. and our allies are more united and
more determined to protect the free world than we have ever
been. But this crisis is far from other.
And Putin and all members of his criminal regime that bear
responsibility for his horrifying assault on an independent and
peaceful nature and should suffer the consequences of their
actions. We will send a message to the bullies and
authoritarians standing alongside Putin that we will not
tolerate aggression against a sovereign nation.
The People's Republic of China should take note, it must be
held accountable for its many violations of sovereignty and
international law in the Himalayas, the South China Sea, the
East China Sea. It cannot continue to threaten Taiwan's right
to determine its own future. And it must immediately cease its
egregious violations of human rights. And I include in this
what I would call genocide.
Department Secretary Sherman, I want to take this
opportunity to ask you for a status update on some of the
provisions of fighter jets, of tanks, of surface-to-air
missiles, specifically functioning as S-300's, to Ukraine. I
recently had the privilege of traveling to Poland and the
Ukrainian border. And I saw firsthand what the Ukrainians are
up against.
And President Zelensky has repeatedly asked for tanks and
fighter jets and surface-to-air missiles. But the Biden
Administration has claimed that Russia could deem these systems
escalatory. Now that the world has seen the horror of Russia,
Russian war crimes committed in Bucha just yesterday, how can
this Administration continue to argue that any weapon system
for Ukraine is escalatory or provocative?
Is the United States policy on providing these critical
assets evolving, I'll say, in light of what we are learning
about the horrifying situations on the ground in Ukraine,
Secretary?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. The United
States has provided over two billion dollars in security
assistance to Ukraine. And for every one Russian tank between
the United States and our allies and partners, there are ten
tanks that have been supplied to Ukraine.
We can go into detail, and I did this in a classified
briefing. And my colleagues from the Department of Defense and
the Joint Chiefs went through it in great detail in a
classified briefing with all members of the House about each
weapon system, where it was coming from, what its issues were,
a lot of discussion about those, migs and why it's been so
difficult to get them in. This is a decision that is up to
Poland in the end. All of this----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mrs. Wagner. What about--because of my time--the surface-
to-air missiles, the S-300's? And I'm right over here, Madam
Secretary.
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mrs. Wagner. The S-300's--the functioning S-300's, I'm
hearing they're 1984. They're not functioning. So what's the--
--
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Ms. Sherman. I think, Congresswomen, I can brief you
further about the S-300's in a different setting. But we
understand the importance of them.
Mrs. Wagner. OK. Well, I would appreciate that very, very
much.
Ms. Sherman. Sure.
Mrs. Wagner. I do not have much time left. I want to ask a
question about the PRC and what they may be hoping to gain from
the current prices in Europe. But I'm going to submit it for
the record given the fact that I am out of time and I yield
back to the chair.
Chairman Meeks. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
Representative Colin Allred of Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allred. Good. I thought you were going to skip me, Mr.
Chairman. Madam Deputy Secretary, it's great to see you again.
Thank you for coming to speak with us.
And this is an important region in the world. I was there
in November. We visited South Korea and Japan and also Taiwan.
Mostly the discussion as you can imagine revolved around China.
And I've been kind of wanting to avoid the idea that China
is ten feet tall and that we are falling behind. We have some
unique abilities to bring to the table, particularly our
alliances and our economic power. And speaking with our allies,
I think there's a lot of concern over our withdrawal from TPP
and where we were going to go and how were we going to
economically engage with them going forward.
And I see it as also part of a deterrent strategy with
China as important as it is for us to continue to shift our
resources to the Pacific on the military side. One the economic
side, I think this is maybe our strongest tool. And so I wanted
to discuss the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework that the
Administration has put forward which I think is intended to set
a positive agenda for economic coordination in the region.
I'm just wondering what countries you envision
participating in that framework, what the breadth of the
membership will be, and how its role will play in our overall
Indo-Pacific strategy.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Congressman. And let me
quickly correct something I said to Congresswomen Zeldin. And I
think I said it maybe earlier as well. It is not that we have
ten tanks for every one tank. We have ten anti-tank weapons for
every Russian tank. So I wanted to correct the record. I do not
want to leave a misimpression. So sorry for taking some time,
Congressman.
On the Indo-Pacific framework, we haven't made final
decisions on membership. The framework will be open, inclusive
to those partners that share our ambitions and our high
standards. And that's what we're doing here.
I think it's also important for people to understand that
this is not a traditional trade agreement approach. It is a
much broader approach and is about really a worker-centric
trade policy that includes novel areas such as supply chain
resiliency that go beyond traditional trade agreements. And I
think this quite critical to the future for all of us.
Mr. Allred. While I understand that it is going to go
beyond, I would like to see us have a trade agreement. And
those countries are moving forward without us now. And I think
there's a U.S.-sized hole there. And in many ways, China wants
to fill that.
Just really quickly, do we imagine that Taiwan may have
some inclusion in that framework?
Ms. Sherman. As I said, we haven't made any decisions. But
I've heard both from you and from other members this morning
your perspective on that decision.
Mr. Allred. OK. Well, I certainly think they should be. And
with the supply chain issues that we're talking about, they
have an important role to play in that. And I think we need to
continue to build kind of a wall of our democratic allies,
partners, and the economies that we can bring to the table in
this region. And with that, I'll give you some time back. Thank
you.
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Representative Brian Mast of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, ma'am, for
coming today. The Administration is working on negotiating a
nuclear deal with Iran again. We agree on that?
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Mast. Yes, ma'am. I want to talk a little bit about
what you know about negotiation. Probably easily in this room,
you've sat with Iranians more than anybody. And so you do have
an opinion on this that should be valued.
You stated about the first Iran negotiations, and you said
this passionately, we had to make sure our military was arrayed
in such a way to say that we are serious. If we have to take
military action because nothing else works, we will. We made
sure that the Iranians knew that we had weapons that could
penetrate Fordow. We helped oil producers more oil to compete
with Iran.
At that time, as you mentioned already, Russians were
taking Crimea while you were negotiating the Iran deal. But now
we have Russia aiding in part. United States of American
negotiates the Iran deal, totally different situation.
So I want to start with the first point. What can you say
that this Administration--something that you said was so
crucial for credible negotiation with them. What can you say
that this Administration does to array our military in such a
way that they are taken serious so that the Iranians know that
if nothing else works that we will take military action and use
weapons that would penetrate Fordow?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I believe that diplomacy is often
supported by a credible threat of force. And I think that
everybody in this room would agree that the United States
military is the finest, strongest, broadest, deepest military
on the face of the earth.
Mr. Mast. Agreed, ma'am. And I do not want to interrupt
you, but I do not want to filibuster this time. There's a
difference in Administrations. The Trump Administration,
whether you like them or not, had an incredible military
prowess, took out Soleimani, other things that we can talk
about, negotiations with North Korea, you name it.
What is this Biden Administration doing to show Iran that
they are arrayed in such a way to say to them that we are
serious and that if we have to take military actions because
nothing else works, that we will and that they're well aware
that we have weapons that can penetrate Fordow and others
things?
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Mast. What is this Administration doing?
Ms. Sherman. They know that today as they knew it then,
Congressman. There's nothing different in that statement or the
veracity of that statement today as it was then.
Mr. Mast. Ma'am, you'd have to think we're all naive to
think nothing is different today. Obviously, the world oil
markets and what this Administration has done with what rubs up
against their long-term climate goals is totally different, as
was different than what you were doing to negotiate with Iran.
What they did in Afghanistan in the withdrawal from
Afghanistan, our intelligence throughout the region, what
they're doing with Ukraine, what they're doing right now with
Russia who is just like they were attacking Crimea during the
Obama Administration is now attacking Ukraine during the Biden
Administration. This is a totally different world.
So you'd have to think we're naive to think that this
Administration right now is doing something to array the United
States military in such a way to say that we are serious, that
if we have to take military action because nothing else works
to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon, then we will.
And I would love a specific example.
Ms. Sherman. So I would say, Congressman, two things. I
think if you take to General Milley who testified, I think,
yesterday, he would tell you that we have the capacity to do
exactly what I said we had the capacity to do back in 2015.
Second, I think you will have seen in the Secretary's meeting
in the Negev Desert with Abraham Accord partners and Israel
that our partnerships and alliances are as important in our
negotiations with Iran as they are in our standing up to Putin
in Ukraine.
Mr. Mast. So one more question on that. You're going to
defend your point of view, rightly so. You believe that if Iran
were to be on the cusp of a nuclear weapon right this moment
that General Milley would launch an attack, use military action
as you said was so important for you to be able to negotiate.
Ms. Sherman. Congressman----
Mr. Mast. You have to say that credibly.
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I'm not going to deal today in a
hypothetical because----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Mast. That's what you did previously.
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Chairman Meeks. The gentleman's time is expired. And I'll
recognize Representative Tom Malinowski of New Jersey who's the
vice chair of the full committee for 5 minutes, and he can do
that right here because I got to run. I have to run to the
floor. I'll be back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. I want to say thank you, Mr.
Chairman. But I'd at least temporarily be addressing myself.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
So we've had a bunch of conversations and debates and votes
on the Hill in the last couple of weeks on funding our domestic
and international vaccination and public health efforts. I
wanted to ask you about that as it pertains to the theme of
this hearing. We've talked a lot about the importance of the
United States competing, leading, winning the future.
My point of view and I assume you would agree with this is
that the horrific catastrophe of this pandemic has also
presented us as the country that invented these vaccines and
has the capacity to save hundreds of millions of lives around
the world with a strategic opportunity that is unparalleled in
our experience, maybe not since the end of the cold war have we
had such an opportunity. The President has said we should be
the arsenal of vaccines. We've done a lot. But I'm not sure if
we've done enough to be able to say we're seizing that
opportunity.
Indonesia, for example, 100 million Western vaccines, 35
million that we've donated, 200 million from China, Bangladesh,
90 million Western vaccines, 158 million from China. And other
countries, the ratio is a little bit better. In Vietnam,
Turkey, Sub-Saharan Africa, about 194 million doses from the
Western brands donated compared to 28 million from China. And
yet still, 194 million, when you think about the population of
Africa, is a drop in the bucket.
USAID has asked us for about five billion dollars. That
request came in December. That was not to step up our efforts.
That was just to maintain the current, I think, insufficient
effort. And the Senate zeroed out that funding which if we
allow that to stand, we're at basically no effort going forward
this year.
So I want to ask you about this from a strategic
perspective. So set aside the obvious public health arguments
for doing this. Can you talk a little bit about in terms of our
competition with China some examples of when and how we have
benefited from when we've been able to provide this sort of
assistance and how you feel we as a country are constrained
right now by the lack of resources?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for raising
this issue. The President, the Secretary, virtually all of you
have been clear that nobody is safe from COVID until everybody
is safe. We have seen that time and time again with variance
from other countries making its way to our shores and having
another surge.
Without additional funding to support getting shots into
arms around the world, we will have to cut short our efforts to
turn vaccines into vaccinations. As you've noted, we've already
donated over 500 million doses free of cost with no strings
attached which is quite different from what the PRC has done.
We have done so to more than 110 countries and economies around
the world, sole purpose to save lives.
But by June of this year, we estimate that we will have
obligated the majority of funds under the Initiative for Global
Vaccine Access, Global VAX. That means we will have to begin to
ramp down the initiative. By August or September without
additional funding, all of our related Global VAX efforts will
end.
Without additional funds, the Administration would be
unable to extend search support to 20-plus additional under-
vaccinated countries that will need intensive support this year
to get shots in arms. This will devaState our ability to ensure
those countries can effectively deploy safe and effective
vaccines. We will also be unable to provide lifesaving
supplies, tests, therapeutics, oxygen. You go on and on.
Laving large unvaccinated populations worldwide will
increase the risk of new deadly variants emerging that could
evade our current vaccines and treatments. And I think
everybody probably saw in the morning paper the discussion
going on among scientists and medical researchers about how to
make sure vaccines can work for all of the variants that are
coming our way and will be sustainable over time.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. I'll stop you with a very quick
question.
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Where will those countries
turn?
Ms. Sherman. Those countries will turn to the PRC.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. And I think that's
the key point here. Again, the public health argument should be
obvious enough. But how can we and all of us, I think, agree on
this aspect? How can we voluntarily lose this competition to
the Chinese Communist Party? I cannot imagine it.
Very, very quickly. Very different issue. Does the
Administration intend to fill the position of North Korea Human
Rights Envoy?
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. I yield back my time and
recognize Representative Tim Burchett of Tennessee.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ma'am, thank you for
being here. I wonder why hasn't the Biden Administration
nominated Ambassador to Ukraine?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, we are very lucky that Kristina
Kvien is our chargee d'affaires. She is doing a simply
spectacular job under the most difficult circumstances. I
certainly understand why it would have been great if we had
decided on that nominee to be a permanent Ambassador.
These things take time to make sure you have the right
person. And right now, I'm quite glad that we have the
sustainable commitment of Chargee D'affaires Kvien and her
team. They're doing a great job.
Mr. Burchett. OK. And I'm wondering will India's neutrality
in Russia's war on Ukraine and the country's general friendship
with Russia have any effect on our policy toward India--U.S.
policy toward India I guess I should say.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Congressman. I've addressed this a
couple of times so far today. But it's very important, so I
have no problem addressing it again.
Our relationship with India is a very critical one. They're
the largest democracy in the world. We have a strong defense
relationship with them. They are part of the Quad with
Australia and Japan, and we are moving forward on many
achievements that are critical to Indo-Pacific prosperity and
security. We obviously would prefer that India move away from
their long-term history of nonalignment, G77, partnership with
Russia.
Mr. Burchett. Aren't a lot of their weapons, though,
weaponry----
Ms. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Burchett [continuing]. They're made in Russia, correct?
Ms. Sherman. Yes, we have to told them that it'll be very
hard for them now to get spare parts or to get them replaced.
They have increased their defense relationship with us and
defense sales and co-production efforts. And I think this is a
great opportunity for that to surge in the years again.
Mr. Burchett. Seems like it's sort of an extension of
China's Belt-and-Road. They use their weaponry, and then
they're stuck with them. And then they have to buy the parts
from them.
Are we working with any of our allies to try Putin for war
crimes? I hear a lot of talk about it, and we talk about the
horrors. We shouldn't be surprised at what Russia does. If you
know anything about history, they're very brutal.
They're brutal on their own people. They're brutal on
people they conquest throughout history. It's just gone on and
gone on. And personally, I think war crimes started when they
cross the border.
They're going to talk about all these things where they've
lobbed missiles into this group or that group which are
horrible and horrific and the torture. And of course, it looks
like they've killed a lot of innocent civilians and just very
careless kind of attitude they take about it. But I'm wondering
if that's a possibility.
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, Secretary Blinken named Russia as
having perpetrated war crimes, even before the horrifying video
that's come out of Bucha and what people have faced. And we
expect to see much greater--even more horror as this unfolds.
I think that there will be actions for accountability,
whether that's at the ICC, at the U.N. Human Rights Council,
U.N. General Assembly, our own efforts in that regard. The
President has already said that war crimes have been committed
here. Our lawyers and others are collecting evidence. Other
countries around the world have offered to collect evidence to
meet legal thresholds for that accountability. It is a very
high priority.
Mr. Burchett. OK. Thank you. One last question. I'm
wondering we've seen all the horrific things the Russians have
done. And I put those at Putin's feet 100 percent and the
crimes committed in Bucha.
And how can this Administration continue to argue any
weapon system is escalatory or provocative? Those seem to be
the words we use a lot now. And I'm sure the lawyers or the
think tanks have come up with that. If you can answer that real
quick, ma'am, I'd appreciate it.
Ms. Sherman. Sure. I think it's not just about escalatory.
The President has been very clear that he does not see American
troops in Ukraine, and NATO does not see its troops in Ukraine,
that we want to supply the Ukrainians with everything they need
to defend themselves.
And so we also look at what is needed and what, in fact,
might drag us into that conflict. And he's made the commitment
that we will not do that. And certainly if a convoy is taken
out on NATO territory, we're going to defend that country to
every inch of its soil as the President has said. But these are
hard and touch decisions.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back none of my
time.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski.
[Presiding.] You have 4 seconds, so thank you for giving
those to us. I now recognize Representative Brad Sherman of
California for 5 minutes----
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding].--plus 4 seconds.
Mr. Sherman. I want to start with a couple observations,
first speaking up on the gentleman from New Jersey's comments
on the need for us to provide at least five billion dollars to
international vaccination efforts. Obviously, this is the moral
thing to do. Obviously, it's a thing to do to assure our role
in world leadership.
But if we were just exclusively selfish, we'd recognize
that the impact on our economy of shutdowns and disease in all
of the middle income and poor countries of the world has an
impact on us of far more than five billion. But even more than
that, I would hope that the U.S. Senate would be on team human
rather than on team COVID and recognize that every time anyone
in the world gets this disease, that means the disease is
replicating. When it replicates, it can mutate, and the next
variant can come back to the United States.
I feel that so many senators just aren't able to
contemplate the difference--Republican senators I might add--
the difference between billions and trillions. But if we have
trillion--if you just look at the economics. We have trillions
of dollars at stake in not having another variant. And the cost
of vaccination is measured in the single digit billions.
The other observation is one that I hope that China would
observe. We have three major allies east of China: Taiwan,
Japan, and South Korea. And we have for the better of a century
been successful in persuading them not to develop nuclear
weapons.
China has one ally in that region, perhaps only ally in the
world. They have been remarkably unsuccessful in persuading
North Korea not to develop and expand its nuclear weapons
program and the delivery systems. There's a lack of symmetry
here, and the Chinese need to understand that our success in
preventing our allies from going down the nuclear road is
dependent on them extending some real efforts not only in the
sense of fairness. But as North Korea flexes its nuclear
weapons muscle, that is a reason for countries near North Korea
to develop their own nuclear deterrent.
My question is on the free association compacts we have
with the Pacific Islands. This is a hearing on the Indo-
Pacific. And these small countries literally geographically
dominate the Pacific.
In the 1980's, we developed these compacts. We now see
China trying to poke its nose in the area. We see the risks of
climate change. The current compacts expire in 2023 and 2024.
And President Biden has named Ambassador Yun as special envoy
on the compacts of re-association.
The Departments of State and Interior need to get their
work done and give Congress enough time--not always an
efficient institution I might add--to enact any provisions.
What is the targeted conclusion date for these critical
negotiations?
Ms. Sherman. So thank you for raising the compact. We, as
you noted, have named Ambassador Joseph Yun as Special
Presidential Envoy for compact negotiations. He'll lead the
negotiations with support of a team composed of representatives
of all relevant agencies. And certain economic assistance
including certain Federal programs provided under the compacts
as amended ends in 2023 as you've noted.
We are focused on negotiating the provisions which are
expiring and doing it in a timely fashion which is why we named
this Presidential envoy and consulting with Congress along that
process.
Mr. Sherman. You got a target date?
Ms. Sherman. I do not have a target date for you. But I
know when they're going to expire, so we got to get it done.
Mr. Sherman. Don't expect us to be efficient. We need
efficiency on your end. Second, the Rohingya, we've now
declared this to be a genocide, yet we continue to provide
economic development in smaller quantities to the government of
Burma-Myanmar. Since this is a government perpetuating a
genocide, can we turn that off. And I'm excluding from that
food and medicine, but I'm certainly including all economic aid
and economic development aid.
Ms. Sherman. So Congressman, I'd have to look at the
particular funding streams that you're referring to. We
certainly do not as you do not want to turn off food or
medicine or anything that really is helping the people.
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Sherman. All of our aid helps the people. But whatever
aid we're providing economic development also helps the
government.
Ms. Sherman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Sherman. And that's money that could be spent on so
many other disasters happening elsewhere.
Ms. Sherman. Yes, I'm not aware of what particular funding
you're talking about. So I'd be glad to have a followup with
you.
Mr. Sherman. We'll do a QFR. But we did not provide
economic aid to Germany in 1940.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. Chair recognized
Representative Mark Green of Tennessee.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. And
I want to thank Deputy Secretary Sherman for her testimony
today. The future of freedom across the globe is increasingly
under attack. As the world is still reeling from President
Biden's failed withdrawal from Afghanistan, our adversaries are
on the move.
Russia seized the opportunity to invade Ukraine. China is
increasing its aggression toward Taiwan and Iran and North
Korea, continue down their dangerous nuclear paths. There's no
doubt that American influence has been greatly diminished by
the countless blunders committed by this White House.
Most of all, there's an erosion of the decades long
commitment to what has brought this country prosperity and the
world security, peace through strength. Deputy Secretary
Sherman, you served under the Obama Administration where you
acted as the lead negotiator of the 2015 Iran nuclear deal.
Earlier this year as the Deputy Secretary of State, you were
sent to Europe to persuade the Russians, not to invade Ukraine.
Unfortunately, those efforts failed.
However, it's not too late to stop this bad deal with Iran.
It did not work when we did it last time, and it won't work
now. Iran is an enemy of the United States and the free world.
And it's just crazy to rely on its oil exports as it was to
rely on Russia's exports.
Iran is the foremost State sponsor of terrorism. And they
do not comply with international agreements. In fact, Iran has
already violated the current deal with the Biden Administration
through its ballistic missile development program and uranium
enrichment.
And under this new deal, we're potentially freeing up
billions in Iranian assets, allowing them to export millions of
barrels of oil per day, and giving them enough uranium to make
a bomb in 3 years. All of this for what, to acquire Iranian oil
rather than rely on American energy that President Biden has
actively stifled since day one of his Presidency.
It's not too late for the State Department to reject this
horrible deal. I'm going to go off script here for just a
second which always makes my staff a little concerned.
Ms. Sherman. Same thing happens to me when I go off my
talking points.
Mr. Green. I get it. I get it. I had some friends killed in
Iraq, a lot of friends. I was there twice, and I think of those
improved explosive devices that were created by the Iranians
and given to the Iranian militias and the Shia militia. And it
just seems unconscionable to me that we would sit down at a
negotiating table. Instead, the Administration needs to take a
page from Ronald Reagan's playbook, peace through strength.
And I'm reminded of President Zelensky's recent address to
Congress and his thinly veiled cry for help from the Biden
Administration. And I quote, I am addressing President Biden.
You are the leader of a great nation. I wish you to be the
leader of the world, end quote.
The world is a lot more dangerous than it was just a year
and a bit ago. President Biden is failing to lead. This
Administration needs to lead the world. And right now, our
country is in trouble. The world is in trouble.
My first question is from a purely national security
perspective. Is it better for the United States to produce its
oil or to buy oil from Iran?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, thank you for your service, not
only as a Member of Congress----
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. But as a serviceman as well. Let
me be clear. The negotiations for a return to compliance for
compliance in the joint comprehensive plan of action is not
about oil. It is about ensuring that Iran cannot obtain a
nuclear weapon.
That has been a bipartisan ambition over the course of
several Administrations because as dangerous as Iran is--and I
would agree with you on that. There's State sponsorship of
terrorism, their maligned behavior in the region, their
targeting by militias and proxies. All of that is horrible. But
Iran with a nuclear weapon would be able to project even more
power into the region and would deter some of our allies and
partners in pushing back against Iran.
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Green. If I could, though, real----
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. Is about ensuring they not have a
nuclear weapon.
Mr. Green. I appreciate that. But unfortunately, they
violated it last time with their ballistic missile program,
their uranium enrichment. Now we're talking about letting
Russia whom we've sanctioned build a 10 billion dollar nuclear
plant for the Iranians.
I want to switch subjects real quick because I only have
half a minute here. What would you guys do differently in your
negotiations to prevent Ukraine from being invaded? Have you
taken some notes down on lessons learned, and what would you do
differently?
Ms. Sherman. I think that right now we are very focused on
helping President Zelensky and the Ukrainians ensure that they
have a country, that they have their sovereign territory, that
they have their future. There will be many lessons learned out
of this, Congressman. And I hope we will learn those lessons
together.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. And if I may add one
comment, I think one of the most extraordinary things this
Administration has done, and I've sometimes been critical of
it, was to warn the world, including to warn the government of
Ukraine about the near certainty of this invasion. Many people
did not believe it.
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with you on that. We
are in agreement there. Thank you.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. I now recognize Representative
Ted Deutch of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Deputy Secretary
Sherman, nice to see you. Thanks for joining us today. I want
to talk about a couple of issues, and I want to start with the
premise that I think we all share, that human rights needs to
be front and center in our foreign policy.
And the President signed legislation to ban imports from
China's Xinjiang region, punish the Chinese Government for
genocide of the Uyghurs. This is as critical an issue today as
it was at the end of December when the President signed that
legislation into law. And I would just start by asking you for
any updates that you can provide on the Administration's
efforts to address this ongoing atrocity.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you. And indeed, an ongoing atrocity it
is. And the Secretary early on called this a genocide and the
Administration and the President as well.
We have certainly called upon the PRC authorities to
immediately release all arbitrarily detained people, abolish
the internment camps, cease forced sterilization, end all
torture, stop prosecuting Uyghurs and members of other ethnic
and religious minority groups in Xinjiang. We have delivered
this message forcefully and directly to President Xi, to Yang
Jiechi, to Foreign Minister Wang Yi, to the Ambassador here, me
directly in my meetings in Tianjin with Xie Feng and with
Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
We continue to work with our partners and allies to promote
accountability for this in every way that we possibly can. We
coordinated the imposition of sanctions and other actions by
the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, European Union. It
sends such a strong signal that the PRC then put sanctions on
members of European Parliament. But we stayed together to make
sure that people understand that we will take the reaction and
the response, but we will not back away from what has occurred
here and the accountability that must be achieved.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate it. I would just ask one followup
to that. Is there movement on or is there a reason the U.S.
hasn't accepted Uyghurs as prioritized refugees at this point?
Ms. Sherman. I do not know the answer to that question,
Congressman. I will get you an answer.
Mr. Deutch. There are a lot of us who would be interested
in that response. Appreciate that. Let me turn, Madam Deputy
Secretary, to the fact that, as a lot of my colleagues have
already mentioned, the war in Ukraine has pulled the world's
attention west.
And there are those in the region that I spent a lot of
time focused on in the Middle East and continue to question
U.S. commitment to the region. How has China viewed accusations
of U.S. pullback from the Middle East particularly when we know
that China is always more than happy to sell its weapons to our
partners. And does China see an opening in the Middle East?
Ms. Sherman. I think the PRC looks for an opening
everywhere quite frankly. And one of the things I think we've
all come to understand is they are present and aggressive on
every continent in this world. And that's certainly true in the
Middle East as well, though I think--and I know you know this
quite well, Congressman--the Negev Summit that just occurred
that Secretary Blinken attended showed the solidarity among
many nations in the Middle East to work together, not only to
push back threats but also to increase prosperity of the people
in the region.
Mr. Deutch. I do, and I appreciated that and in particular
the Secretary's participation and leadership there. Last
question, do you believe that the Administration's strong
leadership and rallying support for Ukraine in standing up
against Russia, does that strong leadership seem to our
partners in the Indo-Pacific region to be what they should
expect from the U.S. vis-a-vis China, or do they view it as
limited to a Western conflict?
Ms. Sherman. Oh, I hope they do not see it as just about a
Western conflict. The United States has worked very hard to
affirm ASEAN's centrality, to support APEC, to create a new
mechanism, the Quad, Japan, Australia, the United States, and
India, to underscore the East Asia Summit, APEC, to say that
regional alliances, partnerships are very critical.
We obviously have critical treaty allies in the Indo-
Pacific. So I hope people understand that what President Biden
said when he became President that we were going to establish
our partnerships and our alliances, once again, we thought they
were valuable, that they mattered, that we have done so and
we've done so in every part of the world.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much. Thanks for being with us.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. The chair recognizes
Representative Andy Barr of Kentucky.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Deputy Secretary
Sherman, thank you for being here today. I just came from the
Financial Services Committee where I had an opportunity to ask
Secretary Yellen this same question about the gapping loophole
in our sanctions regime on Ukraine related to energy-related
transactions.
There's a general license that OPEC has included in the
sanctions on Russian banks and the Russian Central Bank that
allows for energy-related transactions to continue to flow
through to Moscow, admittedly for sensitivities with our
European allies who are overdependent on Russian energy. But
this is what is financing this war. These energy-related
transactions are supplying Putin with the hard currency that he
needs to execute this unprovoked aggression against the
innocent people of Ukraine.
Would the Administration, both Treasury and the State
Department, shift approach here and consider my legislation,
the No Energy Revenues for Russian Hostilities Act, which would
create an escrow mechanism which is similar to what we do with
Iran. It would allow for specific waivers where some
transactions would be allowed to go through by Treasury to help
our European allies. But then the proceeds of those
transactions would go in an escrow and released to Russia only
for humanitarian purposes if they withdraw from Ukraine, kind
of a carrot approach, not just a stick.
Ms. Sherman. What did Secretary Yellen who knows----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Barr. She was open to it, and Adeyemo was open to it as
well. I want to know what the State Department thinks.
Ms. Sherman. The State Department works very closely with
Treasury on making these kinds of judgments. I think,
Congressman, you may not have heard yet that we, in fact, did
full blocking sanctions on Sberbank today. So I think that
you've also seen Germany take action regarding Gazprom and that
financial channel yesterday. So I think that everyone is
thinking through concepts like you've put on the table. And I
hope we will continue----
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. To work together to see what we
can do.
Mr. Barr. Thank you for your open mindedness on that
because Zelensky is asking for tougher sanctions. This is the
way to do it. I urge your consideration.
Security aid to Ukraine, I appreciate the announcement of
additional 100 million dollars in security systems for Ukraine
from last evening. That is the right direction. But there's
still more than a billion dollars left in funds that Congress
has appropriated for Ukraine to back-fill stocks.
I'm talking about Javelins and Stingers. And by the way,
this is not just for Ukraine. Representative Hsiao, Taiwan,
there's several orders for Stingers that have not yet been
delivered to Taiwan. We need deterrents. We need it now. What
is the status of delivering these weapon systems to our allies
under siege, both Ukraine and Taiwan?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, we were looking at each one of
those cases in terms of Europe, case by case to see what we can
do and what's appropriate for us to do and what's possible for
us to do, and working with our partners and allies because it's
not just about us. There are 30 countries involved in providing
weapons to Ukraine.
And where Taiwan is concerned, we are very, very focused on
what Taiwan needs. And I'll be glad to get you an update on
deliveries.
Mr. Barr. They need that now. They need that now. And I'd
encourage the State Department to move with haste on that. What
about inclusion of Taiwan in the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework? I think that would be a strong signal that we stand
with Taiwan.
Ms. Sherman. I have heard that from a number of members,
both bipartisan today. We haven't made any final decisions yet
about membership. And we'll certainly take advise from Congress
under advisement.
Mr. Barr. I think that's a very important signal to send.
If we're moving forward with this economic framework, we cannot
exclude Taiwan. I think that would be an invitation for
aggression.
The other point is--and this is out of your jurisdiction
but more of an editorial comment to the USTR. We need a
bilateral trade agreement with Taiwan.
Final question on Oceania, again, kind of echoing my
colleagues. Last month, the Solomon Islands announced the
drafting of a security agreement with China. We know China has
its eyes set on Oceania. And yet it was not until just 2 weeks
ago that Ambassador Yun was appointed as the Special
Presidential Envoy. We need action and we need action now. Your
reaction?
Ms. Sherman. We are very concerned about the Solomon
Islands. We are quite engaged with them. We are very glad that
we now have a Presidential envoy. And Ambassador Yun is raring
to go and underway. And we shared the concerns, and he will be
a terrific compact negotiator.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. The chair recognizes
Representative Omar of Minnesota, 5 minutes.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chairman. The Biden Administration's
Indo-Pacific strategy says that the United States has for a
long time seen Asia merely as an arena for geopolitical
competition. I'm grateful to see that framing. I agree.
One of the things I think was profound, moral, and
strategic mistake in the last cold war was our support for
brutal dictators in the name of having a common enemy. I would
hope that most Americans look back at our long relationship
with Pinochet in Chile, Suharto in Indonesia, Rios Montt in
Guatemala, and feel the same determination. I do not want to
repeat those historical injustices.
What worries me is that this time we seem willing to let
Modi be our new Pinochet. Some in the foreign policy world seem
eager to let Duterte or Marcos be our new Suharto. In the whole
Indo-Pacific strategy, there are only two references to human
rights.
One of those is a reference to how China is undermining
them. Nobody doubts that. China's human rights record is
atrocious and that is well known. But I ask, what about Modi in
India? How are we promoting a free and open region by
supporting Modi?
So I ask you, why has the Biden Administration been so
reluctant to criticize Modi's government on human rights?
Ms. Sherman. Congresswomen, President Biden said when he
became President that human rights would be at the center of
our foreign policy. And I can assure you in every interaction I
have had with any government where we have concerns about their
human rights record, it has been part of that dialog. That is
true for the Secretary of State. That is true for the President
of the United States.
I wore this pin this morning for a reason. This eagle was
Madeleine Albright's signature pin. It has her signature on the
back of it. She was a dear friend of mine, a business partner,
but also my boss when I was Counselor for the State Department.
She fought for democracy and human rights her entire life.
She was so proud that President Biden made human rights at the
center of his policy. So I can assure you that every single----
Ms. Omar. So what do you think----
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. Person at the State Department
raises these issues and presses them.
Ms. Omar. What do you think is the root of that reluctancy
to call out Modi's government for the human rights violations
there?
Ms. Sherman. I think it is important that we talk with
countries with whom we have multiple interests about our human
rights concerns, that we meet with civil society, that we deal
with these issues, that we support NGO's who are pressing, that
we support journalists and the freedom of journalists. We
mentioned earlier today the Secretary just met with Maria Ressa
who has spoken out and gotten a Nobel Peace Prize for it but
also threats against her life on a constant basis, that we
reinforce voices for human rights in countries, even where we
have many other agendas with the government of those countries.
I think you will see that everywhere. When I went to India
the last time as the Deputy Secretary of State, I met with the
LGBTQI+ community. I have to tell you 5 years ago, no such
meeting would exist. And it is partly because of the advocacy
of NGO's and civil society and our affirmation of them that
people have more freedom than that once had. And we will
continue to pursue this agenda in every way possible.
Ms. Omar. I really appreciate that sentiment. And I push
because when your predecessor was here, I asked the same
question. What will it take? How much does the Modi
Administration have to criminalize the act of being Muslim in
India for us to say something?
And I ask you again, what will it take for us to outwardly
criticize the actions that the Modi Administration is taking
against its Muslim minorities in India? Because when we remain
silent and the situation gets out of control in the way that it
did with the Rohingyas, we, all of a sudden, show our interest
in whatever genocide that's taking place. But we have an
opportunity now to lead and make sure that there is a
deterrence in the actions that they are taking as our partners.
Ms. Sherman. Congresswomen, I agree. The importance that we
stand up for every religion, every ethnicity, every race, every
quality of diversity in this world and certainly in our own
country. We are not perfect either. I stand up for the rights
of minorities and difference here in this country. And we have
to do so around the world.
Ms. Omar. I do hope we make a practice of standing up, not
just to our adversaries but to our allies as well.
Ms. Sherman. Absolutely, absolutely.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. I recognize Representative
Meuser of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much,
Deputy Secretary Sherman, for being with us. Deputy Secretary,
has the Biden Administration learned from this crisis that what
many do describe radical Green New Deal policies and basically
an assault on domestic energy, have created dangerous
vulnerabilities for transatlantic security.
Ms. Sherman. I'm not sure what you're referring to,
Congressman.
Mr. Meuser. The weakening of our national security and our
economy through assault basically on our domestic energy policy
which is, in the end, causing us to purchase from Russia. You
really do not know what I mean, Deputy Secretary?
Ms. Sherman. I understand what you're saying. I think our
oil importation from Russia is about one--it's a very small
percentage of our----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Ms. Sherman. But to your point, I think that the Europeans
would say to you that one of the things they have learned is
that their reliance on Russian oil and gas made the vulnerable.
And I think they would say to you that it proves the point that
we have to look at renewable sources of energy.
It's not that oil and gas aren't going to continue to be
important for some years to come. It is absolutely true there
will be a transition. But it is also absolutely true that if we
want a planet for our grandchildren----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. You have to have renewables and
move in that direction.
Mr. Meuser. That's fine. So the Administration will support
U.S. fuel industries and LNG exports that will enable U.S.
energy independence. Is that something that----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Ms. Sherman. We already have.
Mr. Meuser. We already have? OK.
Ms. Sherman. Sure. We already have.
Mr. Meuser. Madam Secretary, look at the price of gasoline.
Look at the depletion. We're well over a million barrels a day
less. That's inaccurate. No data supports the comment you just
made. We're still purchasing oil from Russia as we speak.
Ms. Sherman. The issues that we face in terms of the price
of gasoline is multi-faceted. And----
(Simultaneous speaking.)
Mr. Meuser. Not really. If we were energy independent, it
would've stayed very, very stable. See, if you want to
complicate the issue, that's one thing. But if we want to
simplify it, because it's such a catastrophe for most American
families, we can do that too. Energy independence with a
transition toward green new energies and renewables is a
reasonable, economically feasible plan. But the radical
policies that have taken place, OK, have----
Ms. Sherman. What has been----
Mr. Meuser [continuing]. Changed.
Ms. Sherman. What has been radical, Congressman?
Mr. Meuser. We have hundreds of thousands of less barrels
being produced locally. There's an assault on the financial
community based upon any involvement they had with the oil
industry. There's no permits being issued.
Pipelines are not something that's being passed. I'm not
going to go through it all. But everything I just stated is
completely factual.
You know what? I did not expect that. I thought there would
be some reasonableness to the realities of our economy and our
national security. But I guess I'm not going to receive that.
Can I ask you this? The Biden Administration promised--you
know what? I'm just going to yield back. I'm going to yield the
reminder of my time to Representative Kim. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you, Mr. Meuser, for
yielding. I'll switch gears just a little bit. And I want to
thank you, Madam Secretary, for committing earlier to appoint a
special envoy on North Korea human rights issues.
However, I heard the same thing from Secretary Blinken a
year ago in this very hearing in the seat that you are sitting.
And since then, we have seen zero progress on an appointment
since then. So I know you've spun this earlier, but I would
like to hear from you. Will it be the end of this year? Could
we get a firm commitment on this?
Ms. Sherman. I cannot give you a time table today because
we want to make sure we find the right person, Congresswomen.
And we are----
Mrs. Kim of California. I think we're hearing the same
thing from----
Ms. Sherman. I appreciate it. I'll try to get you a more
specific answer.
Mrs. Kim of California. Sure. All right. Well, I just want
to conclude by saying that the North Korea--we understand the
North Korean people are suffering enough. And if we are
actually serious about addressing the human rights abuses,
globally, we need to follow through with an action. And I hope
that both parties in Congress, Democrats and Republicans alike,
we agree. The Administration needs to make this a priority and
appoint someone in the immediate future, hopefully soon. Thank
you.
Ms. Sherman. I understand your point completely. And I
think the horrifying situation for the people in North Korea
deserve that.
Mrs. Kim of California. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. Just a note, U.S.
oil imports from Russia significantly increased between 2016
and 2020. So I assume there was a radical Green New Deal attack
on U.S. oil production during those years. I now yield to
Representative Abigail Spanberger of Virginia for 5 minutes.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
want to thank you for being here today. It's just a followup to
one of my colleagues asking a question.
Is it correct--and I will give you the source. I'm on the
U.S. Energy Information website that's eia.gov for anyone
following along at home. The U.S. total annual crude oil
exports have increased every year since 2010 and reached a
record high in 2020.
I know this isn't within your portfolio. But is there any
reason to think that these statistics are incorrect?
Ms. Sherman. No. And in fact, Congresswomen, one of my
colleagues just reminded me. We're producing more oil
domestically now than any other country. And as I think
everyone knows, we now are releasing a million barrels a day
from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve which is unprecedented and
have mobilized the rest of the world to follow suit.
Ms. Spanberger. And one more thing, again, outside of your
normal purview, Madam Deputy Secretary. But the U.S. crude oil
imports fell to about 5.88 million in 2020. So U.S. oil imports
feel in the year 2020. Also, any reason to doubt the figures
from this----
Ms. Sherman. No.
Ms. Spanberger [continuing]. Site? And also notably, the
United States was a total net energy exporter in both 2019 and
2020.
Ms. Sherman. Sounds correct to me.
Ms. Spanberger. Fantastic. And Mr. Chairman, I'll want to
supply some of this documentation for the record.
[The information offered by Ms. Spanberger follows:]

The information was not provided for final printing.

Ms. Spanberger. Madam Deputy Secretary, thank you so much
for being here. I have some questions about supply chains and
semiconductors. Certainly the semiconductor supply chain will
be critical to U.S. and economic global security for decades to
come.
We know that China is currently trying to expand and has
been for some time, control over parts of that supply chain by
taking control of, among other things, critical minerals. And
we also know that some of our key partners are important nodes
in the supply chain, be it Taiwan, South Korea, Japan.
So are we as a country prepared if there's some
geopolitical instability within the Indo-Pacific that could
disrupt this supply chain, create shortages, or make other
challenges--create challenges within these nodes? And are we
activity developing contingency plans to prepare for such a
potential risk?
Ms. Sherman. Thank you for raising that. The supply chain
is one of the critical nodes of the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework. And quite obviously, semiconductors which are so
critical to so much of what we do in the world and our future
is very much a part of that and the critical minerals that are
the inputs for that as well.
Our Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, Energy Affairs,
Jose Fernandez has this as his highest priority. We are working
very closely with Japan, South Korea, with Taiwan to look at
this issue. And we certainly have seen American manufacturers
rethink their own approach to semiconductors and manufacturing
of semiconductors and making sure that we have access to the
critical minerals as necessary.
Ms. Spanberger. Wonderful. And totally switching gears,
thank you for your answers on that. We have a lot of people--
and I know some of my colleagues have already touched on it--
make consistent comparisons or parallels between the Russian
invasion of Ukraine and risks to Taiwan from the People's
Republic of China.
So I want to just pull us back from this discussion and say
generally speaking, do you think these two situations are
analogous? Making these comparisons, are there factors we
should be considering that present differences? And are there
any risks from potentially putting these two potential
conflicts in the same bucket?
Ms. Sherman. So I think each situation in national security
and foreign policy is sui generis. Everything is different.
Context is different. Time is different, where the world is at
that point, what the geopolitics are.
So they're each sui generis. At the same time, we hope--and
I said this earlier today--that the PRC gets some lessons
learned out of this. I think that many people in the world were
surprised at the strength of our alliances and partnerships.
I think that Putin fully expected that NATO would fall
apart, that the European Union would be divided. And instead,
what Putin has gotten is a strengthened NATO, a strengthened
alliance, a stronger EU taking unprecedented action that they
have never taken before. The EU set aside money to help
countries pay for weapons to be sent to Ukraine. They've never
done that before.
We've had countries around the world change what they do.
Japan has changed what it has normally done, New Zealand.
Switzerland who has always been neutral, always, became non-
neutral in the circumstances by calling out Russia.
So I hope there's some lessons learned that sanctions bite,
that we will keep them coming, that there will be consequences
for actions, that force is not the answer. Force is not the
answer, and that the international rules-based order matters.
And we're going to stand up for it.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you. So we're going to do
two more rounds, 5 minutes. Deputy Secretary Sherman has been
very generous with her time, not just today but in repeatedly
coming back to us. And I want to encourage you to keep on doing
that by keeping our commitments.
So we're going to go to Representative Pfluger and then
Representative Houlahan and cut it off there. And I apologize
to members who did not get a chance to ask if there are any
still left in the queue. So Representative Pfluger for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Deputy Secretary,
thank you for being here. Before I start with my questions,
please pass my sincere gratitude to President Biden for meeting
with Paula and Joey Reed last week for 40 minutes. It's
incredibly important that we get him home. He has tuberculosis.
He's coughing up blood every minute. Vladimir Putin knows this.
We need to bring him home. We will support the Administration
in this.
Ms. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Pfluger. Last week, I introduced H.R. 7139 which is
Removing Arms from Terrorists Through Sanctions Act. This
legislation would codify the previous Administration's
executive order which basically implemented sanctions designed
to prohibit rogue States from transferring weapons to Iran.
Defense officials have recently testified to Congress that
China wants to sell arms to Iran. And under the sunsets of the
2015 deal, the U.N. arms embargo has expired as of October
2020. So in response to the executive orders, my bill would
codify that executive order from the previous Administration to
threaten the second sanctions on China and any firms that were
intending to transfer arms to Iran.
So can you assure us that executive order will be kept in
place as part of any deal that you're working?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, we take a look at every piece of
legislation. We certainly share your interest in there not be
technology transferred and weapons transferred to Iran that in
fact can be used against our interests. And so we'll take a
close look at that.
Mr. Pfluger. Can you assure us that it will be kept in
place?
Ms. Sherman. I cannot assure you because----
Mr. Pfluger. You are the expert.
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. I need to look at the exact
language.
Mr. Pfluger. You are the expert on the Iranian nuclear
deal, yes?
Ms. Sherman. I do not know. I certainly----
Mr. Pfluger. You've been part of this for seven or 8 years.
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. Worked on the Iran nuclear deal.
That's correct.
Mr. Pfluger. Right. I think everyone in the country knows
that you orchestrated the 2015 deal and now we're part of the
orchestration of this deal. Can you assure us that this
executive order will remain in place?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I need to look at the executive
order. I need to look at your language.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Chairman, I would respectfully urge this
committee to bring this forward. I mean, if we're serious about
deterring Iran and therefore any rogue actors like China, we
would also consider this. I mean, it's very disappointing that
you do not know what the language is of that.
And I have serious questions about this deal in general. I
think we're in glove safe land right now and extremely
disappointing that you're not able to comment on that deal and
on the efficacy of whether or not that executive order mean
within the deal that you are negotiating.
Shifting gears, the energy security and given the
importance of the Indo-Pacific and especially knowing what our
national security strategy says, what can you tell me about
what the strategy is for the Administration to ensure that
products like LNG get to our partners and allies?
Ms. Sherman. I think it's very important that we help our
partners and allies through this energy crisis. The President
as I just noted a moment ago has done an unprecedented release
from the strategic petroleum reserve and gotten countries all
over the world to match our efforts so that we can help
consumers everywhere and particularly in our own country, of
course, to lower these gas prices. So I think this is something
we all are working on collectively in a bipartisan fashion.
It's quite critical.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you believe that the oil and gas executives
are price gouging Americans?
Ms. Sherman. Congressman, I'm not knowledgeable enough to
make that determination.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, your comments on the SPR indicate that
you are.
Ms. Sherman. I am not an expert in this arena.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. Well, that's good to know. We've had a lot
of discussions on energy security in this hearing. And across
the hall, there's another hearing where that's being suggested.
Just theoretically, are we more secure today than we were 2
years ago, this country, under the policies that have been
implemented?
Ms. Sherman. I obviously believe, Congressman, that
President Biden is doing everything he possibly can and
succeeding in ensuring the security of the United States of
America. That's my solemn obligation. That's his solemn
obligation as the President of the United States. And he takes
it as a solemn obligation. You should know him well enough to
know that when he took that oath of office to secure our
country, he took it seriously.
Mr. Pfluger. I hope that you will consider the text of the
previous Administration's executive order that does deter
China, that does deter those types of actions from transferring
weapons into the hands of the largest State sponsor of terror,
one who actually fired weapons onto or nearby our own
facilities in Erbil, Iraq.
Ms. Sherman. I share your concerns, Congressman, and I will
look at your legislation.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Chair recognizes Representative
Houlahan, Pennsylvania.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Madam
Under Secretary Sherman for this conversation. I very much
appreciate your testimony, and I appreciate that you noted in
that testimony the impact that Russia's invasion of Ukraine is
having and could potentially have on the Indo-Pacific region.
We know that China violates Taiwan's airspace and
territorial waters regularly, not to mention the repressive
tactic in Tibet and the atrocities that they're committing
against the Uyghurs and Xinjiang. I do not believe that
Russia's inability to easily dominate Ukraine will necessarily
indicate to China that continuing their destabilization efforts
is a bad idea.
I also do not think frankly that the United States has done
nearly enough to help support Ukraine in their effects to repel
the Russian incursion. And I'm afraid that if China does indeed
invade Taiwan in the future that we will be having these exact
same conversations and the exact same delaying discussions
about it and when to provide aid or send weapons to the people
of Taiwan as they suffer as well.
Can you please speak to what actions the United States is
currently taking or perhaps should be taking to support Taiwan
and to make sure that an invasion is an unappealing as possible
to China?
Ms. Sherman. Congresswomen, we share your concerns that
China not consider taking Taiwan by force, that there would
be--and we have said they know that there will be consequences
for their back-filling Russia and what is happening in Ukraine
by giving them any kind of material support. And we have been
quite clear publicly that we believe that it is I wrong and
that there will be a reaction if the PRC tries to take Taiwan
by force.
United States sold more than 30 billion dollars' worth of
arms to Taiwan since 2009. We have more than 400 foreign
military cell cases in implementation. Since 2017, we've
authorized with your support 18 billion dollars in foreign
military sales to Taiwan.
In addition, direct commercial sales authorizations for end
use by the Taiwan authority during this period totaled over 2.3
billion dollars. The Departments of State and Defense are
looking at the entire defense trade enterprise to see where
efficiencies can be made and get those articles to them more
quickly. And we've talked today about ensuring those timelines
speed up.
We've also had very direct discussion about what kind of
capabilities Taiwan needs. They're known as asymmetric
approaches. The President has been very thoughtful about this.
He sent a delegation to Taiwan of former senior U.S. security
officials led by the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen.
The selection of those individuals sent an important signal
about the bipartisan U.S. commitment. It was quite a bipartisan
delegation. And our commitment to Taiwan is democracy and
demonstrates that our commitment to Taiwan remains rock solid.
We'll continue to support Taiwan with training and encourage an
innovative and asymmetric security posture to help them in
their self defense.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I guess what I would want to
emphasize is that we could've probably had similar
conversations about Ukraine a while ago and felt as though we
were doing everything we could then as well. And we clearly
have not been--we now know that's not the case.
And so there's just so many parallels and analogous
situations here that we can learn from. And there are really
strong teaching moments that we should be experiencing right
now. And so I just really do not want to see us being here in
this situation on the other side of the globe.
With my remaining minute, you also mentioned in your
testimony that you've expressed concerns to the PRC about their
growing strategic alignment with Russia. Could you share to the
degree that you're able to their reaction and what is the plan
to continue to discouraging them from aligning further with
Russia?
Ms. Sherman. The President was very direct with Xi Jinping,
Jake Sullivan with Yang Jiechi, the Secretary with Wang Yi, I
with the Ambassador here that there would be consequences if
they provided material support. We now have Ambassador Nick
Burns out of quarantine. As our Ambassador to the PRC, he is
delivering this message as well.
We are very focused on making sure that they understand
what choices they're making here. And for a country that has
long said that they believe in sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the right of countries to choose their political
system and their own foreign policy, we hope they will apply
that here as well.
I think we've all seen indications that they are conflicted
somewhat. That's not to say they do not see Russia as a
partner. I'm not naive. They do.
But they've also been public to say it is not an alliance.
And they certainly--I think even in the meeting the other day--
were horrified by what happened in Bucha. Who could not have
been by seeing that video?
So I think this is an ongoing circumstance and
relationship. And we're going to have to keep working at it.
Thank you for your question.
Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I'll just say in conclusion, thinking about
Mr. Pfluger's question to you, are we safer?
And it occurs to me that this contest that we're in with
Russia over Ukraine did not begin in 2022. You could argue it
began in 2014. The contest between the democratic and
authoritarian world was underway in Syria 10 years ago, in Hong
Kong, in the South China Sea.
We have not been safe for a very long time. But we are
standing upright now with our allies, leading our allies, and
demonstrating that without the United States, there would be
very little hope for democracy in the world. So I'm very glad
we did not listen to those who are saying we should pull out of
NATO, we should pull our troops out of Asia, South Korea, and
Japan, that we should pull our troops out of Europe. And that
was a very, very close call.
So thank you so much for your leadership, Secretary
Blinken, and the President. Look forward to our next
opportunity to have these discussions with you.
And the hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:06 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
