- IMPROVING ACCESS TO QUALITY PUBLIC EDUCATION IN AFRICA

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING ACCESS TO QUALITY PUBLIC EDUCATION IN AFRICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
AND GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 8, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-103

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,

or http://www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-696 PDF            WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida          STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
KAREN BASS, California               SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts       DARRELL ISSA, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California                 LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas                ANN WAGNER, Missouri
DINA TITUS, Nevada                   BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California                 BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             KEN BUCK, Colorado
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                MARK GREEN, Tennessee
COLIN ALLRED, Texas                  ANDY BARR, Kentucky
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan                 GREG STEUBE, Florida
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia         DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           PETER MEIJER, Michigan
ANDY KIM, New Jersey                 NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
SARA JACOBS, California              RONNY JACKSON, Texas
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina        YOUNG KIM, California
JIM COSTA, California                MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida
JUAN VARGAS, California              JOE WILSON, South Carolina
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and Global Human Rights

KAREN BASS, California, Chair

DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             CHRISTOPHER SMITH, New Jersey,
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota                    Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 DARRELL ISSA, California
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             GREG STEUBE, Florida
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey           DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
SARA JACOBS, California              YOUNG KIM, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island        RONNY JACKSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Sengeh, The Honorable David, Minister of Basic and Senior
Secondary Education, Office of the President, Sierra Leone.....     7
Winthrop, Dr. Rebecca, Senior Fellow and Co-Director, Center for
Universal Education, The Brookings Institution.................    17
Sherif, Yasmine, Director, Education Cannot Wait.................    27
Kaufman, Robert, Executive Director, Abaarso Network.............    36

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    66
Hearing Minutes..................................................    67
Hearing Attendance...............................................    68

OPENING STATEMENT FROM CHAIRMAN BASS

Opening statement from Chairman Bass.............................    69

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Additional materials submitted for the record....................    75

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    85

IMPROVING ACCESS TO QUALITY PUBLIC EDUCATION IN AFRICA

Tuesday, February 8, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and Global
Human Rights,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Karen Bass [chairwoman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Ms. Bass. The Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and
Global Human Rights will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any point, and all members will
have 5 days to submit statements, extraneous material, and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
To insert something into the record, please have your staff
email the previously mentioned address or contact full
committee staff.
As a reminder to members, please keep your video function
on at all times, even when you're not recognized by the chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves, and
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
Consistent with H. Res. 965 and the accompanying
regulations, staff will only mute members and witnesses as
appropriate when they are not under recognition to eliminate
background noise.
I see that we have a quorum and I will now recognize myself
for opening remarks.
Pursuant to notice, we are holding a hearing on improving
access to quality public education in Africa to discuss the
ways in which the United States can help enhance the delivery
of quality education on the continent.
To lead that conversation, I want to thank our witnesses
for being here today: the Honorable David Sengeh, minister of
basic and senior secondary education for the Office of the
President in Sierra Leone; Dr. Rebecca Winthrop, senior fellow
and co-director for the Brookings Institution in the Center for
Universal Education; Ms. Yasmine Sherif, director of Education
Cannot Wait; and Mr. Robert Kaufman, executive director of the
Abaarso Network.
I welcome your testimony and the discussion surrounding it.
I look forward to hearing from our experts to describe the ways
in which the U.S. can strengthen basic education systems in
Africa and what we can do to increase access to quality
schooling be it public or private.
Across the continent to varying degrees the pre-primary,
primary, middle, and secondary education system, what we in the
United States would generally refer to as pre-K to 12, or basic
education, requires support.
The African Union's Continental Strategy for Africa from
2016 to 2025 reports progress in expanding access to primary
education across Africa from 59 to 79 percent between 1999 and
2012.
However, these gains could be increased should there be
greater policy emphasis and investment in target areas such as
pre-primary education, educating girls and children with
disabilities, increasing funding for infrastructure and
educators.
These types of strategies are important and must be
specific to local context. But the fundamental goal remains the
same--get all children to school early, develop solutions to
coherently link the stages of basic education to ensure they
acquire a strong foundation without interruption.
It is disheartening to hear that by the time children reach
primary school age an estimated 34 million of them go
unenrolled. The trend continues and is even greater for middle
and secondary school-aged children, respectively.
The COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated these
challenges through the closure of schools, pushing hundreds of
millions of students out of school since the beginning of the
pandemic.
I feel it is important for us to do more to create policy
and investment opportunities on the continent to improve access
to education.
This Congress, I plan on introducing a bill that focuses on
promoting access to inclusive, uninterrupted quality pre-
primary and secondary education in Africa, reauthorizing the
Reinforcing Education Accountability Act, also known as the
READ Act.
I want to prioritize the importance of education at a young
age that goes uninterrupted because these children will grow to
contribute to the expanding and growing economies on the
continent, which will in turn strengthen the continent's
capacity for self-reliance.
In recent discussions with USAID education experts, I
learned that under the auspices of the READ Act the United
States seeks to work within local contexts to improve quality
and expand access to education across the continent.
Beyond its traditional engagement, USAID is expanding
outreach to include nongovernmental education providers through
new financing approaches. Again, the goal is to improve the
quality of education and to reach more children as early as
possible and have them finish basic levels.
These fresh ideas are needed and must be realized to meet
the mutually beneficial goals of the U.S. and Africa. Further,
it must be a priority for U.S. national security interests to
educate on the importance of democratic principles and free
market economies.
Hopefully, young people will be taught about democracy, the
rule of law, free speech, freedom of the press and assembly,
and have the hope of real prospects of employment that these
ideals provide and protect.
Finally, children who have access to quality education go
on to partake in opportunities for young professionals through
programs such as the Young African Leaders Initiative, which
includes the Mandela Washington Fellowship that I introduced
and passed in the House--the YALI Act--to strengthen young
leaders' knowledge and skills
[inaudible].
I now recognize the ranking member for the purpose of
making his opening Statement.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, and I want to thank my good
friend and colleague, Chairwoman Karen Bass, for convening
today's very important hearing on improving access to quality
public education in Africa.
I know that this is a topic that she is passionate about,
and over the years, she has repeatedly shown her deep concern
for Africa's youth, who are, indeed, Africa's future.
This has been shown by her efforts while here in Congress
as, first, ranking member and then chair of the Africa
Subcommittee to solidify and strengthen the Young African
Leaders Initiative, or YALI.
It is also demonstrated by her convening today's hearing on
improving access to quality public education.
I think one of the concerns, which we have shared over the
years, is the compelling need for the State sector throughout
Africa to provide for the people, be it in the area of health,
education, or simply protection and good governance.
That's why reviewing successes and what works is important.
We also need to realize that in many countries, a robust public
education system is, at this point, aspirational and that has
to change.
Indeed, if you go to a place such as the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo, which is very remote from the capital of
Kinsasha--and I know I've been there twice--we see a minimal
State presence in education as well as in healthcare.
Thus, there is a role for the private education as well,
and, in particular, faith-based schools. This is especially
true in Africa, which, as a witness at one of our hearings a
few years ago put it, is a faith-based continent.
Indeed, there's probably no institution more active at the
grassroots level of communities throughout Sub-Saharan Africa
than the churches and variously affiliated schools, be they
Christian or Muslim, and in all education efforts, we need to
place the interests of children, their parents, and families,
as paramount.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights envisions a
system of free education, quote, ``directed to the full
development of the human personality, and to the strengthening
of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.''
Wisely, the Universal Declaration also proclaims that,
quote, ``Parents shall have a prior right to choose the kind of
education that should be given to their children,'' closed
quote.
With these words from the great inspirational and
aspirational document, I look forward to this hearing, and
again, I thank my good friend for convening it.
And I yield back.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much. I appreciate your comments.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses for today's
hearing.
First, we have the Honorable David Sengeh. He's the
Minister of Basic and Senior Secondary Education and the Chief
Innovation Officer for the government of Sierra Leone. He also
serves as the chair of the advisory board of UNESCO's Global
Education Monitoring Report, board member of the Global
Partnership for Education, and a member of the High Level
Steering Committee for Sustainable Development Goal Number
Four, which is a quality education.
Next, we have Dr. Rebecca Winthrop. She is a senior fellow
and co-director of the Center for Universal Education at the
Brookings Institution.
Her research focuses on education globally, with special
attention to the skills young people need to thrive in work,
life, and as constructive citizens. She was educated at
Columbia University Teachers College, Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs, and Swarthmore
College.
Our third witness is Ms. Yasmine Sherif. She is the
Director of Education Cannot Wait, a global fund for education
emergencies and protracted crisis as established by the World
Humanitarian Summit.
A lawyer specialized in international humanitarian law and
human rights law, she has 30 years of experience with the U.N.
and international NGO's. She has served in some of the most
crisis-affected countries on the globe.
I would now like--oh, I'm sorry.
And our final witness is Mr. Robert Kaufman. Mr. Kaufman
has been a co-founder, director, and senior representative for
humanitarian and education institutions for two decades.
He began his career as a grant-funded researcher in West
Africa working for Save the Children and the American Red Cross
in various positions on four continents.
We appreciate all of you being here today and look forward
to your testimony. Your written statements will appear in the
hearing record, and under Committee Rule No. 6, each witness
should limit your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of
your written Statement, and I believe there will be a clock
that you will see on the screen when your 5 minutes is up.
And with that, I would like to welcome our first guests
again--our first witness, Dr. David Sengeh.

STATEMENT OF DAVID SENGEH, MINISTER OF BASIC AND SENIOR
SECONDARY EDUCATION, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SIERRA LEONE

Mr. Sengeh. Chair Bass, Ranking Member Smith, and other
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to this important hearing on improving access to
quality public education in Africa.
While I must admit it is a tough task to speak on behalf of
the entire African continent, I do also believe that
investments in quality public education is the closest thing we
have to a silver bullet that solves the world's intractable
problems.
If we achieve this, we will lay the foundation for gender
equality, climate action, social inclusion, and economic
growth.
In Sierra Leone, upon assuming office in 2018, His
Excellency President Julius Maada Bio announced the free
quality school education program for all children in public
schools.
Three years in, we have simultaneously improved access,
quality, and gender equity, and all this is against the
backdrop of COVID related school closures.
On access, between 2018 and 2020, we added more than 700,00
new learners to our schools. We have achieved while attending
gender parity and enrollments at nearly all levels.
We have more girls than boys in primary and secondary
schools, and we're actively working to improve transition of
girls into senior secondary and tertiary at higher
institutions.
On quality, we now have more students succeeding in passing
the National Transition exams than at any point in our
country's history. For junior secondary school, we were able to
improve the pass rates from 72 percent to 79 percent in 3
years, while adding more than 40,000 students to the
examination roster.
Although hard, we're seeing that this is possible to
achieve quality while expanding access. We have also made
significant headway on our early grade reading and math
assessments known as EGRA and EGMA.
I'm proud to say that across nearly all reading and math
tasks, we have cut the percentage of students who score zero in
half since the last assessments in 2014.
How did Sierra Leone get there? In a word, we invested. We
pay the full bill for school fees in public schools and pay the
examination fees for nearly all students.
Moreover, we have hired more than 12,000 teachers,
increased all teacher salaries by 30 percent, and doubled down
on continuous professional development.
In addition, we invested in new teaching and learning
materials and school feeding programs. We believe that children
must have access to nutritious meals for learning and their
holistic development.
We have created a new set of curricula relevant for the
21st century at all school levels.
Furthermore, we innovated. For example, we introduced
digital SMS-based learning tools including a free SMS
dictionary where students can now check their exam results and
school placements with their mobile phones instead of waiting
for the paper results to travel to their schools. Our digital
tools have been used millions of times.
Just recently, we introduced the Learning Passport, which
gives students access to past exam papers. On the first day, it
was downloaded 4,000 times.
We also launched the Education Innovation Challenge where
service providers support primary schools to generate evidence
on how learning can even further improve. This year we'll scale
the concept to cover more than 100,000 children.
Our goal is clear. We should have impacts and learn through
the process of achieving that. We have laid the policy
groundwork for education to improve on all fronts.
Our radical inclusion policy ensures the inclusion of
girls, especially pregnant ones, disabled learners, learners
from remote areas, and learners from impoverished backgrounds
in our educational system.
We have already overturned the 2010 ban on pregnant girls
attending school, and we're only getting started. This year,
we'll update the Education Act of 2004 to match our
aspirations.
Also, we're spending 22 percent of our national budget on
education. We have made hard choices to protect this budget,
but we are confident that Sierra Leone will reap the rewards
for decades to come.
In the year of COVID-19, Sierra Leone is one of the few
countries who have expanded its education budget. This has been
a journey, but we are very far from finished. So how can the
United States help accelerate progress?
I serve as board member on GPE and I believe that it is the
best vehicle for pooling international efforts to accelerate
progress toward our common educational goals.
The U.S. has supported the GPE generously over the years.
But if the distinguished members will forgive me for the
observation, these contributions are surpassed by accumulated
contributions from countries such as Denmark, whose populations
are smaller than the State of Maryland.
In short, the GPE is the best place to start, and I believe
the United States can do more.
On the personal note, I studied in the United States for 10
years. I know that when the United States supports bold goals
alongside the international community there is nothing that can
stop us.
To underscore my point, I think I need only mentioned
PEPFAR to recall the United States' massive investment in
saving millions of lives and helping African countries control
the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
This kind of investment is now needed in quality public
education. Sierra Leone will be honored to continue our
partnership with you on the journey to improving access to
quality public education.
Together, nothing can stop us. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sengeh follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bass. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Dr. Rebecca Winthrop?

STATEMENT OF DR. REBECCA WINTHROP, SENIOR FELLOW AND CO-
DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR UNIVERSAL EDUCATION, THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION

Dr. Winthrop. Hello. Thank you very much for having me,
Representative Bass, Representative Omar, Representative Smith,
and the distinguished members of the committee. It's a pleasure
to be here.
I am sharing my perspectives from my personal experience,
both as a practitioner on the continent for some years and also
in our current work at the Center for Universal Education.
We work with about 35 African partners across 21 countries,
including a host of about 12 fellows on girls education. We
have a girls education fellowship every year who, who are based
in Sub-Saharan Africa.
I am really, really thrilled that you're focused on this.
It is such an important issue for all the reasons you said but,
you know, it's important for Africa but it's important for the
whole globe.
Africa is the youngest continent in the world. Sixty
percent of the population is below the age of 25, and by 2050,
it'll be home to about 70 percent of the world's working age
population. It is, literally, going to be the global talent
pool for everybody, and so we really do need to put education
at the center.
In terms of what the United States can do, in 2010, I wrote
a piece when I came to Brookings initially called ``Punching
Below its Weight: The U.S. Government's Approach to Education
in the Developing World,'' and the reason I came to that
assessment was because I found that there were 13 different
agencies working on education and development with very little
coordination and synergy, and the sum of the parts, you know,
did not make for a greater impact.
I am really pleased that this is beginning to change. With
the U.S. Government strategy on international and basic
education, which came to being in 2019 and is coming up in
2023, this is really the first time this whole of government
approach has been taken.
I urge the committee to make sure this is renewed. We're
seeing the benefits already. And I would put forward the
recommendation to renew this with four main additional focus
areas. I have four recommendations.
The first one is, really, around harnessing the innovative
capacity of African communities. One of the things that I note
and a lot of our partners talk about is that anytime you get in
a discourse about foreign aid or international development
there's lots of problems, which there are, but it really
obscures all the innovation and creativity and ingenuity on the
ground that African communities are using to solve their
problems every day.
I've done a global study of education innovation around the
world and found a very robust education innovation sector on
the continent. And I would--we hear a lot from our partners
about U.S. Government strategies funding that.
So, bilaterally, I would continue the small steps that the
basic education strategy has started of funding more local
partners and really flip it--really put African innovators and
actors at the center and bring the international community into
support them rather than the other way round.
And second, I agree wholeheartedly with Minister Sengeh.
Increasing, multilaterally, support for GPE would be very
important.
The entire approach puts African governments at the center
and, at the moment, the U.S. gives about $125 million, which
is--annually, which is a far cry from the $1.5 billion annually
it gets to the Global Fund for Health. So that's recommendation
one.
Recommendation two is to keep focusing on enriched teaching
and learning experiences around foundational literacy and
numeracy. This is an area the U.S. Government has really led
on. It is no time to take your eye off the prize.
Eighteen percent of children and youth--only 18 percent
master basic foundational literacy and numeracy. And in stable,
you know, contexts, working to train teachers on differentiated
instruction and more interactive pedagogies and scaling that
approach that has shown to be effective is great.
The U.S. Government should do more, though, to think about
flexible approaches like catch-up classes and tablet-based
learning that have been shown to work without having a
consistent teacher for all the kids, whether it be COVID or
conflict or climate impacts, that aren't able to readily access
stable education and learning.
Additionally, family engagement and really supporting
communities to support their kids learning has shown to be
highly cost effective, and I would encourage the U.S.
Government to invest more there.
My third recommendation is around investing in models of
learning to prepare youth for the work force. There are
estimates that there's about $175 billion needed in Sub-Saharan
Africa to educate all kids in secondary education but only $25
billion currently is being invested.
This is a big area wide open. There's not one massive
global--you know, sort of global bilateral leading on it. The
U.S. could really harness its whole of government approach and
bring in the public-private partnerships that are needed to
actually revolutionize what secondary education looks like on
the continent.
There's huge demands from people like Minister Sengeh and
others with very large youth populations that have only been
exacerbated by COVID, and the U.S. Government could play a lead
role.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Dr. Winthrop.
Dr. Winthrop. My fourth and last recommendation is really
around leading on system transformation for climate change.
This is an area that we are just in the education sector
beginning to grapple with. Only 25 percent of countries around
the world even mention children's youth education in their
national climate plans.
Ms. Bass. Excuse me. Let me interrupt.
Dr. Winthrop. Yes?
Ms. Bass. Your time is up but you will get additional time
in Q&A.
Dr. Winthrop. OK. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Winthrop follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bass. Let me now introduce Ms. Yasmine Sherif.

STATEMENT OF YASMINE SHERIF, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION CANNOT WAIT

Ms. Sherif. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, and I
will really do my best to stick to the time. I have very long
talking points here in testimony.
Distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
invitation to testify on improving access to quality education
in Africa and the United States' leadership is critically
important and we really appreciate the investments made by you.
So as I was introduced, I'm the director of Education
Cannot Wait, which is the world's first global fund for
education in emergencies and protracted crisis, the very global
fund that is hosted by the United Nations, and we were founded
and became operational in 2017.
The United States is a key donor to Education Cannot Wait
and has pledged a total at $82.3 million and is, therefore,
also one of our largest contributors, and these have been very
timely contributions, especially in our cooperation with the
United States in Africa where we worked in the Sahel and many
other countries and the neighboring countries.
Now, for my testimony I draw on over 30 years of working
with the United Nations in crisis countries, including in
Africa, such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, and
have led many missions to the Sahel and Sub-Saharan Africa.
When you go to the Sub-Saharan Africa, you see that of all
the ordinances we have around the globe when it comes to the
education sector, that is the most underfunded and the most, I
will say, lacking the most basic infrastructure for quality
education. They are truly those left behind.
Now, there are--the importance of education, we all
understand that. If we do not provide young children and youth
in Africa with education, not only is it a legal or a moral
responsibility, but it's a game changer that will eventually
have impact not only the African continent but all of us.
Here we speak about an estimated in total globally 128
million refugees and displaced populations in crisis of whom
the majority are in Africa. So just imagine they not receive a
quality education today how that will impact not only the
region but the rest of the world in the near future.
So in Africa, especially, we also have to focus on girls'
education and the benefits of investing in girls because that's
also a benefit for the family and for the communities. And it's
more about--it's not just about getting girls into school, but
also making sure that they have a safe school environment to go
to.
Just look at Nigeria and the Boko Haram where girls are
being kidnapped going to school. So it's safety. It's about
curriculum that are gender sensitized so that these young girls
learn they can be empowered educated leaders, and it also is
about nutrition, health. No child, no girl, can go to school on
a hungry stomach.
Now, if you look at the situation across Africa, there have
been, of course, achievements over the past 20 years. But we
also know that there's a huge gap that remains.
In year 2000, almost a third of the primary school-aged
children were out of school. Now, for 2019, this had decreased
to 17 percent.
So in 19 years, we saw a decrease because investments were
made and basic education were made compulsory across Africa. So
this--indeed, progress has been made.
However, despite this progress, Africa continues to face
the highest rate of out of school children and adolescents. The
Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest rates of education exclusion
in Africa.
Over one-fifth of the children between the ages of six to
11 are out of school, followed by one-third of youth between
the ages of about 12 to 14, and according to data from UNESCO's
Institute for Statistics, almost 60 percent of school-aged
children between ages 15 and 17 are not in school.
And so we see definitely that situation is going to worsen,
and to achieve Sustainable Development Goal Four, access to a
quality education, again, they are left further behind, and if
we do not achieve that goal, all other sustainable development
goals will fall behind because without an education we cannot
have gender equality. We cannot eradicate poverty, hunger, and
so forth.
So the scale of the challenge is quite remarkable. What is
important for Education Cannot Wait is it's not enough to bring
children and youth back to school. It's also to achieve
learning outcomes where they actually learn something.
We need to make sure that teachers are properly trained. We
make sure that we are not excluding the refugees and that we
take a holistic whole of child approach and that we reach all
girls and adolescents and focus on children with disabilities.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Ms. Sherif. I'm afraid that my time is running out. I can
see that. There's much more in my talking points. But, again, I
thank you very much for inviting Education Cannot Wait, the
Global Fund for Education Emergencies in the United Nations to
provide this testimony.
Thank you very much, and thank you for all the generous
support from the United States of America.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherif follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bass. Thank you very much.
Our final witness is Mr. Robert Kaufman.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT KAUFMAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ABAARSO
NETWORK

Mr. Kaufman. Thank you, Chair Bass, Ranking Member Smith,
and distinguished members of the committee for an opportunity
to testify at this hearing.
My name is Rob Kaufman, and I'm the executive director of
the Abaarso Network. I'm here to share extraordinary stories of
success and lessons we can draw from this experience to improve
access to quality education in Africa.
In 2009, and American social entrepreneur set out to create
a rigorous, inclusive high school that would transform
Somaliland.
Despite the fact that many of our students entered with
little or no English--some had never even been to school
before--they absolutely thrived. In a few short years, our
graduates were earning full scholarships to some of the world's
most elite universities.
There was Mubarak, a nomad who had never been to school
before, who earned a full scholarship to MIT, and Nadira, whose
father was reluctant to send his daughters to school at all,
who very likely became the first woman from Somaliland to get a
full scholarship to an Ivy League school when she was accepted
at Yale.
In the last 8 years, more than 200 Abaarso students have
earned over $37 million in scholarships for schools around the
world.
That's not even the best part of the story. While the
Abaarso model is highly successful, we needed a scalable model
built around local staff and day schools to reach thousands
more. So we created the Kaabe model, the first ever Montessori
primary schools in Somaliland.
Today, there are three Kaabe schools serving over 200
students. In order to staff our Kaabe schools, we created an
all-female residential college called Barwaaqo University that
today offers one degree, a degree in education.
Last year, we had our first graduating class. Sixteen women
graduated and we hired 15 of them. As we continue to grow, many
alumni have returned from abroad to teach or manage our
schools.
In fact, both Barwaaqo and Kaabe included Abaarso graduates
as co-founders. How did Abaarso realize such success in one of
the most fragile and complex settings in the world? Here's a
brief explanation, although definitely not comprehensive.
From the beginning, Abaarso set extremely high
expectations. Students go to class five and a half days a week
and have significantly more learning time than typical schools.
By the time someone graduates from Abaarso, they know
what's at stake: opportunities for scholarship, self-
improvement, and a career, and they have the skills and
confidence to achieve them.
Our founding teams worked with local leaders to ensure that
we honored local customs, like including a mosque on campus and
the establishment of a local board.
The mission of the school--to graduate the leaders of
tomorrow and transform Somaliland--is reinforced every day. We
fully expect Abaarso graduates will be leaders at the highest
levels of public service and commercial enterprise, driving
development, innovation, and inclusion.
The stories of success inspired huge demand. Parents like
Nadira's father, once skeptical about Abaarso, have become some
of our most vocal advocates. Today, we accept less than 3
percent of our applicant pool.
Here are three recommendations to take from our experience
that would help improve access to quality education in Africa.
One, investing in quality with better teachers. More than
computers or any other resource, the teacher is the single
biggest factor in student success. Provide a great teacher and
you can change the trajectory of a child's life.
Two, generate demand by incentivizing success. In many
communities throughout Africa, sending a child to school may
jeopardize a family farm or business. There is often little
sense that it will lead to genuine opportunity.
We have to change the cost benefit analysis so that
families believe the education offered is worth their time and
money. Curricula that are context specific and partnerships
with local employers give students the skills and networks to
be competitive in local markets.
And three, more access. We have to redefine public
education. Government alone will never be able to manage the
supply side of education. We must leverage the impact of--the
interest of impact investors, social entrepreneurs, and others
to mobilize resources.
NonState schools are already ubiquitous in much of Sub-
Saharan Africa. These schools can work in tandem with local
authorities. Influential partners should energize and finance
public systems and support choice and scaling models that work.
In conclusion, Abaarso Network is a rare solution in a
fragile setting, with evidence of success raising learning
outcomes, creating gender equity, and increasing productive
employment.
Abaarso was fortunate to get support from USAID ASHA in
2015. But we first had to prove our success. And since ASHA
only funds secondary and post-secondary schools, we still had
to raise philanthropic dollars for primary schools.
To scale up quality education in Africa, partners must
capitalize on demand for these models and support their growth.
Replicating models that work is in the interest of the
government from the United States. Failure to improve access to
quality education breeds poverty and leaves few options for
young people, which can drive violence and extremism.
When people have tasted a great offering and are hungry for
more, the U.S. should put its full weight behind these programs
and give youth and their families a reason to hope.
As Abaarso has shown, doing show can transform entire
communities.
Thank you, Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kaufman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Mr. Kaufman.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and we
will now question witnesses under the 5-minute rule. But before
we begin, I'll start with questions. Let me ask Erica if you
would come back with a little instruction for members and
witnesses.
Ms. Baganza. Sure. Hello, everyone. So the timer--the
easiest way to see the timer and ensure that you are within the
5-minute time allotment is if you go up to the right hand
corner and click layout. You can click the option of grid. Then
you will be able to see the 5-minute timer.
Or, additionally, you can click the stack option. Hover
over the timer. There is a button with three little dots on it.
Click that and press move to stage. Therefore, the timer will
remain stationary and it'll be within your view.
Hopefully, that is more helpful to everybody.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much, Erica.
I would like to ask my first question to Dr. Winthrop, who
was in the middle of giving us recommendations around the READ
Act and I wanted her to finish. I think she was on
recommendation four.
Dr. Winthrop. Thank you, Representative Bass, and I now see
the timer, which I did not before. So that was helpful.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Winthrop. Yes. Recommendation four was, basically, the
idea that climate change is here and education systems are not
prepared, and we in the education sector have not really put--
globally, put our arms around how--what would a climate smart
education system actually look like.
And this is something that the U.S. Government has started
to do. I think, you know, with the whole of government approach
in the basic ed strategy it could really be a leader in this
space and there's huge need, given what I said before about the
fact that, you know, only 25 percent of countries even mention
education in their climate plans.
Ms. Bass. Let me ask you something, because you were
talking about the innovation on the ground and when--and
talking about the READ Act and the fact that the READ Act funds
educational organizations, it sounded as though you were
emphasizing that we need to fund instead of the massive NGO's
that are U.S.-based or other countries that we need to fund
African organizations. Is that what you were saying earlier?
Dr. Winthrop. That is what I was trying to say, though
perhaps not as clearly as you. The new strategy--yes, go ahead.
Ms. Bass. I have a question to you and to also Dr. Sengeh,
who I'll move to in a quick second because I only have 3
minutes left.
How do we identify those organizations and are there
particular countries that have a number that we should focus
on--a number of strong organizations?
Dr. Winthrop. I think that actually there are lots of
people who could help--who could help the U.S. Government
identify these strong organizations. We have a running list of
several hundred. There's many other organizations that do that.
I would go to Minister Sengeh and his peers. The GPE has an
entire civil society sort of empowerment theme. They could help
identify organizations.
Ms. Bass. OK.
Dr. Winthrop. So I think there's absolutely good ways to do
it.
Ms. Bass. OK. Dr. Sengeh?
Mr. Sengeh. Yes. Yes. Thank you very much.
Ms. Bass. Let me ask you--hold on a second. You talked
about GPE and that the United States needed to support that
more. Are you suggesting that READ Act funding should go to
that? But what about U.S. Government supporting the public
sector of different countries and is there recommendations that
you have there?
Mr. Sengeh. Yes, I do. I mean, I do think, yes, the U.S.
should expand its support to GPE. GPE is the largest fund
dedicated to developing countries and education, and I think
the U.S. should definitely expand its support there.
And in terms of the conversation that you were just having
with Dr. Winthrop, we actually just published a blog on the GPE
website today that talks about an NGO consortium that includes
global international NGO's and local NGO's who are working with
governments to deploy lots of advanced solutions here,
particularly with our response to COVID, and it's quite
interesting to see what we're able to do together.
But other institutions like the MCC--you know, the MCC does
not generally support education. But one of the metrics that
are looked at for seeing whether a country is eligible is
education and girls education and completion levels.
So I think that's also really important, and I will then
say supporting things like MCC, which ultimately supports
infrastructure based on the indicators like school completion,
are all very important and I think that the U.S. Government can
do.
Ms. Bass. You were--you mentioned the U.S. government's
support, and I think you compared it to Denmark--was that
support for GPE or was that support for something--another
program?
Mr. Sengeh. That's--yes, thank you very much, Republican
Bass. Representative Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Sengeh. The U.S. Government, from inception, has paid,
I think, about $550 million, whereas the Norwegian government
has about $800 million cumulative to GPE, and I think that the
U.S. Government can support more in GPE.
And the reason why I stress GPE is not because I'm on the
board for it. It is because I know that Sierra Leone, for
example, has benefited tremendously, and most of our programs,
particularly with early childhood education and primary
education, comes from such multilateral support.
Ms. Bass. OK. Thank you.
And I would now go to the ranking member, Mr. Smith.
Is Mr. Smith with us? If not--because I know he was going
to have to step away. If not, I will go to Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you very much. And Madam Chair, I was
almost ready.
Mr.--no, I am--Mr. Kaufman, how does your organization
tailor the curriculum to training students to reach--to make
sure they receive and ensure that they're prepared for jobs?
In other words, it's very expensive to educate, generally.
If we educate, generally, in Africa where there isn't enough
money, we're, obviously, not going to educate the amount we
need.
So how do you get that focus of education that leads to
specific employment and how do you determine what those
employment opportunities are?
Mr. Kaufman. That's great. Can you hear me all right?
Mr. Issa. I sure can.
Mr. Kaufman. Great. Thank you. I appreciate the question.
It's so important that when we design a degree program at
our university it's done in consultation with the private
sector and the largest employers in Somaliland.
So right now, we have 100 percent education to employment
from our graduates. But that's because our private sector
partner is, largely, ourself.
We need to generate many more teachers in order to scale
the Kaabe primary schools. So we're generating ready,
professional, qualified educators and hiring them.
Our next degree will be a management degree, that we're
talking with the leading CEOs and private sector companies
throughout the country to make sure that they're informing our
curriculum, and the people that they need to hire in the next
five and 10 years are the ones that we're graduating.
So it's that partnership that's really key.
Mr. Issa. That's great. What I'd like you to do, and I
think each of our witnesses can help us in this, how do we
contrast things like what we're doing--you know, what you're
doing is very similar to what Ohio did with its land grant
universities. All the original public universities were
teaching universities because that had the greatest leverage
for the future.
If you teach the teacher, you can then teach the next
generation of students. But how does it--would you contrast
that with how China is competing with us in Africa? What are
they doing and what makes your program different?
Mr. Kaufman. Well, I have to admit, I'm not expert enough
to comment on the Chinese government's strategy around
education.
I can tell you that in Somaliland, because of its unique
status as an unrecognized country that's formally considered
part of Somalia, they do not have access to financial aid and
assistance from most multilateral institutions or the Chinese
government.
So in Somaliland, there's very little investment from the
Chinese government. But, otherwise, we just need to make sure
that from the primary school up through secondary and into our
university that we're adapting the curricula based on the local
context.
And I think it was Honorable Minister Sengeh who talked
about that they were doing the same thing to make sure that
their graduates were ready for the work force.
So I just think it's a matter of being flexible. But maybe
Dr. Sherif can respond vis-a-vis China.
Mr. Issa. Please.
[No response.]
Mr. Issa. Maybe I'll respond. My understanding is that
China does not prioritize any actual equivalent of what we
would call USAID for these kinds of purposes as some training
programs related to their projects.
But I'm going to followup with just one question. The kind
of support we're giving to your organization, Mr. Kaufman, are
you seeing any other nation step forward and, if so, would you
recognize them, either in Somaliland or in the case of the
other witnesses?
Because I'd like to understand who our best partners are
and I often see what we're doing, but I do not see similar
partnerships with other countries.
Obviously, France has a huge presence. Are they doing
something similar or helping in this project?
Mr. Kaufman. We do have some really strong partners but
very few of them are financial sponsors, particularly from
governmental entities.
The British government has been a good friend to the
Abaarso Network in providing advice and support. But so far,
they're not a financial contributor, and the government of
Somaliland also has provided----
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Does anyone else have any examples of
what the four nations----
Mr. Sengeh. Sure. In Sierra Leone--in Sierra Leone, I do
think the EU is a great supporter of education so we will be
able to see what the EU is doing. And now we have the Africa-EU
Summit is just next week that many of the EU leaders will be
at.
I think with China, for example, something that China does
differently is with government grants at the higher and
technical institutions. I benefited from scholarships in the
U.S. but it wasn't through the U.S. Government.
And I think you see what the U.K. does through the
Commonwealth Scholarships, or with the Chinese or the Russian,
there are many country levels scholarships. We know that in the
U.S. that's much different, and that's the major difference.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Chairwoman Bass, and greetings to
all of our witnesses today.
I think it's fair to say that U.S. support for public
education programs in Africa cannot and shouldn't be a one-
size-fits-all approach. So I'd love to talk about best
practices, Mr. Kaufman and Dr. Sengeh, starting with you.
Mr. Kaufman, in fact, a group from Minnesota, my home
State, from the Wellstone School traveled to your school,
Abaarso, in Somaliland recently to see your secrets of success,
and I know Sierra Leone has seen a lot of progress in accessing
quality of education since they introduced universal public
education just a few years ago.
And I'm sure there are many other successes in other
countries and we'd love it if you might each speak to some of
those. What scalable and replicable and cost beneficial best
practice models can other countries draw on to improve baseline
education?
Mr.--Dr. Sengeh, if you want to start, I'd welcome your
comments. Other models.
Mr. Sengeh. I mean, I think one of the things that's worked
really well for us in Sierra Leone is this relationship between
civil society, and not just with NGO's. It's not just about
government to government, and we see that the relationship with
civil society, the relationship with NGO's, including parents
there.
And in Sierra Leone we have a decentralization for basic
education that we're trying to move forward. So that also works
very well in terms of effective models for quality education.
And something I do want to also emphasize and stress on is
the use of technology and digitization, and there are different
parts to that.
It cannot be disparate, you know. When COVID--with COVID
school closures, every country had their own platform. I
imagine in the U.S. every State had their own platform, their
own systems, their own content.
And it does not work that way, and I think we really have
to think about how we share the architectural and the
technology systems such that we are taking advantage of our
best resources in terms of quality content, quality platform,
modes of engagement, that actually reaches and includes as many
more people as possible.
Mr. Phillips. Right. And just, quickly, before we move to
Mr. Kaufman, any--are there any of the external development
partners in Africa that have made interesting investments of
which you're aware that we should take note of?
Mr. Sengeh. I think the EU and I think for girls education
we do a lot of work with IrishAid. So I mentioned radical
inclusion, which is--will stop at nothing until everybody,
girls--but organizations like IrishAid.
FCDO--we do have a lot of work with them with evidence-
based policy support from FCDO, and, as I mentioned, China with
enhanced technical institution.
I think there does need to be, and I think one of the
respondents mentioned, USAID needs to step up a little bit on
education and I must say in Sierra Leone, we do not have a
large footprint of USAID, particularly on education and
innovation, and I feel like that's a miss for the U.S.
Mr. Phillips. I appreciate the challenge to us. Thank you,
sir.
Mr. Kaufman, any thoughts on scalable and replicable models
that you think, you know, could be employed across the
continent?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes. Thank you. First, let me just take a
moment to acknowledge and really thank the group from Wellstone
International School. They are a great--great friends of ours.
They've been out to the school and we have been talking
with them about a deeper project to draw some of those lessons
that can help kids in Minnesota and, perhaps, beyond.
Mr. Phillips. I love it.
Mr. Kaufman. So thanks so much for acknowledging them.
Yes, there are a few really important takeaways that go
beyond the three that I mentioned and I want to highlight those
again.
It was said by a few of the witnesses that it's not just
about access. It's not just about the supply side of schools.
Equally critical is the quality of what we're offering and the
relevance in the classroom. Good teachers make a huge
difference and 10 great teachers are much better than a hundred
bad or mediocre teachers.
Mr. Phillips. Correct.
Mr. Kaufman. The other side of that is this demand piece--
you know, the cost benefit analysis that families have to do to
decide if it's worth the time and money to send their kids.
If there aren't job prospects, if there aren't post-
graduate or secondary opportunities, if they're leaving a good
primary school but have no decent secondary school to go to,
then the incentive to continue your education is greatly
diminished, and that has a deleterious effect on the prospects
of employment, innovation, economic growth.
Just really quickly, the few other things I want to mention
is I think that key are to scale or to incentivize, both with
financial incentives and otherwise, public-private
partnerships.
We have to promote choice. As you said, one size does not
fit all. We need a proliferation of models, and then when we
find one that works we have to hold on to it and invest in it.
The other thing is businesses can also be incentivized to
provide not just scholarships but apprenticeships and
internships, because in developed countries we know that your
network plays a huge role in your job prospects post-
graduation. We need to help kids in remote and fragile settings
develop those same networks.
Mr. Phillips. OK. I know I'm out of time. Thank you both.
Appreciate your perspectives and contributions.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Bass. And thank you, Mr. Phillips. It's my
understanding that Mr. Meuser is not here, so I will go to the
committee vice chair, Representative Omar, who will chair the
rest of this meeting.
Thank you very much, Representative Omar.
Ms. Omar [presiding]. Thank you, Chairwoman Bass. Thank you
for convening this really important discussion as well.
Mr. Sengeh, according to UNICEF, the COVID pandemic has
created the worst crisis of education access on record. But you
talked in your testimony about Sierra Leone's success in
continuing to invest in education during the pandemic.
Can you tell us more about the programs you instituted to
ensure students could continue to learn during COVID?
Mr. Sengeh. Thank you very much, Representative Omar.
Yes. I think one thing I must say is the leadership. His
Excellency President Julius Maada Bio made education his
priority, and so in 2018 we are at 19 percent of our budget and
then we went to 20 percent, 21 percent, and we decided that we
have to keep expanding the percentage of our budgets to
education until we can reach our targets.
So it was really a leadership decision and understanding
that the only way out of this and preparation for this pandemic
is through public education. So we had to keep investing.
Some of the things that we did was we brought back all the
kids who were in transition classes, give them dry rations and
made sure that they did the examinations 5 months after school
closed.
We expanded education radio. So now, as we speak, we bought
transmitters and hoping to ensure that all across the country
people can continue learning with educational radio, and the
new EGRA EGMA study shows that about 87 percent of kids listen
to education radio.
We also printed materials. We know that not everybody has
access to technology so we printed materials and mailed it to
communities who were hard to reach and who were not in radio
reach or who could not have TV, and we built mobile systems,
right.
So 87 percent of the population has access to mobile
connectivity. So we built SMS USSD solutions that we made
available to poor kids as well.
So it's really a combination, what we have--what we call
hybrid technology solutions within the directorates of science,
technology, and innovation, so things that work on paper,
online, offline, mobile, that we really extended.
Ms. Omar. OK. Excellent. And are there ways we can use some
of these programs as a model for policies we should support in
other countries in Africa and in the developing world?
Mr. Sengeh. Thank you. I think it's a great question.
By the way, something as well I think the U.S. can do is be
part of what we call the Digital Public Goods. It's a platform
that we have with the United Nations, with UNICEF, and within
the Digital Public Goods framework is that we should build
technologies and solutions that should be shared across the
world, and I think the U.S., being a leading technology
country, should see how it can be part of these global networks
that create solutions for sharing for everybody.
I do think investing in education and data technology--ed
tech--in ways that was not what we imagined before but, rather,
that is inclusive, that does not leave poor communities out,
that does not leave women and girls out, is something that you
can invest in a little bit more.
Ms. Omar. Thank you so much.
Ms. Sherif, does the United States provide enough
assistance for education to refugees and displaced children,
and what more could we be doing? As you know, I was a child in
a refugee camp for 4 years and missed the opportunity to be
educated in those 4 years.
Ms. Sherif, are you there?
Ms. Sherif. Yes. Yes. Yes. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold
on. Sorry. Sorry. I am here.
Ms. Omar. OK. Did you hear the question or do you want me
to repeat it?
Ms. Sherif. Please repeat it. I'm so sorry.
Ms. Omar. I was asking if you thought the United States
provides enough assistance for education to refugees and
displaced children, and what more could we be doing.
As you probably know, I was a child in a refugee camp in
Kenya for 4 years and missed the opportunity to be fully
educated while I was there.
Ms. Sherif. Yes. We have--we did a special COVID-19
response where Kenya was included because they host a large
number of refugees. So they have definitely provided support
directly to Kenya.
We have also worked very closely with the U.S. in Burkina
Faso, in Cameroon, and many other places. And the U.S.,
especially--the way the U.S. provided money to ECW--Education
Cannot Wait--is one is from our trust fund in New York, and
then they provide money in country because you have the USAID
missions in country.
So they're always part of the Education Cannot Wait's
programs. And so across the Sahel and in Kenya and refugee
education. PRM has been very strong in refugee education.
So yes, my answer is yes. And the U.S. is often very
flexible, very fast, very speedy.
Ms. Omar. All right. Thank you so much. My time has
expired, and I will now recognize Mr. Bera for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let me direct the first question to Mr. Kaufman. You know,
I'm still on faculty at the University of California Davis and
I've had conversations with both my chancellor but also the
University of California system in general, and have thought
about the utility of how we take the talents that we have
within our university system but make that accessible to the
rest of the world, whether that's, you know, in the farming
agriculture sector or climate change, et cetera.
And what I've explored with them is, you know, we're able
to interact in a virtual setting right now. Is there a way for
us to build capacity so it's not that those students who are
graduating now have to travel abroad and attend university, you
know, in another country but can we in a virtual setting, and
are there any examples where U.S. universities in a virtual
setting are taking their talent, partnering with institutions
in Africa and various countries, and doing some of that online
training, which may, ultimately, lead to their students
studying in the United States or elsewhere? And can we do that
in low cost way that takes the talent and builds capacity in
some of these countries?
Mr. Kaufman, maybe the question is for you.
Mr. Kaufman. Yes. Thank you. I appreciate it.
First of all, a few things. I think that an online support
both for teacher training and for students is a super-efficient
and effective way to expand opportunities. It's expensive to
bring people and travel around the world. So I think there's
more we can do that.
And if you're looking at ways to help share the expertise
of UC Davis faculty and students, then we need it, and I think
schools all around the continent need it.
The truth is, in a place like Somaliland and many other
fragile settings we do not yet have the cadre of qualified
teachers who are proficient in contemporary pedagogical
strategies.
So until we bring them up to speed through support with
different programs that you and others have mentioned, we're
going to struggle to promote learning among kids.
So the more support we can get from people like your
colleagues and students would be great and the more we can
expand digital access would be really helpful.
And if I can, just a super quick response to Representative
Ilhan Omar's question about does the U.S. Government do enough.
The answer is no. I'm grateful for all the support of the
U.S. Government and you've done a lot. The U.S. Government has
made opportunities possible that otherwise would not have
existed.
But we need to do more. The risks are too great, not just
in fragile settings but for spillover that can drive violent
extremism if we do not give people a reason to hope and other
opportunities.
Mr. Bera. Right. Let me ask a quick question to Ms.
Winthrop.
You know, one of the areas that I've done some work is
thinking about global fragility in fragile States in Sub-
Saharan Africa and, you know, one of the best strategies is
that investment in women and girls--you know, pregnancy
spacing, you know, providing full reproductive access, but also
that investment in girls education. I think you mentioned that
in your opening Statement.
You know, when I was in Sierra Leone a few years ago, I
also had a chance to visit some CARE-sponsored programs that
were targeting boys and fathers, which, I think, if we want to
get the full capacity of girls education we also have to start
with boys so as those girls become young women, you know, and
those boys become young men, there's that value in that
recognition.
And I do not know, Ms. Winthrop, if you want to touch on
that and how we cannot forget about educating boys.
Dr. Winthrop. Thank you very much for the question.
Yes. It's true that if you--educating women and girls,
especially up through secondary education, is--has such good
ripple effects across a community.
But I have seen, running programs on girls education
myself, if you really just focus on the girls and leave out the
boys you'll have a backlash and you'll undermine your work.
But also, certainly, our scholars we work with on girls
education around the world are saying the next frontier is
really to make sure that boys are brought into the conversation
around gender equality.
You know, it's no point in, you know, having a really
empowered group of women if the men, their counterparts and
peers, aren't right there beside them lockstep. So I think that
is the next frontier for sure.
Mr. Bera. Right. Thank you. And I see my time has expired.
So I'll yield back.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. Jacobs for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here.
I want to start with Dr. Winthrop. Thank you for talking
about directly supporting local organizations in your
testimony. I absolutely agree and think that we can do much
more on this and that there are plenty of local organizations
that the U.S. can and should support.
So I was hoping you could highlight some successful
examples of USAID doing this well in the education sector in
certain African countries, and maybe also describe the issue a
little more with governments and partners wanting to find
funding for their solutions without the many competing
priorities that come with donors.
Dr. Winthrop. Thank you. Thank you very much.
We hear a lot about this from our decades of work with
African partners. One of the things we hear, and I'm sure
Minister Sengeh can attest to this, is that, you know, it's
very hard to navigate the competing donor partners--the U.S.
Government priorities, the U.K.'s priorities, EU's priorities,
multilaterals' priorities--and that's part of why GPE is so
helpful because they pool everybody together, and frequently
what we hear is that folks on the ground feel like they do not
get a say in what the strategy really is.
And we have heard a lot about sort of flipping--you know,
USAID is beginning to move in this direction where they've--you
know, rather than giving--basically, the tradition has been,
and I think they've been mandated to do it for some time, you
know, fund international U.S. American organizations to go
forth and maybe then find African partners to support
implementing.
There are--like in Malawi, this organization CRECCOM, which
is a community-based organization nationally across the
country, is now getting direct funding and helping to design
some girls education empowerment work, and it's highly, highly
effective because they work with local tribal leaders to try to
change gender norms, which really only they can do.
So I really think what we're hearing and what we have been
doing with our partners trying to flip the narrative where
international organizations who are--have lots of expertise,
lots of things to offer, including universities that we have
talked about, come in behind local organizations to try to give
the--hear what they--what their ideas are for the solution and
try to lend global expertise, including something we hear a lot
about are sharing across borders.
That's a great thing for international groups to do. You
know, what are my--you know, what are my peers in Africa doing
or in Latin America, et cetera? And there's a--we have been
doing a lot of exchange of innovative, scalable models that was
mentioned before, some great, amazing strategies on expanding
and scaling quality secondary education in the Amazon jungle,
really useful for remote areas of Sub-Saharan Africa, for
example.
So that--the U.S. Government is just taking baby steps in
this direction, in my opinion, so I would encourage it to keep
going and lean in even more.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you. I want to move to Minister
Sengeh.
You know, I appreciated that you talked about the Digital
Public Goods platform. I actually helped work on that when I
worked at UNICEF and as the CEO of Project Connect, which is
now part of the Giga Project, which I know you all in Sierra
Leone are working on as well.
But, you know, I wanted to ask you about how we can think
about what we should be teaching these kids. You know, many
schools in Africa still focus on the sort of old colonial rote
memorization model.
So it's not enough just to get bodies into schools but make
sure we're teaching them the right thing. And even when we're
doing the more sort of tech focus, it's often just teaching a
specific coding language that, frankly, will be obsolete by the
time they graduate and go into the work force.
So how are you thinking about what skills these kids really
need and how can we do more to invest in these kinds of
education practices?
Mr. Sengeh. That's an excellent question and I think this
is also linked to, again, back to the president's vision and
human capital development.
In Sierra Leone, one of the things we have done, and this
is much more difficult to do in other countries, it's changing
the curriculum whole frame, so being able to change the civics
curriculum, being able to change the basic education in the
early childhood development and the secondary school
curriculum.
We have what we call the five C's: critical thinking,
creativity, civics; computational thinking, and comprehension.
If you're teaching computational thinking, then you are not
teaching coding, which is one language. You're helping the
child learn how to think.
If you're thinking comprehension, you're going beyond
literacy. Certainly, the child needs to be literate, but it's
about whether they understand.
And the value of education--what we teach them is that they
should be problem solvers and they should be creative and that
they should participate in civic life. So for us in Sierra
Leone it's these five C's that we go with and we're thinking
beyond just what literacy and numeracy means.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
And, Madam Vice Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Meuser for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Madam Chair. Appreciate it. Thank
you to Ranking Member Smith as well. So a very important
subject. Glad to be a part of it.
Africa's demographics alone, certainly, underscore the need
to make impactful investments in African education now. The
data shows that in the next 30 years the working population in
Sub-Saharan Africa will--is expected to double, accounting for
two-thirds of the world's total population growth, and Africa's
development depends on this predominantly young and growing
population to be as practically educated and scientifically
educated, I guess we could say, as possible.
So, Mr. Kaufman, I'll start with you. Thanks for being
here. You mentioned that your school has developed a curriculum
in coordination with local private sector employers. Certainly,
that's done in the U.S. as well.
Love to hear a little bit more of your creativity and
synergies that you create on how Abaarso tailors the curriculum
in training students to ensure students are prepared for jobs,
entrepreneurship, and, of course, future higher education.
So if you if you would, Mr. Kaufman, maybe elaborate some.
Mr. Kaufman. Yes, thank you. I so appreciate you coming
back to the Abaarso Network on that. To begin with, our
students who go to the Abaarso School--the secondary school--
the key to making sure they're prepared for a changing,
dynamic, and competitive global world and in order to come back
to Somaliland and make a difference, we have to keep the
standards as high as we would for anyone else around the world.
We can say, well, we're in a difficult place. We're in Sub-
Saharan Africa. I'm so glad that more kids are going to school
and that they're reading at a higher level.
We need to keep the standard at proficiency and readiness
to compete on the world stage, and our graduates from the
Abaarso School are doing just that and they're coming back and
starting businesses, working for various ministries.
The other part of that is the liaison that we have with the
university and our own network. So the 15 women who graduated
and are now working in our primary schools, we have been
watching and monitoring this year, well, how are they doing?
Are they good teachers? Are they reliable professionals?
And the early returns have been fantastic. They are some of our
best and most dedicated teaching staff, and we fully expect
that some of them will go on to lead additional schools.
But we need to greatly expand our throughput on graduates
from the university because unless there are more great
teachers available, we can only expand as quickly as we can
grow great teachers, or other partners can.
You asked about our creativity. So when I went around and
spoke with CEOs from around the country and asked them, who are
you going to be hiring for--what do you need, as one quick
example, the director of the bottling plant that owns the Coke
franchise in Somaliland said, well, they need quality
assessors--people who are expert in planning and processes.
So we said, well, give us your forms, give us your tools,
and we'll make that part of our curriculum in our school of
management. We do not need to create a program in the abstract
or that's theoretical. It can be specifically for their program
or for their work force.
Mr. Meuser. Well, you know what? You're really doing some
great work. Congratulations, really, to all of you. It's so
important.
Do you do--do you offer semesters abroad and any sort of
student exchange?
Mr. Kaufman. We send some of our students. They get
scholarships to go to secondary schools in the United States.
But we also are very happy to receive students and young
professionals who want to take a gap year or having a program
to support and teach or learn teaching in our schools.
We provide about three to 4 weeks of professional
development before the school year starts with everybody in
country. So if we have got really smart, super dedicated young
people, we're ready to help them make a difference in our
classrooms.
Mr. Meuser. Yes. Well, you know what? Let us know on the
semesters abroad opportunities. Maybe we can be helpful within
our districts or within our State. But really, really,
congratulations for your enthusiasm and the important work that
all of you are doing.
And I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. I think that concludes our first round
of questions. I have some followup for a second round. If any
member has or wants to do that as well please flag it for me.
I just wanted to begin with Mr. Kaufman. Earlier, you said
that there was more the United States could do. Can you give us
maybe two or three examples of ways the United States could be
more helpful in regards to investment in education?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes. Thank you. The U.S., I think, can
mobilize some of its partners of which it is a major
shareholder, from different multilateral banks and government
partners, to make sure that they're providing support to the
most proven models that are scalable.
I've worked in the nonprofit and humanitarian community for
a long time and I know that a lot of inertia can buildup within
that community, and sometimes we struggle to make creative use
of those finances and they keep going to the same people for
the same things to little effect.
So I think the U.S. Government can really incentivize and
influence how those dollars are spent so that more money can go
to things that work and that it be scaled.
Ms. Omar. Thank you.
And, Dr. Winthrop, I wanted to ask you about USAID's
distribution of textbooks and other school materials,
especially in the context of the shift to locally driven
programming that you talked about.
How does USAID ensure that these materials are student
centered, meaning available in local languages and are covering
appropriate subjects, and how will USAID's localization
strategy affect the provisions of these materials?
Dr. Winthrop. That's a good question, and I'm not sure I
have the full answer because I do not think I have a super
great grasp on exactly what they're doing in textbook and
materials distribution.
But what I can tell you from what I do know from my
experience is that, you know, while there is a general strategy
in USAID, everything is run through the country office.
So, you know, mother tongue instruction is definitely high
on the list and it is one of the most effective ways of
ensuring young people can learn to read because, often,
children are being asked to come to school and learn in a
language that they do not even know how to read, and I know
USAID is very much on top of that and they are focused on
mother tongue instruction in multiple languages.
I wonder if you're also getting at this question of if you
were to support local African groups and bringing the
international community behind them, you know, what might be
some of the new strategies that USAID should take?
And, to me, I think, you know, folks that--partners that we
work with on the ground, the things that they ask for are often
very technical, like, come tell us the latest evidence on--from
the learning sciences and how we can apply it, and less about
how to implement rollout and understanding the contextual
nuance of a country.
I do think that USAID could be very helpful in coming
behind folks on the ground, who often have more creative ideas
of how the different assets in their communities can be put
together to really accelerate change and not--that is, I think,
the single biggest shift that would really be helpful because
often the U.S. Government comes in with a solution--you're
going to do this, et cetera.
Ms. Omar. Thank you.
And, Ms. Sherif, I was very interested in your point about
COVID teaching us a valuable lesson in how to provide education
in extremely difficult circumstances. What are some of the
COVID-related programs that were used--that could be in use for
other situations?
Ms. Sherif. Yes, I think how we respond to COVID-19 depends
on the context, and when we speak about Africa, we have the
poorest infrastructure there to use technology because we often
speak about the need of technology, and that works in countries
like Lebanon where you have an infrastructure.
But when you go to countries like Mali, Central Africa
Republic, they do not have infrastructure even for wifi. So to
shift, I would say, also, our resources to ensure this campus
can build an infrastructure that allows for technology to
respond to remote learning is going to be very, very important.
You know, you have to flesh out a little bit of the
resource distribution on the globe, to be honest, because you
go into a place--and I've been to camps and IDP camps in places
like Mali or Burkina Faso.
I mean, they do not even have--they do not even have
electricity. So now how do you install wifi? How do you move on
to technological solutions?
We're dealing with very, very primordial situations where
there is nothing available. So not always look at technology as
the only answer.
Ms. Omar. Thank you.
Ms. Sherif. That's No. 1. One more thing I would like to
say--what is going to be very important and you see a very
strong U.S. leadership here, and the U.S. has two big interests
in the kind of Administration especially--a strong United
Nations and strong delivery in the education sector.
Now, as a U.N. fund, we are a living example of how we can
cap bureaucracy and show for more accountability, and when we
delivered in COVID-19, the moment the pandemic was declared we
actually picked up Martin Luther King's quote, the fears are
larger now and we moved faster than most in delivering a
response.
So I would say more funding and trust that our
entrepreneurship and our less bureaucracy actually deliver
results on the ground, bringing all actors together and in the
competition and deliver real results.
Ms. Omar. I see that we are out of time.
I do not see any other members who want to ask questions.
And before I adjourn, I wanted to see if you all can do 1
minute of closing remarks and we will start with Minister
Sengeh.
Mr. Sengeh. Thank you very much. I mean, I do think, as I
said, our most powerful weapon is not a silver bullet to
solving the world's intractable problems is public education.
Quality public education is our only way of ensuring that
we achieve inclusion, we are better prepared to face pandemics
of the future, and that we can help our children learn what
they need to learn to fulfill their human potential, to
participate in the global economy, and also to have great civic
life, and that's what we have to do is support quality public
education everywhere.
Thank you.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. Mr. Kaufman?
Mr. Kaufman. Thank you. Yes.
First, I want to respond really quickly to Ms. Jacobs'
question about what should we teach in class. I talked a lot
about the relationship between the private sector and schools,
and there's a great study that I've been carrying around for 7
years with--from McKinsey that noted that while there's 800
million unemployed youth, the vast majority of private sector
companies or at least close to 50 percent of them say that they
cannot find people--young people--who are qualified for entry
level jobs. That disconnect is devastating and driving youth
unemployment.
So one of my big takeaways is continue to recognize that
schools are more than just buildings. We need to make them part
of communities, part of a dynamic economic system and
infrastructure, and then we have to incentivize and generate
demand and ensure good quality.
Invest in the programs that have evidence of success,
whether it's Abaarso or anyone else.
Thank you.
Ms. Omar. Dr. Winthrop?
Dr. Winthrop. Well, I would just second both what Minister
Sengeh and Mr. Kaufman said. I think those are great.
I agree with all of it, and I think the final thing I would
urge the committee to think about is, you know, there are lots
of good examples--someone asked about scalable examples of what
works--that are out there from different parts of the world
that could--both within Sub-Saharan Africa but from outside
Sub-Saharan Africa that could really be applied to effectively
accelerate the pace of change and much more quickly close these
big inequality gaps, part of which Mr. Kaufman referenced.
And, to me, this idea of leapfrogging at the core is to
really think creatively about how to bring, whether it's
employers to bear, technology companies to bear, communities to
bear, all in this effort of educating kids.
We have seen really effective models of that being done,
and I agree that the opening the mind and then investing in
scaling is the best way to get the job done.
Ms. Omar. Thank you.
Ms. Sherif?
Ms. Sherif. Thank you very much.
Well, I would like to just lift up one incredible program
where USAID has really played an instrumental role, and that is
the first ever Refugee Education Response Plan in Uganda when
you had refugees coming from South Sudan.
And the USAID played an instrumental role in making it one
of the successful investments of Education Cannot Wait and that
has continued throughout the Sahel and other countries.
You have incredibly strong USAID officers on the ground.
They are there to determine strategic focus, moving and shaking
everyone else to work together, and I think that besides the
strategic contribution--the Uganda Refugee Response Plan is a
great example in time--is financing and bring in the private
sector.
Private sector, together with governmental resources, can
make that difference. It's not impossible. Strong people,
financing, private sector, and we can turn the tide around.
Nothing is impossible. We can do it.
Ms. Omar. I just want to thank all of our panelists and our
colleagues for participating in this wonderful discussion
today.
I want to thank Chairwoman Karen Bass and Ranking Member
Smith. And, you know, my father used to say education is the
greatest equalizer, and if we want to create a more equitable
world we have to make sure that we're investing in the
education and the well-being of every child in every corner of
the world.
So thank you all. This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:27 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT FROM CHAIRMAN BASS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
