- BUDGETING FOR AMERICA'S NATIONAL SECURITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUDGETING FOR AMERICA'S NATIONAL SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

Available on the Internet:
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=budget

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-222 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland,
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho              Ranking Minority Member
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ALLYSON Y. SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 BILL PASCRELL, Jr., New Jersey
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             TIM RYAN, Ohio
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
BILL FLORES, Texas                   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                PAUL TONKO, New York
TODD C. YOUNG, Indiana               KAREN BASS, California
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan
TODD ROKITA, Indiana
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
ROB WOODALL, Georgia

Professional Staff

Austin Smythe, Staff Director
Thomas S. Kahn, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

Page
Hearing held in Washington, DC, July 7, 2011.....................     1

Hon. Paul Ryan, Chairman, Committee on the Budget............     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Additional submission:
Prepared statement of Hon. Peter T. King, Chairman,
Committee on Homeland Security.....................    62
Hon. Chris Van Hollen, ranking minority member, Committee on
the Budget.................................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5
David E. Mosher, Assistant Director, National Security,
Congressional Budget Office (CBO)..........................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Hon. Jim Talent, distinguished fellow, the Heritage
Foundation, former U.S. Senator from the State of Missouri.     8
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Dr. Gordon Adams, professor of international relations,
School of International Service, American University, and
distinguished fellow, Project on Budgeting for Foreign
Affairs and Defense, Stimson Center........................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    21

BUDGETING FOR AMERICA'S
NATIONAL SECURITY

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Paul Ryan, [Chairman of
the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ryan, Garrett, Calvert, Akin,
McClintock, Stutzman, Lankford, Ribble, Flores, Mulvaney,
Huelskamp, Young, Amash, Woodall, Van Hollen, Schwartz, Kaptur,
Doggett, Blumenauer, Yarmuth, Ryan of Ohio, Wasserman Schultz,
Moore, Castor, and Tonko.
Chairman Ryan. Welcome to the reason everybody came here
today. Today's hearing on the strategic choices we face in
budgeting for our national security. I want to thank my
colleague Mr. Van Hollen for requesting this hearing. We may
differ over the appropriate level of defense spending, but we
stand united in our commitment to America's security and a
strategy-based debate when it comes to funding our military.
Indiscriminate cuts in defense spending that are budget-driven,
and not strategy-driven, are dangerous to Americans here at
home and to America's interest in the world. Former Defense
Secretary Gates put it quite well when he said, ``That is math
not strategy.''
This Committee has examined, in depth over the last six
months--and has advanced solutions to address--the fiscal
challenges that stifle job creation today, threaten the
economic security of American families and jeopardize our
national security commitments, as well.
Our fiscal crisis is above all a spending crisis driven by
the growth of our major entitlement programs: Social Security,
Medicare, and Medicaid--critical programs that help provide
health and retirement security for millions of Americans. In
1970, these programs consumed about 20 percent of the federal
budget. These autopilot spending programs now consume about 40
percent of the federal budget.
Over the same period, defense spending has shrunk as a
share of the federal budget from about 39 percent to 19
percent, even as we conduct an ambitious global war on
terrorism. Clearly, defense spending is not driving our
unsustainable fiscal path. There is, of course, considerable
waste and inefficiencies at the Pentagon, which Secretary Gates
did a great job of identifying. The House-passed budget builds
upon this effort, devoting $100 billion of the savings the
higher priority defense programs and $78 billion of savings to
deficit reduction.
We must work together to address the real drivers of our
debt. We must advance solutions like those included in the
House passed budget that strengthen our social safety net, save
our critical health and retirement security programs, lift our
crushing burden of debt, and spur economic growth and job
creation.
America remains the greatest force for human freedom the
world has ever seen. Lifting millions out of poverty and
liberating millions from the shackles of terror and tyranny.
Our leadership in the world is threatened by a fiscal crisis
from within, and the stakes could not be any higher. It is
critical for our national security and our economic security
that we advance solutions that match the magnitude of the
challenges before us. I thank our witnesses for joining us
today and for bringing considerable expertise to help us frame
the strategic choices we face. We have David Mosher, did I
pronounce it right is it Mosher? David Mosher serves as
Assistant Director for CBO on National Security. We will also
hear from a former colleague of ours here in the House, former
Senator Jim Talent, who is now a distinguished fellow at the
Heritage Foundation and a member of the bipartisan panel that
provided an independent assessment of the most recent QDR.
Welcome back Jim, it is good to see you. We also have Dr.
Gordon Adams, a distinguished fellow at the Stimson Center and
a former national security budget official during the Clinton
Administration.
The final point I want to make is this--a sentiment that I
know Mr. Van Hollen shares: The men and women in uniform are
not mere line items on our federal budget. Our budget debates
must never lose sight of our solemn obligation in Congress to
provide our troops fighting overseas with the resources they
need to successfully complete their mission, and our commitment
to them upon their return. We owe a debt of gratitude to our
military families that have taken untold sacrifices for our
security and our freedoms we hold dear. I want to thank the
witnesses, and I now yield to Mr. Van Hollen for his opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Paul Ryan follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Ryan, Chairman,
Committee on the Budget

Welcome all to today's hearing on the strategic choices we face in
budgeting for our national security.
I want to thank my colleague Mr. Van Hollen for requesting this
hearing. We may differ over the appropriate level of defense spending,
but we stand united in our commitment to America's security and a
strategy-based debate when it comes to funding our military.
Indiscriminate cuts in defense spending that are budget-driven and
not strategy-driven are dangerous to Americans here at home and to
America's interests in the world. Former Defense Secretary Gates put it
well: ``that's math, not strategy.''
This Committee has examined in depth over the last six months--and
advanced solutions to address--the fiscal challenges that stifle job
creation today, threaten the economic security of American families,
and jeopardize our national security commitments as well.
Our fiscal crisis is above all a spending crisis driven by the
growth of our major entitlement programs: Social Security, Medicare,
and Medicaid--critical programs that help provide health and retirement
security for millions of Americans.
In 1970, these programs consumed about 20 percent of the federal
budget. These autopilot spending programs now consume 40 percent of the
budget.
Over the same period, defense spending has shrunk as a share of the
federal budget from about 39 percent to 19 percent--even as we conduct
an ambitious global war on terrorism.
Clearly, defense spending is not driving our unsustainable fiscal
path. There is, of course, considerable waste and inefficiencies at the
Pentagon--which Secretary Gates did a great job of identifying.
The House-passed budget builds upon this effort--devoting $100
billion of savings to higher priority defense programs and $78 billion
to deficit reduction.
We must work together to address the real drivers of our debt. We
must advance solutions, like those included in the House-passed
budget--that strengthen our social safety net, save our critical health
and retirement security programs, lift our crushing burden of debt, and
spur economic growth and job creation.
America remains the greatest force for human freedom the world has
ever seen, lifting millions out of poverty and liberating millions from
the shackles of terror and tyranny. Our leadership in the world is
threatened by a fiscal crisis within--and the stakes could not be
higher.
It is critical for our national security and our economic security
that we advance solutions that match the magnitude of the challenges
before us.
I thank our witnesses for joining us today, and for bringing
considerable expertise to help us frame the strategic choices we face.
David Mosher serves as the assistant director of the Congressional
Budget Office for national security.
We'll also hear from a former colleague of ours here in the House,
former Senator Jim Talent who is now a distinguished fellow at the
Heritage Foundation, and a member of the bipartisan panel that provided
an independent assessment of the most recent Quadrennial Defense
Review. Welcome back Jim.
We also welcome Dr. Gordon Adams, a distinguished fellow at the
Stimson Center, and a former national security budget official during
the Clinton Administration.
A final point worth keeping in mind today--a sentiment that I know
Mr. Van Hollen shares: the men and women in uniform are not mere line-
items on the federal budget.
Our budget debates must never lose sight of our solemn obligation
in Congress to provide our troops fighting overseas with the resources
they need to successfully complete their mission, and our commitment to
them upon their return.
We owe a debt of gratitude to the military families that make
untold sacrifices for our security and our freedoms we hold dear.
Thank you to our witnesses--and to all for joining in today's
discussion, and with that, I yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Van
Hollen.

Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for holding these hearings. As you indicated we
requested a few months ago a hearing on the role of defense
spending, security spending within the overall budget as well
as a hearing on tax expenditures at some point; and I thank you
for holding the hearing today. I hope we can do the other one.
And I want to join the Chairman in welcoming all our
distinguished witnesses hear today. The Congressional Budget
Office just released a new updated report on the Pentagon's
current plans that concludes historical cost growth will
continue to put upward pressure on the budget at a time of
large deficits, and we will hear more about that today. As
Republicans and Democrats come together to work out a plan to
get deficits and debt under control, we must get a better
understanding of all the elements of the budget that continue
to put pressure on the budget's bottom line and what options we
should explore to get the most out of every tax dollar spent.
There is no higher priority than providing for the security of
our country and I join the chairman in expressing our gratitude
to the men and women in the military who help keep our country
strong. We all want a military that is second to none, but
during this difficult fiscal period we have to be much smarter
and more efficient in how we go about providing for one. The
economy, the source of our ability to provide for a strong
security apparatus, is at risk because of large deficits and
rising debt over time. Admiral Mike Mullen, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, warned the policymakers of this growing
risk when he stated, ``Our national debt is our biggest
national security threat.''
Over the last decade the base Pentagon budget has nearly
doubled, and spending at the Pentagon is now at its highest
level since World War II. The United States currently outspends
the world's second largest military, China, by a factor of 7-1.
Roughly $700 billion to $100 billion, and from 2001 to 2010,
security spending including Pentagon, State Department, VA, and
Department of Homeland Security, excluding emergencies and war
costs, grew on average 1.5 percent per year more than non-
security spending. Over the last decade the Pentagon was able
to avoid making difficult choices because of this permissive
funding environment. This is not my opinion, it is the opinion
of the highest ranking officer in our military, Admiral Mullen
said, and again I quote, ``With the increasing defense budget,
which is almost double, it has not forced us to make the hard
trades. It has not forced us to prioritize. It has not forced
us to do the analysis.''
We can no longer afford to spend tax payer resources
without ensuring every dollar is efficiently and effectively
invested. There is now bipartisan consensus that all spending,
including spending at the Pentagon, must be on the table as we
figure out how to get our finances back on track. Many
Republicans have expressed their support for reviewing defense
spending to find savings, including Governor Haley Barbour,
former Majority Leader Dick Armey, former Senator and three-
term Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee Pete Domenici, and
many others. Even in this year's Defense Appropriations Bill,
Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, Hal Rogers, and
Appropriations Defense Subcommittee, Bill Young, made the case
that Defense cannot be excluded from this debate. Others have
proposed far deeper cuts to security spending.
The President's Fiscal Commission, co-chaired by Democrat
Erskine Bowles, and Republican former Senator Alan Simpson,
proposed more than a trillion dollars in cuts to security
programs over 10 years, including illustrative examples of how
to save $100 billion per year at the Pentagon as part of a
balanced plan to reduce the deficit. A majority of the
commissioners voted to approve that plan by vote of 11 to 7,
including a number of Republican Senators.
Even in this committee, where agreement is hard to come by,
the notion that all spending, including spending at the
Pentagon, needs to be on the table was agreed to by a majority
of the members this spring in Sense of the House language. So
where do we look for savings? We should look at all aspects of
the budget, but the very first item to examine should be
inefficiencies and wasteful practices.
After years of trying, the DOD is still the one agency, the
one agency that cannot pass a standard audit. It does not keep
track of the number of service contractors even though it
spends roughly $200 billion a year on such contracts. Major
weapon acquisition programs have experienced hundreds of
billions of dollars in cost overruns in recent years. The GAO
recently estimated cost growth of these weapon systems totaling
$300 billion, and the GAO has identified a number of
persistent, high-risk management areas at the Department that
need improving. There are also seemingly endless examples of
stories of abusive contracting practices.
Last Friday, Leon Panetta was sworn in as Secretary of
Defense, someone who is well prepared to deal with our fiscal
challenge because of his vast security and budget experience.
He released a message on Friday saying, ``A choice between
fiscal discipline and a strong national defense is a false
choice.'' I agree with the incoming Secretary of Defense in
that regard. We can make both tough decisions to put spending
at the Pentagon on a more affordable path and still maintain a
military that is second to none. Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you
for holding this hearing. The Defense Department budget alone
makes up approximately one-fifth of the entire federal budget,
and more than half of all discretionary spending. So I think
this hearing is an important exercise in our oversight
responsibilities. Again, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chris Van Hollen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Chris Van Hollen, Ranking Minority Member,
Committee on the Budget

I would like to thank the Chairman for holding this hearing. I
requested a couple of months ago that we hold a hearing on Pentagon
spending and tax expenditures and I welcome this opportunity today. I
would also like to join you in welcoming our witnesses. Mr. Mosher,
Senator Talent, and Dr. Adams, thank you for coming today to share your
views and analysis on the Pentagon's budget and budgeting for our
national security in general.
The Congressional Budget Office just released a new updated report
on the Pentagon's current plans that concludes historical cost growth
will continue to put upward pressure on the budget at a time of large
deficits. This report is very timely. As Republicans and Democrats come
together to work out a plan to get deficits and debt under control, we
must get a better understanding of all the elements of the budget that
continue to put pressure on the budget's bottom line and what options
we should explore to get the most out of every tax dollar spent.
There is no higher priority than providing for the security of our
country. We all want a strong military that is second to none, but
during this difficult fiscal period we have to be much smarter and
efficient in how we go about providing for one. The economy--the source
of our ability to provide for a strong security apparatus--is at risk
because of large deficits and rising debt. Admiral Mike Mullen, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, warned policy makers of this
growing risk when he stated, `Our national debt is our biggest national
security threat.'
Over the last decade, the `base' Pentagon budget has nearly
doubled, and spending at the Pentagon is now at its highest level since
World War II. The U.S. currently outspends the world's second largest
military--China--by a factor of seven to one (roughly $700 billion to
$100 billion). And from 2001 to 2010, security spending (including
funding for the Pentagon, State Department, VA, and Department of
Homeland Security), excluding emergencies and war costs, grew on
average 1.5 percent more per year than non-security spending.
Over the last decade the Pentagon was able to avoid making
difficult choices because of this permissive funding environment. This
isn't my opinion; it is the opinion of the highest ranking officer in
our military. Admiral Mullen said, ``* * * with the increasing defense
budget, which is almost double, it hasn't forced us to make the hard
trades. It hasn't forced us to prioritize. It hasn't forced us to do
the analysis.''
We can no longer afford to spend taxpayer resources without
ensuring every dollar is efficiently and effectively invested. There is
now bipartisan consensus that all spending, including spending at the
Pentagon, must be on the table as we figure out how to get our finances
back on track. Many Republicans have expressed their support for
reviewing defense spending to find savings, including Governor Haley
Barbour, former Majority Leader of the House Dick Army, and Former-
Senator and three-term Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, Pete
Domenici.
Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers and Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee Chairman Bill Young also made the case that
defense cannot be excluded from this debate when they brought a defense
appropriations bill to the House floor that, while still increasing
defense funding over this year's level, contained $9 billion in cuts
below the President's February budget request for 2012.
Others have proposed far deeper cuts to security spending. The
President's Fiscal Commission, co-chaired by Democrat Erskine Bowles
and Republican Former-Senator Alan Simpson, proposed more than $1
trillion in cuts to security programs over ten years, including
illustrative examples of how to save up to $100 billion per year at the
Pentagon, as part of a balanced plan to tame deficits. A majority of
Commissioners voted to approve that plan by a vote of 11 to 7.
Even in this committee, where agreement is hard to come by, the
notion that all spending, including spending at the Pentagon, needs to
be on the table was agreed to by a majority of its members this spring.
The Committee voted to include `Sense of the House' language to that
effect in the 2012 budget resolution.
So, where do we look for savings? While we should examine all
aspects of the Pentagon budget, the very first item to examine should
be inefficiencies and wasteful practices. After years of trying, DoD
still can't pass a standard audit. It doesn't keep track of the number
of service contractors it has even though it spends roughly $200
billion per year on such contracts. Major weapons acquisition programs
have experienced hundreds of billions in cost overruns in recent years;
the Government Accountability Office (GAO) recently estimated cost
growth of these weapons systems totaling $300 billion. GAO has
identified a number of persistent high-risk management areas at the
Department that need improving. There are also seemingly endless
stories of abusive contracting practices. The most recent example is
one uncovered by a government report showing that Boeing overcharged
DoD for a number of spare parts it was providing. One spare part was
marked up 177,000 percent above its cost.
Last Friday, Leon Panetta was sworn in as Secretary of Defense,
someone who is well-prepared to deal with our fiscal challenges because
of his vast security and budget experience. He released a message on
Friday saying that a choice between fiscal discipline and a strong
national defense is a false choice. I believe he is correct. We can
make both the tough decisions to put spending at the Pentagon on a more
affordable path and still maintain a military that is second to none.
Chairman Ryan, thank you for holding this hearing on the security
budget. The defense budget alone makes up approximately one fifth of
the entire Federal budget and more than half of all discretionary
spending. It is important that we exercise as much oversight as we can
over such a large piece of the budget.
Again, I thank our witnesses for coming today and I look forward to
hearing their testimony.

Chairman Ryan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Van Hollen. We
will begin with our testimony. I asked our witnesses if they
could keep it to five minutes and then they will be able expand
on all of their points in the Q and A. We will start with Mr.
Mosher, and Senator Talent, then Dr. Adams. Mr. Mosher the
floor is yours, and put the mic right up to your faces.

STATEMENTS OF DAVID E. MOSHER, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SECURITY, CBO; JIM TALENT, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW, THE HERITAGE
FOUNDATION; AND GORDON ADAMS, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW, THE STIMSON
CENTER

STATEMENT OF DAVID E. MOSHER, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SECURITY, CBO

Mr. Mosher. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you Congressman
Van Hollen. Members of the Committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss CBO's recent
analysis of the long term implications of DOD's budget request.
DOD's plans are outlined in the Future Years Defense Program,
or FYDP, for 2012-2016 period and in documents it is published
on its long-term procurement plans. Because decisions made in
the near-term can have long-term consequences for the defense
budget, CBO projected the costs of DOD's plans for its base
budget, that is, DOD's budget without war costs, from 2012
through 2030. CBO has projected what it would cost to execute
those plans using cost factors that are consistent with DOD's
recent experience. CBO's detailed analysis was released last
week and can be found on our website, but I want to emphasize
that our analysis is intended to highlight the cost of
executing the current plan. It is not an analysis of
affordability or the requirements for defense; nor is it a
prediction of likely actions taken by lawmakers.
CBO's analysis yielded the following conclusions. DOD
anticipates that the base budget will grow about six percent in
real terms over the next five years from $536 billion in 2011
to $569 billion in 2016 in order to execute its plans. I am
using 2012 dollars in my presentation today. CBO on the other
hand projects that that funding would have to grow about 11
percent in real terms over that same period or almost double
what DOD estimates.
In 2030, CBO projects that DOD would need a budget of $642
billion to execute its current plans, an increase of 20 percent
in real terms over what you guys appropriated in 2011. The
primary cause of growth through 2030 would be the rising costs
for operation and maintenance plus those for military
personnel. In particular, CBO projects that there will be
significant increases in the cost for military health care,
military and civilian compensation, and various other Operation
and Maintenance activities. If you could put Slide 1 up please.
As you can see from the top line in Slide 1, that is
projected on the screen, it is Figure 3 in the prepared
statement. The O and M line, which is that top line, grows
rapidly over the FYDP and beyond. In fact it is the largest
growing, the fastest growing of all those--a total of 42
percent growth from 2011 to 2030. The military personnel
account, which is the next line down from the top, provides pay
and most benefits to our soldiers, grows at about 26 percent
over that same period.
CBO projects that together those two lines would consume
about 71 percent of the budget in 2030, up from 63 percent of
the budget today if DOD does not change the size of its force
structure beyond 2016. In other words, the same force will
continue to cost more and more every year. The growth in those
two accounts represents the largest budget challenge to DOD in
future years, particularly if defense budgets are cut below
2012 levels. I just want to point out, by contrast the
procurement account would grow rapidly through 2019 but then
start to fall thereafter. Growth in the Operations and
Maintenance account is driven in part by rapid growth in the
military health system. More than nine million active duty,
reserve, and retired military personnel and their families are
eligible for this benefit. CBO projects that the cost for the
military health system will nearly double in real terms from
2011 to 2030. By far the fastest growing major component in
DOD's budget.
Compared to levels in 2000, costs will quadruple by 2030.
If you could show the next slide please. The figure on the
screen, which is Figure 4 in my prepared statement, illustrates
the growth in CBO's projection. Rapid growth would occur in all
categories of costs in the military health system except the
cost of military personnel, which is that bottom category,
which will grow much more slowly. The growth rates for military
health systems have been significantly higher than the rates in
the national health care costs over the past five years, and
CBO projects those differences will persist. For example, DOD
spending per user, for purchased and direct care, grew at three
times the national rate from 2006 to 2010.
An important contributor to that increase are the accrual
payments for TRICARE for Life, a benefit that Congress added in
2002. You can see the top category in the figure there in light
blue. TRICARE for Life wraps around Medicare, significantly
reducing out-of-pocket costs for beneficiaries who are eligible
for both programs. They are generally military retirees and
their spouses after reaching age 65. This leaves DOD with few
tools to control these beneficiaries' utilization of services.
It also has the effect of increasing Medicare spending, as
well. Once again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you and discuss our analysis, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of David E. Mosher may be accessed
at the following Internet address:]

http://cbo.gov/ftpdocs/121xx/doc12162/07-07-FYDP_Testimony.pdf

Mr. Garrett [presiding]. I thank the gentleman,
Congressman.

STATEMENT OF JIM TALENT, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW,
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Talent. Thank you Mr. Chairman. I remember the
frequency with which I would read full statements when I was on
your side of the table. So I am going to recap what I have to
say and then make one observation, and then I would be happy to
accept your questions and respond to them. In recapping my
statement, let me give a little bit of a historical overview. I
think that is the best way to do it. I came to the House in
1993, which coincided with the beginning of the post-Cold War
policies and the Peace Dividend that the government took at the
time. The force structure many of you know this, was cut by
approximately 40 percent across all three services. Procurement
was at the time cut by even more than the force structure was
cut. They took a procurement holiday. As I pointed out in my
statement, there was one year when they did not buy a fighter
aircraft for the Air Force; the reason for that was the
assumption that we would not have to put boots on the ground in
the future, the assumption that for at least 10 years there
would be no existential threat to the United States. These
assumptions, by the way, continued through, mostly, through the
1990's, and the assumption that by modernizing the platforms
and modernizing the force it would make each service member
less vulnerable and more lethal and more capable so that we
would be able to accept a smaller force and fewer platforms.
Then modernization was cut in the 1990s. At the same time,
as Bob Gates has pointed out, we found out that history had not
ended; it had just thawed out with a vengeance and deployments
went up. Every president in the post-war era has sustained the
commitments made by his predecessor and added to them, and that
includes this president, who has sustained his predecessor's
commitment, increased what we did in Afghanistan, and has now
announced a responsibility to protect. And I do not intend to
be critical of that; it just shows how busy our forces have
been protecting American interests around the world.
Then 9/11 occurred, spending on defense did go up but it
was largely eaten up by costs that were generated by the
decisions in the previous decade. Operation and Maintenance has
gone up because when you increase deployments and you cut the
number of platforms and you do not modernize, maintenance goes
up because you are trying to keep legacy inventory and
operation. Compensation has gone up. I think that was
justified, but it was also necessary because when you put this
kind of stress on a volunteer force you have to pay people
more.
Well, the upshot is that chickens are now coming home to
roost. We have kicked the modernization can down the road as
far as we can and now we have a force which is losing crucial
capabilities. The Navy is the smallest it has been since 1916.
The Air Force is the smallest and the oldest it has been since
the inception of the service. The Army's missed several
generations of modernization. The Army is not ready outside of
the forces that are committed into combat. The tip of the spear
is sharp, but they get that way by cannibalizing the rest of
the spear. So if the balloon goes up some place else we are
going to send in troops that do not have enough training and do
not have the equipment, even the legacy equipment that they
need, and that is why the panel which you all created which was
consisted of people appointed by the leaders of Congress and
the administration, the Perry-Hadley Panel, and I mention this
extensively in my remark, concluded that a train wreck is
coming in the area of force capability because we have to
modernize the force. Now we have a modernization crisis and we
have to increase the size of the Navy.
That, in sum, is my remarks. I do want to add one
observation; I know that the budget times are difficult. It is
an unusually difficult time and maybe unusually difficult to do
what could have been done any time in the last 15 years to put
in the funds that are needed to modernize and recapitalize the
force and increase the size of the Navy, but at least recognize
that there is a problem. Do not, because you cannot solve it
right now, try and pretend that there is no problem. There is a
problem. If you recognize that there is a problem it gives a
sense of urgency to doing the things that you can do.
I mention in my written statement, for example, it would be
a very good thing if we could increase foreign military sales
because the defense industrial base is very fragile now. Well,
we can carry, we can support that industrial base and carry
some of these programs if we have more sales, but it is very
difficult because we have an archaic system of approving these
things and it takes a long time. You guys have probably studied
it. Well if you accept the fact that there is a problem and we
need to do something about it, you will approach that kind of a
reform with a much greater sense of urgency.
CBO talks about the need to reduce the costs of military
retiree health care. I would agree with that and I think it is
possible to do that without threatening the quality of that
health care. We need to meet with the retirement community and
their leaders, and we need to work something out. There is an
urgency in doing that if you recognize that we are losing
capabilities: air superiority, amphib capabilities, the ability
of the Army to move quickly and move efficiently and
effectively when it needs to. There is a bunch of things that
you can do.
The other thing is if you recognize that there is a problem
you can be opportunistic when the time comes. I have written in
other forms about the stimulus bill. It was a decision to
stimulate the economy by spending about $800 billion. I did not
agree with it as a matter of fiscal policy but when I heard the
government was going to do it, I thought, well now here is an
opportunity to address some of these needs. For about a third
of that money set aside judiciously over five to 10 years,
combined with the procurement reforms that we need, we have
could have taken care of this problem. Even if procurement and
modernization had gotten the same percentage of that money that
the DOD gets in any given fiscal year, we could have done a
lot. We could have kept the F-22 line open; we needed to keep
that line open as a hedge against the fact that the Russians
and the Chinese are still building fifth generation air-to-air
superiority fighters. We could have bought F-18s as a hedge
against the fact that you may not buy out the F-35 requirement.
We could have gone to production of a higher rate production of
Virginia Class submarine earlier. We could have had the money
available to reset the Army after these conflicts, and there
would have been money left over. And I think had this body been
conscious as a body, had we made the decision to recognize and
confront the fact that there was a problem, there is a very
good chance that that money would have been there. It would
have been spent in American industries, high paying American
jobs, which was the logic behind the bill. But instead there
was no money spent on modernization or procurement, and I think
that is because we did not confront the problem.
I think there would have been a greater sense of urgency
last year about passing a defense appropriations bill. I am not
going to comment on that greatly but you all know, the failure
to pass the bill and funding it through CRs did damage to the
way the department operates, and that was not even a money
issue. And I think there would be a greater sense of urgency
now, at least, to try and do what Secretary Gates has said for
several years needs to be done, which is to pass budgets that
have modest real increases in the defense budget, along with
the savings that we are trying to get, so that we can at least
stop the bleeding until the budget situation is resolved and we
have more funds to address the modernization crisis.
I will conclude by saying what I said in the statement.
Yes, there is a price to strength. There is an upfront cost to
it. There is a price to weakness too, and we have been living
with it. The reason that Operation and Maintenance budget is
going up the way it is going up is they have to take care of
legacy equipment that is breaking down. Some of it has mission
capable rates of 50 percent. So you are shoveling money in
without getting the value because we have not recognized the
problem and we have not committed ourselves to a solution.
I understand the situation that you are in. You have a very
difficult job in the best of times, and these times it is
extremely difficult, at least confront the problem, and at
least approach with a sense of urgency the things that we can
do. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Jim Talent follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jim Talent, Distinguished Fellow, the
Heritage Foundation, Former U.S. Senator From the State of Missouri

Mr. Chairman, I am former Senator Jim Talent, from Missouri. I
served in the United States Senate from 2002-2007 and I was privileged
to be a member of the House from 1993-2001. During my years of service,
I was a member of the Armed Services Committees in both bodies. I am
currently a Distinguished Fellow at The Heritage Foundation focusing on
defense and national security, though the views I will express today
are my own.
I want you to know that I greatly value the work of this Committee
and I honor and appreciate the work of every Member here. In the best
of times you must make difficult choices; in these times your choices
are particularly unpalatable.
You have asked me to testify regarding ``Budgeting for America's
National Security.'' I will focus my remarks on the condition of
America's military today and its likely condition in the future given
current trends.
Mr. Chairman, when I was on your side of the table, I always
appreciated witnesses who stated their views plainly and with candor,
because finding a solution requires first and foremost being willing to
recognize the extent of the problem. In that spirit I will give you my
conclusion about the state of America's military. Despite the dedicated
efforts of our servicemen and women--who are among the finest who ever
served any country--America's military strength is declining, both
absolutely and relative to the dangers which confront us. The rate of
decline is growing, and will soon reach a point--if the point has not
been reached already--where our military leaders will not be able to
honestly guarantee America's security within an acceptable margin of
risk.
Allow me to briefly survey some history to explain how the current
state of affairs came about.
After the Berlin Wall fell and the Cold War ended, many in
Washington believed that the United States had entered an indefinite
period of peace. Because of that, the government took too large of a
``peace dividend'' out of the defense budget. The size of the military
was cut by approximately 40-50 per cent across all the services. Then
in the mid-1990s, the government took what was called a ``procurement
holiday.'' It reduced modernization budgets, and reduced the rate at
which it bought ships, planes, helicopters, tanks, and other inventory,
far more than the size of the force was cut. There was one year, for
example, when the United States did not purchase a single tactical
fighter jet for the Air Force.
Yet as it turned out, the end of the Soviet threat did not bring
global peace. To paraphrase Secretary Bob Gates, history had not ended;
it had only been frozen, and in the post-Cold War years it thawed out
with a vengeance. All the regional, religious and ethnic rivalries that
had been suppressed beneath the Soviet/American competition came to the
surface, and the United States used its military to manage the
resulting conflicts. In the last twenty years, and beginning well
before the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the American military has deployed
at a far greater rate than was ever the case during the Cold War.
America has fought four major regional conflicts--in Bosnia, Kuwait,
Iraq, and Afghanistan. It is beginning a fifth conflict now, in Libya;
at this point, no one knows what the extent or duration of that mission
will be. In addition, the military has engaged in a wide variety of
other missions--from fighting the drug war, interventions in places
like Somalia, stopping piracy, and delivering humanitarian aid--most of
which would have been unthinkable during the Cold War.
It's the age old lesson our government never seems to learn.
Ignoring the potential for conflict does not make the conflict go away.
Failing to prepare for a mission does not make the mission less
necessary or less likely. In fact, there are some conflicts that are
more likely precisely to the extent that we do not prepare for them,
because the purpose of military capability is not just to win wars but
to deter them.
Mr. Chairman, this highlights a benefit of military preparedness
that your Committee cannot score in dollars but which is nevertheless
very real: the savings from missions that do not happen because
military power deters conflict from occurring. An excellent example is
America's presence in the Northwest Pacific. During the first half of
the 20th century, there were three wars in that region involving
Russia, China, Japan, and Korea. During the last half of the 20th
century, there were no wars. That's at least in part because after the
Korean conflict, America created and sustained equilibrium in the
region that has prevented conflict and promoted peaceful development.
That equilibrium has proven beneficial to the United States and to the
world. That is also why the four American Presidents in the post-Cold
War era have continued America's presence in Korea. If our footprint
there were to be eliminated, decreased stability could end up costing
far more than the burden of maintaining America's presence in the first
place.
Here is another relevant example. In the 1990s, the active duty
Army was cut from 18 to 10 divisions, on the assumption that America
would not need to commit large numbers of troops on the ground for long
periods of time. That assumption was driven at least in part by the
desire to save money rather than by sound national security planning.
As it turned out, two different Administrations decided--in each case
with strong support from the Congress--that there was a need for large
numbers of boots on the ground in Iraq and Afghanistan. Yet because the
Army had become so small, its rotational base was inadequate, which is
why the Reserves have been constantly mobilized and so many of our
troops have had to do four or five tours of combat duty in the Mid-
East. There is at least a substantial chance that if the Army had been
bigger, America could have surged troops in Iraq and Afghanistan at the
same time, and shortened one or both of the missions. If so, the
savings would have dwarfed any savings that were achieved by the
original cuts--not to mention the lives that would have been saved, the
reduced stress on our servicemen and women, and the increased
confidence at home and abroad that would have resulted from a more
effective operation.
Here is another point. I'm sure you are all aware that the cost of
pay and benefits for the military is continuing to increase
substantially. Now, our servicemen and women deserve every dollar they
get. But there is no question that because the force was too small to
support the increased operational tempo of the last twenty years, extra
money had to be spent for pay, bonuses and benefits in order to protect
recruitment and retention.
Mr. Chairman, my point is this. There is unquestionably a cost to
sustaining military strength, and the Budget Committee must take that
cost into account. But there is also a price to be paid for weakness;
it can be very substantial and if the Committee is going to budget
honestly you must take that into account as well.
The upshot is that in the last two decades, the combination of
increased deployment, reduced force structure, and underfunded
procurement and modernization has caused a decline in America's
military capability. In the late 1970s, America's military
``hollowed.'' Now it is stressing and rusting; inventories are aging
and increasingly out of date technologically. The Navy has fewer ships
than at any time since 1916. The Air Force inventory is smaller and
older than at any time since the service came into being in 1947. The
Army has missed several generations of modernization, and many of its
soldiers are on their fourth or fifth tour of duty in Iraq or
Afghanistan. The Reserves have been on constant mobilization and are
under stress; many vital programs, such as missile defense, have been
cut; the space architecture is old and needs to be replaced; and in the
past two years, no fewer than 50 modernization programs have been
ended.
In fact, there are very few major modernization programs that are
still actively underway at the Pentagon. As a result, each of the
services has pressing needs that are largely unmet:

The Air Force must replace the fighter inventory, develop
new cargo and tanker assets, build a new bomber, and increase long-
range strike capability.

The Navy must increase the number of submarines, sustain
the number of aircraft carriers, develop a new cruiser, replace the
aviation inventory on the carrier decks, buy more destroyers, and buy
out the requirement of new littoral combat vessels.

The Army must, at minimum, sustain the number of troops at
current levels as well as modernize and replace its inventory of
fighting vehicles, and procure a next-generation attack helicopter--all
supported by a more robust and secure battlefield network.

The Marines must restore their amphibious landing
capability and acquire both Harrier and A-10 replacements, while
allotting sufficient funds to fix and replace equipment worn out from a
decade of war.
These programs are not luxuries, but needs. Without them, the
United States will lose basic capabilities that everyone has come to
take for granted. For example, if current shipbuilding rates continue,
the number of American naval vessels will continue to decline and the
United States will no longer have a global Navy. The Marines have
already lost considerable amphibious capability and are losing more,
which means the Marines will no longer be able to storm the beaches.
They have already lost a considerable portion of their amphibious
capability. Because of Russian and Chinese advances in fighter
capability, and the end of the F-22 production line, America's
traditional air superiority is eroding. According to Lieutenant General
David Deptula, recently departed Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence
in the U.S. Air Force, ``For the first time, our claim to air supremacy
is in jeopardy * * * The dominance we've enjoyed in the aerial domain
is no longer ours for the taking.''
I said before that American strength is declining not only in
absolute terms but relative to the risks we are confronting. Time does
not permit me to survey all the risks confronting the United States,
but I will offer two observations: about the conflict against terrorism
and the implications of China's growing power.
First, for the purposes of this testimony, it's not necessary to
speculate on the current status of the war against terrorism. What we
do know is this. Whether the President's drawdown of our troop surge in
Afghanistan works or not, and whatever else happens there, America is
going to maintain a substantial presence in country for an indefinite
period of time. Our troops may well remain in Iraq in some capacity or
other, and the military is certainly going to continue conducting
counter terrorism operations around the world on an ongoing basis.
Moreover, it is at least possible and perhaps probable that America's
military will have to get more involved in places like Yemen, if not in
counterinsurgency than in enhanced counterterrorism activities.
The important thing for your Committee to consider is that whatever
the exact nature of American operations against Al Qaeda and its
affiliates, that mission will be substantial, and it is being executed
by a force the size of which was determined in the 1990s before
terrorism was considered a major threat. In other words, force
structure was never adjusted upwards in response to the attacks of 9-
11; the conflict against terrorism is a mission that was added to the
burdens of a military that was structured without that mission in view.
Second, Chinese power is surging at a pace that no one anticipated
when the current force was established. China need not become an enemy,
and its increasing power should not be viewed as inherently hostile.
The Chinese are simply recovering from a long period of unusual
weakness and beginning to assert themselves as a major power. But the
rise of Chinese power has implications for the United States that no
Administration can ignore, especially considering the form it is
taking. There is no doubt whatsoever that China is deliberately
assembling naval, missile, and air assets for the purpose of acquiring
the ability to deny the United States access to strategically vital
parts of the Western Pacific. Whether and under what circumstances they
might use that capability is an open question, as is the question of
China's intentions regarding the assertion of its power globally. But
whatever combination of engagement, diplomacy, and deterrence President
Obama or future Presidents might use in response to Chinese ambitions,
the foundation of any successful policy will be confidence in America's
commitment and leadership, and that will be determined in substantial
part by the presence and capabilities of America's naval and air power
in the Pacific--power which is currently in a state of decline.
Mr. Chairman, I haven't said anything to this point that was not
said, in much fuller form and with complete documentation, by the
commission that Congress created last year specifically for the purpose
of reviewing the condition of America's military and recommending steps
for the future. I refer to the Independent Panel which examined the
Quadrennial Defense Review produced by the Pentagon in the spring of
2010. The Independent Panel was chaired by former Secretary of Defense
William Perry and former National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley. It
was thoroughly bipartisan, consisting of twenty members appointed by
the Obama Administration and the Republican and Democratic leaders of
the two Houses of Congress. The Panel considered the likely risks
facing the United States and examined the adequacy of the military to
respond to those challenges. To that end, the Panel interviewed scores
of top officials and examined all the relevant material, including
classified documents. I heartily recommend the report to the Committee
and will summarize for you today some of the key conclusions that are
relevant to this hearing. Direct quotes from the report are italicized
and page numbers are provided for reference.
The Perry-Hadley Panel unanimously concluded:
The United States has for most of the last century pursued four
enduring national security interests. Those objectives include defense
of the American homeland, assured access to sea, air, space, and
cyberspace, preservation of a favorable balance of power across Eurasia
that prevents authoritarian domination of that region, and providing
for the global ``common good'' through such actions as humanitarian
aid, development assistance, and disaster relief. (page vii)
Five key global trends face the nation as it seeks to sustain its
role as leader of an international system that protects the interests
outlined above. Those trends include the Radical Islamist extremism and
the threat of terrorism, the rise of new global great powers in Asia,
continued struggle for power in the Persian Gulf and the greater Middle
East, an accelerating global competition for resources, and persistent
problems from failed and failing states. (page vii)
These trends are likely to place an increased demand on American
``hard power.'' (page vii)
``There is increased operational tempo for a force that is much
smaller than it was during the years of the Cold War. In addition, the
age of major military systems has increased within all the services,
and that age has been magnified by wear and tear through intensified
use.'' (page 53)
[The report] suggests an Army and Marine Corps of the same size as
today, but suggests the Navy expand substantially * * * Air Force end
strength * * * may be at about the right level (page 58)
``We have long been living off the capital accumulated during the
equipment investment of 30 years ago. The useful life of that equipment
is running out, and, as a result, of the inventory is old and in need
of recapitalization. Because military power is a function of quantity
as well as quality, numbers do matter. As the force modernizes, we will
need to replace inventory on at least a one-for-one basis, with an
upward adjustment in the number of naval vessels and certain air and
space assets.'' (page 55)
The Department must fix its acquisitions process to regain
credibility * * * [producing] real savings, which should be captured
and applied to the modernization effort. However, those savings will be
insufficient for comprehensive modernization. ``Meeting the crucial
requirements of modernization will require a substantial and immediate
additional investment that is sustained through the long term.'' (page
61)
Finally, the Panel issued two warnings that are worth quoting in
full as the conclusion to this portion of my remarks.
``The issues raised in this Report are sufficiently serious that we
believe an explicit warning is appropriate. The aging of the
inventories and equipment used by the services, the decline in the size
of the Navy, escalating personnel entitlements, overhead and
procurement costs, and the growing stress on the force means that a
train wreck is coming in the areas of personnel, acquisition and force
structure.'' (page v)
``There is a choice our planners do not have. As the last 20 years
have shown, America does not have the choice of abandoning a leadership
role in support of its national interests. Those interests are vital to
the security of the United States. Failure to anticipate and manage the
conflicts that threaten those interests--to thoughtfully exploit the
options we have set forth in support of a purposeful global strategy--
will not make those conflicts go away or make America's interests any
less important. It will simply lead to an increasingly unstable and
unfriendly global climate and, eventually, to conflicts America cannot
ignore, which we must prosecute with limited choices under unfavorable
circumstances--and with stakes that are higher than anyone would
like.'' (pages 28-29)
next steps
Mr. Chairman, I am going to recommend a series of steps that can be
taken, on a bi-partisan basis and even in this extraordinary budget
climate, to address the problem that I have raised in these remarks and
that the Perry-Hadley Panel covered so thoroughly in its Report. Before
I do that, I want to put the issue in context.
If the government were in anything approaching a typical budget
year, this would not be that difficult a problem. The first step would
be for the Department of Defense to work vigorously to reduce the cost
of major new procurement programs. The Pentagon simply cannot continue
taking up to 20 years to design and build major new military platforms
that end up costing billions more than was originally estimated. The
pace of technological change and the needs of modern warfare make
procurement reform vital, even apart from the budgetary issues created
by the current ineffective system.
Procurement reform would produce substantial savings that could be
put towards the recapitalization called for in the Perry-Hadley Report.
I comment more on procurement reform below. Except for the unusually
difficult budget situation, the next step would be to do what the
Perry-Hadley Panel explicitly recommended: increase the procurement and
modernization budgets by an additional amount sufficient to
recapitalize military inventories over the next five to ten years. The
sum necessary would be substantial but fully affordable in the short
term, and as I have already said, failing to spend the necessary
dollars only increases costs in the long term. In fact, the shortfall
is as large as it is today because in the past--when there was no
budget crisis--the government did not spend the smaller sums that would
have prevented the problem from ever occurring. It always costs more to
catch up than it does to keep from falling behind.
To emphasize precisely that point, The Heritage Foundation
advocated for years that the government adopt as a guideline funding
the military force structure at a level equal to four percent of
America's GDP. Heritage believed that over time, and assuming normal
economic growth, a figure equal to that percentage was approximately
what was needed to recapitalize and sustain the force. Beyond that,
however, Heritage wanted to emphasize that no matter what fiscal policy
Congress adopts, and regardless of your views regarding other budgetary
needs, America can afford to defend itself. The government may choose
to spend less than one out of every 25 dollars defending the country,
but it certainly can spend at least that much. As the Committee is
aware, the government has often spent much more than 4% of GDP on the
military in the past, at times when the economy was much smaller and
less prosperous than it was until the recent economic crisis.
Again, to put the budgetary issue in context, two years ago, the
government spent close to 800 billion dollars in an extraordinary
attempt to stimulate the economy. None of that money was spent on
recapitalizing the military. It's not my purpose to comment on the
stimulus bill as a matter of fiscal policy, though my views on that
subject are easily available to anyone who wants them. But had perhaps
a third of that money been reserved for and spent judiciously on
military modernization over the next decade (and assuming the necessary
procurement reforms had also been implemented) Congress would by that
decision alone have met the vital needs which the Perry-Hadley Panel
thoroughly documented. And the money would have been spent on high
skilled, high paying American jobs in American industry, which was
supposedly the point of the stimulus bill.
That was a missed opportunity. Congress should not miss such an
opportunity again. If I were on the Committee, and regardless of
whether I was a Republican or Democrat, I would vote to recommend the
necessary funding to begin implementing the recommendations of the
Perry-Hadley Panel--even given the current budgetary climate. The
problem which the Panel report documented must be addressed, and the
sooner Congress addresses it, the less it will cost in the long run.
Moreover, funding military modernization is fully consistent with
finding a solution to the budget crisis. I do not pretend to be as
expert on budget issues as Members of this Committee. But it does not
take an expert to see that the core of the problem is a structural
mismatch between the revenue dedicated to the entitlement programs and
the growing cost of those programs. One way or another, Congress is
going to have to resolve that issue. If it does, then a thoughtful plan
to recapitalize the military over the next decade will be fully
affordable. If it doesn't, then denying our servicemen and women the
tools they need to defend us will not prevent the bankruptcy of the
government. In fact, it will make the budget situation worse, if--as is
entirely possible--America's growing military weakness causes conflict
that could have been prevented, increases instability that inhibits
economic growth, or allows a disaster to be inflicted on the homeland
or the American economy.
In short, Mr. Chairman, this government is where it is not because
of budgetary necessity but because of choices that were voluntarily
made over the last 20 years. Making the wrong choices over time has
multiplied problems and narrowed the number of solutions that are
available. Making the right choices, on the other hand, will gradually
reduce the challenges we face and create more palatable options for the
future. The right choice is to meet the government's most basic
responsibility and fund the military at the level that gives the
greatest chance for peace and security in the future.
The current budget climate may make that decision politically or
practically impossible in the short term. Here are some other steps I
recommend for the Committee:
1. stop the bleeding in the short term
Stop cutting the President's budget for defense, and--until the
general budget crisis is resolved--make every effort to meet Secretary
Gates' goal of a small real annual increase in the defense budget. I
understand that in this budgetary climate, every aspect of the federal
budget is ``on the table.'' There undoubtedly are efficiencies that can
be found in defense spending. When savings are achieved, however, they
should be invested in the procurement and modernization budgets. Every
dollar that is used effectively now in those budgets is money that will
not have to be found later.
Also, Congress should pass a timely defense appropriations bill
every year. Last year, Congress failed to pass a FY 2011 defense bill
and instead funded the Pentagon through Continuing Resolutions that
lasted well into this calendar year. Apart from the resulting cuts in
the President's budget, which was already too low, the operational
restrictions in the Continuing Resolutions caused significant
disruptions in the Pentagon's contracting process for ongoing programs.
That caused unnecessary and significant challenges for the Department
and defense contracting community from which they have not yet
recovered.
Third, on a forward going basis, Congress should make every effort
to set and keep stable funding projections for ongoing programs. Of
necessity, Congress appropriates on a yearly basis, while the
Pentagon's major modernization programs last for a number of years.
Without firm funding projections for the out years which Congress
commits to keeping, it is impossible for the Department to plan and
spend the money it is given efficiently. But with such a commitment, it
would be possible to procure more platforms in an economical way,
through multi-year programs and other plans to buy larger numbers of
platforms according to set commitments over time.
2. procurement reform is necessary both to save money and
for the reasons i have outlined above
But the Committee should be aware that every Secretary of Defense
in the last 15 years has dedicated himself to procurement reform.
Congress has passed several bills on the subject, and yet the system is
at best no better and by most estimations has gotten worse.
A quote from former Secretary of the Navy John Lehman illustrates
the problem:
``There were about 1,000 people in the Bureau of Ships during World
War II * * * And they were the ones that mainly ran the shipbuilding
program--not micromanaged the contractors, but developed and did the
systems integration and oversaw the program. Through World War II, they
built on average about a thousand ships per year. That's one ship per
person.
Now in my day (in the 1980s), there were 4,000 people in the Bureau
of Ships, and we averaged 28 ships per year.
Today we're averaging about 6 to 7 ships per year, and there are
25,000 people in the equivalent of the Bureau of Ships. That's a whole
Pentagon load of people in the Bureau of Ships. Now they're scattered
all over the country in different offices and functions, but the
numbers are--you can get into lots of quibbles about it--but the
numbers increased from 1,000 to 4,000 to 25,000 as the numbers of ships
declined precipitously.
And so what's the answer? Reform? We have a new budget that will
add 20,000 additional civil servants to oversee the already-bloated
layers of bureaucracy that are there today.''
The Perry-Hadley Report contains a brief but important chapter on
procurement reform which I strongly recommend to the Committee. The
Panel noted that the most basic problem was ``fragmentation of
authority and accountability for performance.'' In other words, the
processes of procurement have been made so complicated--often in an
effort to avoid mistakes or ensure oversight--that there is no single
manager or small group of managers who have the authority to make
decisions or feel accountable for the progress of programs. Someone
must be clearly in charge of every procurement program, and must
clearly have the authority that goes with that responsibility.
Second, the Panel noted that the Department must insist on no more
than a 5 to 7 year delivery window for new programs. That means, among
other things, accepting that a platform as initially delivered may have
only incrementally improved capabilities which can be further improved
through evolutionary upgrades over time after the platform has been
deployed. Successful programs in the past have often gone through
several upgrades over decades. Such a process is better suited to the
rapid pace of technological change, and is much easier to manage in an
efficient way, than trying to achieve every possible desired
improvement before initial delivery.
To put it another way, we have to focus on getting more hulls in
the water, more planes in the sky, and more trucks and fighting
vehicles on the ground. We have to increase numbers quickly even if it
means increasing capabilities more incrementally.
There are a number of other cogent suggestions in the Report. But
the upshot is that a well trained line management force, with clear
authority and responsibility, that insists on short timelines with
reasonable deliverables, is the key to procurement reform. What is not
needed are huge numbers of new regulations or new managers with
complicated chains of command. If that is the manner in which
``reforms'' are instituted, they will increase rather than reduce
costs.
It should be noted that one of the reasons program costs have gone
up is the decline in the defense industrial base. The private sector
has not been unaware that since the end of the Cold War, the government
has not placed a high value on procurement and modernization funding.
That has caused investment to shift away from defense industries and
remaining firms to consolidate. This is not 1961 anymore; there really
is no more ``military industrial complex'' or if it exists, it's a lot
smaller than it used to be. A decade ago, there were six major aircraft
producers in the United States. Now there are two. Forty years ago
there were eleven major naval shipyards. Now there are four. For the
first time in almost a century, America has no manned military or
civilian aircraft in design.
Fewer competitors generally means less competition, which puts
upward pressure on prices. Moreover, it means that the remaining
industrial base is less flexible and more fragile. Before Congress ends
programs like the F-22 and shuts down major production lines, it should
remember that those lines cannot be reconstituted without enormous cost
and without taking a lot more time than it would have taken in the
past. So where there is any doubt about whether further procurement of
an existing platform may be required, every effort should be taken to
keep the production line going. And in general Congress should consider
how to protect the remaining defense industrial base, perhaps with
small investments in crucial capabilities even where the money is not
available to fund a major program. In this respect, I applaud the HASC
for its efforts to keep open the Abrams tank line and the Bradley
fighting vehicle line. Given the significant possibility that Army
modernization programs will not be funded, keeping those lines open at
least helps ensure that the industrial base stays intact, that new if
not modern platforms will be available, and that evolutionary upgrades
can be considered at some point.
3. congress can strengthen the industrial base
by promoting foreign military sales
Easing restrictions on sales of select platforms to allies and
partners will achieve more efficient production rates and offset costs
born by the American taxpayer as well as help protect the industrial
base. One problem is archaic International Trade in Arms Regulations
which are time confusing and confusing. They should and can be reformed
without sacrificing real national security concerns. In fact, by
reauthorizing and reforming the old Export Administration Act, Congress
can strengthen protections against exports to state sponsors of terror
while applying less stringent standards to more generic kinds of
exports to friendly countries. Also, more can be done bilaterally to
encourage defense trade cooperation. As a first step in this process,
the Senate was correct to approve two treaties that exempted the United
Kingdom and Australia--two reliable allies--from various restrictions.
Finally, with regard to personnel costs. Much has been written
about how Congress has increased benefits to servicemembers, active
duty and retired, in the last ten years, causing personnel costs to
grow. That policy was, in general, necessary and right--though it was a
mistake not to increase the topline to pay for the extra compensation--
because it allowed the volunteer force to mature and play its part in
carrying out American foreign policy.
After World War II, the logic of historical events pushed America
to the forefront of world affairs. American leaders established a
baseline goal of protecting the homeland and limiting the spread of
totalitarian domination without precipitating a third World War. There
have been many mistakes in judgments, operational failures, and periods
of insensitivity and excess since that goal was established. But the
baseline strategy has been a success, and because of that the United
States and the world has experienced a tremendous growth in freedom,
prosperity, and--relative to the first half of the 20th century--peace.
Moreover, America achieved its goals while at the same time
consistently reducing the percentage of its national wealth that was
devoted to the nation's defense.
There are a number of tools our government has used to accomplish
that strategy. I am an advocate for the tools of ``smart power,'' as
properly defined: diplomacy, international coalitions, engagement, the
growth of economic and democratic institutions, and effective
communication about America's values and intentions. But the
underpinning of all those tools is America's military capability, and
the underpinning of that is the dedication and competence of the men
and women who have defended us over the last 60 years.
Those men and women have made the volunteer military an unqualified
success. They have accomplished every mission we have given them. They
deserve to be well compensated. Moreover, the sacrifices they and their
families make, and the depth and diversity of their skills, has become
so great that to keep them in the service we must compensate them at a
level commensurate or greater than what they could earn in the private
sector.
So in my view, and without commenting on every specific benefit
decision, the increase in pay and benefits of the last ten years was
justified and necessary. But there are three areas where I believe the
compensation structure should be reformed.
First, too much of the compensation package is concentrated in the
post retirement years. I do not begrudge our retired servicemembers
their pay and benefits, but because the retirement benefits have become
so generous, the government has made it financially prohibitive for
many servicemembers to continue in the military once they are eligible
to retire after 20 years of service. That pressure has become a burden
on retention. We need these highly skilled servicemembers to stay
longer in the military, and we need a compensation system that allows
them to continue their service without feeling like they are doing a
financial disservice to themselves and their families.
Second, the cost of health care is becoming a problem, particularly
for retired servicemembers. I voted for TriCare for life when I was in
the Congress, and I believe it was right thing to do. But it ought to
be possible to work with the retiree community to lower the cost of
that care without sacrificing quality or putting an unfair burden on
retirees.
Third, Congress must understand that the cost of military
compensation comes directly out of the same pool of dollars that pays
for everything else on which our servicemen and women depend. It is
politically popular to increase benefits, and as I said the increases
were justified by the contributions of our military. But increasing
compensation is irresponsible and self defeating when it means
sacrificing the training or tools that servicemembers need to
accomplish their missions at low risk and with minimal loss of life. In
future, benefits should not be introduced or increased unless Congress
is also willing to increase the top line defense budget enough to pay
for it.
conclusion
Mr. Chairman, I want in conclusion to thank you and the Committee
again for inviting me to testify. The condition of America's military
is a cause for grave concern. I know that your options to deal with the
issue are not as robust as they would have been even a few years ago.
The key at this point is to confront the problem rather than trying to
avoid it, carefully consider the options that are realistically
available in the short term, and then choose the right alternatives
within the universe of what is possible. The good news is that making
the right decisions now will expand the range of palatable alternatives
in the future; the inherent resiliency of the volunteer force and the
people who constitute it may make it possible to recover our strength
sooner than might reasonably be expected.

Mr. Garrett. I thank the gentleman. Dr. Adams.

STATEMENT OF GORDON ADAMS, DISTINGUISHED FELLOW,
THE STIMSON CENTER

Mr. Adams. Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Van Hollen, for whom I am also a constituent. It is a pleasure
to be here. Thank you very much for asking me to testify today
and talk about this issue. It is incredibly important work that
you are doing and I want to try to offer a perspective, perhaps
slightly different from either one that you have just heard,
about how we might go about doing that work.
When I worked at the Office of Management Budget, which I
did for five years in the 1990s; one of my bosses, who I think
lurks behind that portrait over there in that corner, I am not
quite sure because I am at a angle to it, would have been
Congressman Panetta, who was the Chair of this Committee at the
time is now the Secretary of Defense. We struggled very hard
with this issue of the relationship between defense and the
rest of the federal fisc and the US economy, and in the process
of doing that struggle in large part because we were
constrained by the budget rules that were laid down and the
Budget Enforcement Act of 1990, spent a great deal of time
negotiating between the Office of Management and Budget, and
the Budget Committee; the Chairs, the Ranking Members, and the
Members of the Budget Committee. So I am very conscious of the
important role that you play. As we head into what Chairman
Mullen called our most significant national security issue,
which is dealing with our deficits and our debt, your role is
going to become ever more important. I appreciate it and I
understand it.
Let me reassert then as my first point to summarize my
testimony that our deficit, our debt, and the economy are our
most important national security issues. I agree not only with
Chairman Mullen but with the Simpson-Bowles Commission, with
the Rivlin-Domenici Commission, and national security is part
of that issue. All spending contributes to deficits. All
spending contributes to the borrowing we have to do to fund the
deficits. All revenue changes contribute to deficits, and to
the borrowing that has to be done to make up and fund those
deficits, and that includes national defense. It always has and
it always will.
The Congressional Budget Office and further work on their
data by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities show that
over the past 10 years, and stretching out over the next 10
years, the deficits and the accumulated debt the United States
has have stemmed largely from three things: the tax cuts of
2001 and the reduction of revenue, the increase in defense
spending, and the combination of revenue and spending increases
that happened as a result of the recession. A much smaller
proportion of the deficits and the accumulated debt is
attributable to the one time TARP Bill, and to the stimulus
package of 2009.
So defense is part of the problem. All federal spending,
all federal revenues are part of the problem, and that is why
for you everything has to be on the table.
Defense, point number two, is always resource constrained.
We speak as if we lived in a universe where defense and
resources are unlinked. One of the major weaknesses of the
panel in my judgment that Senator Talent served on was that it
dealt with the world as if there were no resource constraints
on any part of the federal budget, especially defense. But as
Bernard Brodie, prominent strategic analyst, said many years
ago in 1959, ``Strategy wears a dollar sign.'' Resources and
strategy are always linked; they will always be linked.
In doubling the defense budget over the past 10 years, as
Admiral Mullen said and Congressman Van Hollen referred to
that, ``We have lost our ability to make the hard choices and
do the trade-offs.'' Well the piper who is playing the piping
tune now that we have to pay is making those tough choices and
doing the trade-offs that have not been done for the past
decade.
Third point, we are in a build-down. The build-down is
already underway in defense. It is the fourth defense build-
down that we have done since the end of the Korean War. This is
not a new experience in American national security history. We
have built down each time we have ended major involvement in a
conflict, Korea, Vietnam, the Cold War, and now Afghanistan,
and Iraq. This build-down is driven by the end of those
conflicts and by an increasing concern about our deficits and
our debt.
We managed a build-down in 1990s. That build-down actually
began under the George H.W. Bush Administration. The first
500,000 people who came out of the military force structure
were taken out by Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell. We managed
that build-down through the 1990s, and frankly despite some of
the issues raised by Senator Talent, it was in fact the best
managed build-down we have had in American history and left
behind a dominant global military force; one that took out
Saddam Hussein like a speed bump in 2003. So it is possible to
manage a build-down. We have done it before, we can do it
again.
Fifth point, in my judgment the $400 billion over 12 years
the Administration put on the table is best the Defense
Department is likely to do; it is a minimal. As I say in the
testimony, we can achieve $400 billion in savings in defense
over the next 12 years providing the Defense Department with
growth at the rate of inflation over that same 12 years as
against the current defense projected baseline.
The commissions that have been mentioned before in
introductory remarks, and we did the staffing on defense for
the Rivlin-Domenici Panel, have proposed more significant
reductions, $500 billion to $1 trillion, which at $1 trillion
comes to something like 15 percent of the projected resources
over the next 10 years. It is possible to do a build-down. We
agree that if you reach numbers of those magnitudes it is very
important, as you suggested in your introductory remarks, to
link it to strategy. And so in the testimony and in work we did
for Rivlin-Domenici and published in Foreign Affairs in January
of this year, we have talked about what some of those
priorities may be, and I hope we get a chance to discuss them
more in the context of this hearing. Terrorism obviously won,
and we can talk about how one approaches that. It is not
predominantly a military issue. Cyber protection is one, also
not predominantly a military issue. Large steel conventional
combat, we judge to be relatively unlikely, not likely. The
rise of China is an issue of serious discussion and serious
consideration, but not manifestly a threat against which we
need to throw a significant growth in defense resources. And
most important perhaps in our view, the counterinsurgency
mission, the dealing with fragile states using the military
instrument, expanding the force to cope with that kind of a
problem, we would be drawing the wrong lessons from Afghanistan
and Iraq not the right lessons, and I am prepared to talk to
that proposition.
So we suggest in the testimony options that involve
shrinking the American military force, dealing judiciously with
our procurement vectors in the future, the Army fortunately has
spent a good deal of money through supplementals over the past
three or four years to help get ahead of the ball on its own
reset problem and to deal seriously with the problem of defense
infrastructure. When we have more than 500,000 American combat
forces, or I should say uniformed forces, which are not in
combat and do not deploy according to the Defense Business
Board, we have a serious problem of tooth-to-tail; and that
tail needs to be dealt with in a serious way.
Final point, and I will close with this, it is important to
point out that even if you took all of these steps the United
States retains today and would retain 10 years out a globally
dominant military. We sometimes lose this point in talking
about problems that the military has. We have the only military
in the world capable of flying anywhere in the globe. We have
the only military in the world capable of sailing anywhere in
the world. We have the only military in the world capable of
deploying ground forces anywhere in the world. We have the only
military with global intelligence, communications,
transportation, and logistics. The only military, no other
country in the world even comes close. Ten years out in a well
managed build-down we would have exactly the same thing. Thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Gordon Adams follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Gordon Adams, Professor of International
Relations, School of International Service, American University, and
Distinguished Fellow, Project on Budgeting for Foreign Affairs and
Defense, Stimson Center

Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Van Hollen, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the invitation to appear today on the critical
and timely subject of our national security budget.
As you search for avenues to deal with our continuing fiscal
crisis, it is important to keep in mind that a solution can only be
found if everything is on the table, including national security
spending. The underlying theme of my testimony today is that our
defense budget is not only part of our fiscal dilemma; it can and
should be part of the solution as well. We are at a critical juncture
in defense planning and budgeting at which international conditions
make it possible and timely to rethink how we use our military as part
of our toolkit for international engagement.
The Defense Department has not faced strategic or budgetary
discipline for more than a decade. Our military budget has more than
doubled in the past decade, consuming 55% of our entire discretionary
costs. Last year it reaching a level in constant dollars unprecedented
since the end of World War II. And the missions we have asked the
military to perform have grown virtually without end.
Such discipline is now both possible and necessary. In the long
term, strategy and resources--human and fiscal--have always been
linked. As Bernard Brodie, one of America's great strategic thinkers,
put it more than fifty years ago: ``Strategy wears a dollar sign.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bernard Brodie. Strategy in the Missile Age. (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1959). p. 358.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A disciplined approach to both will produce budgetary savings and
ensure that our military capabilities and global leadership remain
powerful and well focused on core missions. This means making choices
linked to a realistic assessment of risks, defining missions better
connected to a more coherent strategy, and doing so within constrained
resources.
My testimony draws on work we have done at the Stimson Center's
project on budgeting for foreign affairs and defense, including
consulting with the Bipartisan Policy Center's Rivlin-Domenici Debt
Panel, as well as my more than thirty years experience in policy
research and government service in the area of national security
planning and budgeting.\2\ It is based on several key principles:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Stimson project work is publicly available at (http://
www.stimson.org/programs/budgeting-for-foreign-affairs-and-defense/)
and blog (http://thewillandthewallet.org/). See also Gordon Adams and
Cindy Williams. Buying National Security: How America Plans and Pays
for its Global Role and Safety at Home. (New York: Routledge, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our central national security crisis today is our looming
federal debt and annual deficits. All ingredients of national spending
and revenues must be on the table for our deficits to be brought under
control and our debt to be stabilized. A budgetary solution is
achievable only if it is balanced, with every element of federal
spending and revenues playing a part.

A defense ``build down'' is already under way. Defense
budgets are primed to decline, as they generally do at the end of
combat deployments and with changes in the international environment,
and will do so gradually over the next decade. In my judgment, the
starting point for budgetary discipline is the FY2011 appropriation for
the base defense budget--$529 billion. The slope of this build down
will be gradual, implemented over a number of years, and it should be
linked to a coherent set of strategic, mission, and program choices.

Much deeper reductions than those proposed by the
administration are possible, likely, and can be executed with little or
no risk to American national security if properly planned. The twelve-
year, $400 billion reduction that President Obama announced in April is
a very small step in that direction; it could be accomplished while
continuing to provide growth with inflation to the defense budget.
Deeper cuts are possible and likely. The Simpson-Bowles Fiscal
Commission, the Bipartisan Policy Center's Rivlin-Domenici Panel, and
the Sustainable Defense Task Force have all endorsed reductions between
$500 billion and a trillion dollars over the next ten years. Even those
can be accomplished successfully, representing something like 6-13% of
the currently projected defense resources.

The key to a successful build down will be linking
strategic and mission discipline to this need for fiscal discipline.
This means setting mission priorities for the military. In a Foreign
Affairs article earlier this year, we recommended focusing on combating
Al Qaeda's organization and cybersecurity as the most critical missions
and divesting from counter-insurgency and nation-building.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Gordon Adams and Matthew Leatherman. ``A Leaner and Meaner
Defense: How to Cut the Pentagon's Budget while Improving Its
Performance,'' Foreign Affairs (Jan/Feb 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The strategic, mission, and fiscal discipline I recommend
creates little risk for our national security. Indeed, priority-setting
might enhance both our security and our global leadership. Even with
such reductions, the US military would continue to be decades ahead of
any other military in capacity and technology, with the only capacity
to fly, sail, and deploy ground force on a global basis and the only
global capability for communications, logistics, transportation, and
intelligence on the planet.
understanding the trend: defense budgets in context
It is not my intent here to analyze the risks that unprecedented US
debt and continuous high deficits pose for the US economy and our
global role. But it is important to underline that our economic
strength is as critical or more for our future security as the level of
our defense spending. As Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, put it, ``the single-biggest threat to our national
security is our debt.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Admiral Mike Mullen. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Detroit Marriott at the Renaissance Center, Detroit, Michigan. 26
August 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today's fiscal problems require perspective. Many attribute our
crisis to continuing growth in particular parts of the federal budget,
especially mandatory entitlements, and there is no doubt that
entitlement spending has grown at a great pace, driven largely by
health care costs (which have had their own impact on defense health
care costs). Yet it is an overstatement to say that entitlements alone
are responsible for our recent deficits. A recent analysis by the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities shows that the deficits of the
past decade, as well as those forecast for the next ten years, are
primarily the result of the 2001 tax cuts, rapid growth in defense
spending, and declining revenues resulting from the economic
recession.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Kathy A. Ruffing and James R. Horney. ``Economic Downturn and
Bush Policies Continue to Drive Large Projected Deficit,'' Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities, 20 May 2011. At http://www.cbpp.org/
files/5-10-11bud.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assigning blame for our federal debt and deficit crisis is less
important, though, than understanding that defense budget reductions
will play a role in getting it under control. It will not be the first
time defense savings have been found, or that they have played such a
role. In fact, this build down follows three previous ones: the end of
the Korean and Vietnam wars, and the Cold War. As OMB Associate
Director for National Security and International Affairs from 1993-97,
I had direct experience of the last such build down, and it is both
instructive and reassuring. The pace was modest, the cuts were real,
and the forces that remained were capable.

The chart above tracks this build down. The median annual reduction
was 2.54%, real but gradual, the margin by which this Congress reduced
the FY2011 appropriation for the Department of Homeland Security (2%).
Reductions at this pace should not lead to sharp changes in strategy.
Near-term savings opportunities could include streamlining our ``tooth-
to-tail'' ratio which, at eighty-four support and administrative troops
for every sixteen combat personnel, is the highest among industrial
powers.\6\ Another option would be to consolidate headquarters
infrastructure, especially combatant commands, which according to the
Defense Business Board have now grown to ten organizations with 98,000
military and civilian staff and a total budget in FY2010 of $16.5
billion.\7\ And, even more immediately, Congress could collect the $100
billion from Secretary Gates' recent efficiency scrub, all of which was
left with the military services to re-spend.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Scott Gebicke and Samuel Magid. ``Lessons from around the
world: Benchmarking performance in defense,'' McKinsey, Spring 2010.
Exhibit 3.
\7\ Arnold Punaro. ``Reducing Overhead and Improving Business
Operations,'' Defense Business Board, 22 July 2010. Slide 30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Budget reductions paced gradually over several years would provide
fiscal discipline and an important contribution to deficit reduction.
Over time, such a build down would produce real change in the defense
budget. The 2.5% annual reductions shrank the Pentagon's budget by 36%
in FY1998 relative to FY1985, or $206 billion in constant dollar
savings that year alone. Change at this pace allows time to rethink
strategy and mission. Over the thirteen years in the last build down,
the Pentagon reduced active-duty troops from 2.2 million to 1.47
million, defense civilian employment from 1.11 million to 747,000, and
procurement spending by two-thirds. The force that emerged was able to
help bring peace to the Balkans in the 1990s, topple the Taliban in
2001, and overrun the Iraqi military in 2003.
This build down was managed by Presidents Reagan, George H.W. Bush,
and Clinton working in a bipartisan manner with seven Congresses. Much
of it was accomplished under the leadership of Secretary of Defense
Dick Cheney and Joint Chiefs Chairman Colin Powell. To some extent,
this bipartisan process is again under way; the FY2011 base (i.e., non-
war) Pentagon appropriations of $528.9 billion effectively froze the
FY2010 amount, marking a shift away from endless growth and creating a
starting point for a sustained process of budgetary discipline.
targets for budget discipline and steps along the way
Congress needs to continue this process. Cuts mean a lower funding
level than the previous year, not a slow-down in projected budget
growth. A lower level of budget growth does not contribute to deficit
reduction; it only slows the pace at which defense is deficit-funded.
As long as defense budgets grow, the discipline the Pentagon needs is
not being provided.
Secretary Robert Gates claimed that he had cut the defense budget
but he only slowed its growth. Some of what he ``cut'' was overstated.
Most prominently, he claimed that his FY2010 weapons system
terminations cut $330 billion from future spending. Those savings were
gross, however, not net. They included terminating the F-22 and the C-
17, though neither was in DOD's long-term budget plans. And Gates
routinely did not net out the investment in follow-on programs to
replace the ones he terminated, including Army combat vehicles and
Marine Corps amphibious landing vehicles. The Gates defense budgets
continued to grow--2.9% in FY2010, despite the terminations--and were
planned to push even higher over the FYDP.
Congress also has conflated defense growth with budget-wide cuts.
The $20 billion cut in the administration's FY2011 base defense budget
request was, nonetheless, ``approximately $5 billion above last year''
for defense.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See http://republicans.appropriations.house.gov/--files/
41211SummaryFinalFY2011CR.pdf. Congress was able to grow the defense
appropriation while also freezing the Pentagon's base budget, referred
to earlier, because of savings from the military construction
appropriation resulting from the wind-down of the 2005 BRAC process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress should use ``current services'' as its baseline, starting
with the FY2011 base defense appropriation. The experience in the
Reagan-Bush-Clinton period showed it is possible to manage a gradual
budget reduction pace, and the FY2012 request should be the first one
to sustain such discipline. The administration's $553 billion base
budget request is already overtaken by events. Were it appropriated, as
the House Armed Services Committee authorized, it would represent $24
billion (5%) in growth over FY2011. This is unrealistic. Even the
President acknowledged it on April 14, seeking a minimum of $400
billion in reductions from his own projections over the next 12 years
and using the FY2011 appropriation as the baseline. Similarly, the
House Appropriations Committee reduced the FY2012 request by $8.9
billion, but that still leaves a 3% increase and makes no contribution
to deficit reduction.
The President's proposed $400 billion in reductions from the plan
should be treated as a ``ceiling'' for defense, the most the Department
might expect to receive. The Defense Department could provide those
savings and more from current budget projections and still maintain
budget growth at the rate of inflation. This level of build down does
not require a change in strategy, despite the ``strategic review''
Secretary Gates began (see table below).

Indeed, deeper, real cuts are clearly both possible and
responsible. The President's Simpson-Bowles debt panel, the Bipartisan
Policy Center's Domenici-Rivlin Debt Panel, and the Sustainable Defense
Task Force sponsored by Representatives Barney Frank (D-MA) and Ron
Paul (R-TX) all proposed more substantial reductions ranging between
$500 billion and $1 trillion over ten years. Most interestingly,
working different paths, although with some consultation, these panels
found common priorities for defense discipline: the size of the force,
hardware investment decisions, personnel policies, and management
efficiency (see chart on page 8).
Some of these recommendations are already subject to congressional
action. This is an important, if minimal, step. The cost of the
military health care program has more than doubled since FY2001, from
$24 billion to $52.5 billion, and the Pentagon projects it to continue
growing at disproportionate annual rates of 3% to 5% through 2016.
Working-age military retirees and their dependents were expected to pay
approximately 27% of program costs when TRICARE was established in 1995
but have not seen any cost increase since then. Medical inflation and
policy changes thus narrowed their cost sharing to approximately 11%.
The fee increase being considered would increase costs for single
members by $2.50 a month, from $230 to $260 per year, and for members
with families by $5 a month, from $460 to $520 a year. The Defense
Department would save $340 million next year if the fee is increased,
and indexing that fee to Medicare inflation would accelerate savings in
later years.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Robert Hale. ``FY2012 Budget Briefing,'' 14 February 2011.
http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4770.
For the history of TRICARE cost sharing, see ``Report of the Tenth
Quadrennial Review of Military Compensation: Volume II,'' Department of
Defense, July 2008. p. 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress also appears ready to support the Pentagon's request to
terminate two programs targeted by the independent defense savings
panels, the Marines' Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle (EFV) and the
Army's Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS). Both programs needed
such budgetary discipline. The Government Accountability Office
reported that EFV costs per unit grew by 170% since 2000, to $24
million, and that the vehicle's design and schedule were in doubt.\10\
Meanwhile, no amphibious landing of the sort that would justify EFV has
been executed under combat circumstances since the Korean War's 1950
Battle of Inchon. MEADS, also on the block, duplicates the ongoing PAC-
3 update to theater missile defenses and has long been a low priority
for the Army.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``Assessment of Selected Weapons Programs,'' Government
Accountability Office, 29 March 2011. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/
d11233sp.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consensus among these panels can provide further guidance for the
Congress. Additional savings could come from slowing and terminating
parts of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program and from reducing end
strength as we withdraw from Iraq and Afghanistan.

linking fiscal and strategic discipline
Returning defense budgets to the peacetime levels more typical of
the past 40 years, as proposed by the fiscal panels, raises the more
fundamental question of strategy. Budgets discipline strategy and
strategic (and mission) choices can discipline budgets. Such discipline
has been noticeably absent over the past ten years. The Domenici-Rivlin
panel moved in this direction and it is also the focus of our article,
based on the panel's work, in the January/February 2011 edition of
Foreign Affairs.\11\ In contrast to the Quadrennial Defense Review of
2010 and, very likely, the current strategic review, this approach
would set meaningful priorities among military missions, calculate
acceptable levels of risk, and tailor the force within budget
constraints. Priority would go to military missions that are probable,
consequential, achievable and appropriate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Gordon Adams and Matthew Leatherman. ``A Leaner and Meaner
Defense: How to Cut the Pentagon's Budget while Improving Its
Performance,'' Foreign Affairs (Jan/Feb 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our judgment, the United States has never been as secure as it
is today. Despite the rhetoric about an increasingly dangerous world,
the US faces no existential threat and substantial choice about the
international commitments it makes. Confronting Al Qaeda's central
network is an important priority. Defending against cyber attack also
is significant, though the US needs to be cautious that it does not
stimulate an even greater threat though our own offensive investments
and to ensure that we work with the international community to control
the challenge we face. The quality, rather than the quantity, of our
defense investment against these two challenges is what matters. As the
bin Laden mission demonstrated, special operators are the most
effective capability to deal with the terrorist threat, combined with
international action, financial tools, and law enforcement. A large
ground force is not the right instrument.
Large-scale conventional combat, a capability that deters
adversaries, and some level of sea lane patrol to provide presence are
next-level priorities. But, again, the end of the Cold War has brought
unprecedented levels of security to the US. Large scale conventional
war is less likely and the US is gradually slimming its nuclear
deterrent to reflect the much lower level of nuclear threat it now
faces. Neither of these missions justifies continued growth in defense
spending.
Still, as Secretary Gates pointed out in May 2008, military
services with lesser roles in current wars chronically plan around
``Next-War-Itis,'' a fixation on potential future conflicts that would
feature them more prominently and thus inflate their budgets well
beyond demand. China is the scenario on which this planning focuses,
especially for the Air Force, Navy, and advocates of programs that are
aimed at ensuring US ``access'' to the Pacific theater.
There is no doubt that China is a rising power and is making
substantial investments in its defense capabilities, but some
perspective is needed here. China's military investment is, according
to the most informed sources, one-seventh of ours. Chinese capabilities
at sea and in the air are minimal compared to those of the US and will
take decades to catch up, a goal reachable only if the US stops
investing in defense. Moreover, there is little indication that China
seeks a military confrontation with the US and no grounds at all for
viewing the relationship as one driven by fundamental ideological
hostility. We must be careful to avoid the contradiction of viewing
China as a country with intentions but no capability for confrontation
while considering ourselves as a power with capabilities but no
intention for confrontation. There is ample room here for a long-term
strategy that maintains our military power and presence in the Pacific
region, avoids an arms race, and engages China on the diplomatic,
economic, and financial levels. Indeed, the Chinese may be looking for
the US to get its fiscal house in order, which is in the interests of
both powers.
The prospect of a major conventional confrontation elsewhere is
minimal. North Korea's military is numerically impressive but would be
confronted by a substantially different South Korean military than that
which existed in 1950. The US role in such a confrontation would be
significantly lower, limited to sea and air power. Pacific strategy
more broadly can and should be one of nuclear deterrence, air support,
and naval presence. The prospect of a long-term conventional conflict
with Iran is also low. Iran's vast size, to say nothing of the public
hostility to any US presence, makes anything more than air strikes or
Special Forces operations unlikely. And for all the rhetoric and
concern about Pakistan, the likelihood of a major US ground presence in
that country is near zero for the same reason.
It is hard to find another case where a sizeable US conventional
ground presence is likely any time in the near future. It is
appropriate to hedge against a conventional ground conflict or the use
of naval and air power, but a smaller US force and budget would be
ample to cope with this risk. Today the US already has the most
dominant global conventional capability on the planet, providing a
significant hedge against such challenges, and we would continue to
have such a capability even should the budget go down as it did in the
1990s.
The most cited danger is also the most recent addition to US
military missions: fragile states, insurgencies, nation-building, and
post-conflict reconstruction. Here we are at substantial risk of
learning the ``wrong'' lessons from Iraq and Afghanistan. The US was
not dealing with state fragility in either country. We consciously
pursued a strategy of regime change using conventional combat forces in
both cases. Once the occupying power, we faced an insurgency our
invasion helped stimulate. The internal capacity to govern and provide
for balanced development disappeared partly because we ``disappeared''
it.
Basing future policy on this model is a dangerous but lesser-known
case of the ``Next-War-Itis'' Secretary Gates warned about. It is far
from clear that the US military is or will be in demand for large-scale
invasion, regime removal, occupation, nation-building, or fighting
insurgents. These missions have had their day, our success has been
less than stunning, and, thus, they deserve a low priority. Future
conflict resolution, conflict prevention, and support for governance
and development are civilian missions for the US, in concert with
international partners, not the future of the US military.
Reviewing defense missions in this way would lead to tough,
strategy-driven choices on personnel and investment--the areas that the
Pentagon most seeks to protect from budgetary scrutiny. US ground
forces have grown by 92,000 soldiers and Marines since 2007, in large
part linked to the rotation requirements of long counterinsurgency and
nation-building campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan. Our proposed
priorities could reverse that growth. If the likelihood of conventional
confrontation is as we see it, our Asian and especially European allies
are sufficiently secure to permit a drawdown of the 80,000 US forces
permanently stationed overseas. And if the tasks facing US military
forces are less than we have given them over the past ten years, the
defense infrastructure could shrink as well, eliminating another
100,000 uniformed positions from the half-million service members that
the Pentagon classifies as working in overhead positions and not
deployed.\12\ Taken together, these end strength reductions could be
phased in over five years, providing significant savings but retaining
a globally operational military capability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Arnold Punaro. ``Reducing Overhead and Improving Business
Operations,'' Defense Business Board briefing, 22 July 2010. Slide 23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mission prioritization can also inform investment choices. Our
current air dominance suggests that continuing current fighter-jet
programs rather than building a new F-35 may be adequate. Slowing the
rate at which we buy new Virginia-class attack submarines also may be
sufficient given our global dominance, and lowering our current
investment in missile defenses may be better tailored to the real
missile threat. Ultimately, the defense savings proposed by the
independent debt panels would lead to this kind of strategic rethink.
Yet these panels would also retain a dominant global military force,
and their savings are achievable through modest, incremental steps over
a period of years, long enough to accommodate discussion and
implementation of a changed strategy.
enduring security of the united states
All of these strategy and mission thoughts are, for now,
suggestive. We are currently working, with the support of the Peter G.
Peterson Foundation, on a more detailed review of military mission
priorities and the forces and costs associated with resetting them.
Making choices in this way would do what the 2010 Quadrennial Defense
Review failed to do and what the ongoing strategy review is unlikely to
do: constrain the defense budget to a strategy that prioritizes
missions, deliberately manages risk, and accepts the resource
discipline reality advised so long ago by Bernard Brodie.
A broad approach to strategic and fiscal discipline in defense
helps provide a sound footing for federal finances and the economy
while also improving our security. It is possible while retaining the
most superior global military capability history has ever seen. The
United States would continue to be the only country able to patrol the
world's oceans, deploy hundreds of thousands of ground forces to any
point on the globe, and dominate the global airspace with superior
combat fighters, long-range bombers, and unmanned aircraft. At roughly
60,000, US special operations forces alone would be larger than the
militaries of more than half the world's countries. More broadly, the
United States' entire post-reform active duty force would exceed the
forces of any other country except for China and India. Supporting this
overwhelming force, the US would retain the world's only global
military transportation, communications, logistics, and intelligence
capabilities. And, even with a trillion-dollar reduction over ten
years, an unsurpassed defense budget would enable this force. For
perspective, our FY2009 military research and development spending
alone exceeded China's entire defense budget.
Admiral Mullen has underlined the importance of returning this
budgetary discipline to the Defense Department. As he acknowledged in a
budget press briefing on January 6th of this year, ``the defense budget
has basically doubled in the last decade. And my own experience here is
in that doubling, we've lost our ability to prioritize, to make hard
decisions, to do tough analysis, to make trades.'' \13\ He is precisely
right.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Admiral Mike Mullen. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Pentagon, Arlington, Virginia. 6 January 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress and the administration now have the opportunity to improve
our national security at a reduced cost, while ensuring a balanced
package of deficit reduction. The experience of the Reagan-Bush-Clinton
exercise shows how meaningful that modest defense budget reduction,
implemented gradually, can be. When the next generation of policymakers
looks back on the era of restraint under way today, they will see that
matching fiscal and strategic discipline led to a bipartisan defense
program that responsibly and soberly saved as much as a trillion
dollars from the coming decade of defense spending while ensuring that
the US continues to play a leading role on the world stage.

Mr. Garrett. And I thank the gentlemen, and I thank the
panel. I yield to myself for the first five minutes for
questions. So, I will begin where the Chairman left off, one of
his closing comments that I think is very apropos, it says,
``Our budget debates must never lose sight of the solemn
obligation in Congress to provide our troops fighting overseas
with the resources they need to successfully complete their
mission and our commitment to them upon their return.'' And I
think that is really what it is all about, why we are here
right now. And I would say, as well, in making sure that last
line, ``Our commitment to them,'' to make sure that they are to
have their safe return and that may necessitate making sure
that they have the resources, the training, and the equipment
necessary so that they actually do come back safely.
The first point, I just recently had the opportunity to
look at some of the so-called top secret memos and what have
you with regard to Libya. I will not reveal what I have learned
there but in the public releases on those that we received from
the White House about a week or so ago with regard to Libya,
the administration estimated that the cost of military
operations over there through September 30, so a month or so
from now, will total approximately $1.1 billion. And I am
wondering whether you all have analyzed the basis for the
administration's estimates in that regard and if so, how do you
make that analysis?
Mr. Mosher. We have not independently looked at that
number. Those numbers are still rolling through and we have not
done a separate analysis of that.
Mr. Garrett. Do you do a pre-analysis of that? Have you
done any look at this that we can say, turn to you folks who we
always turn to about these things.
Mr. Mosher. No, we have been keeping track of it and we
would be happy to take a look at it for you but we do not have
anything to share with you today a CBO analysis of those
numbers.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And last question on this then, so going
forward should we anticipate something from you or do we need a
specific request.
Mr. Mosher. If you ask us to take a look at it, we would be
happy to do so.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. Very good. To some of the comments that
Dr. Adams raised, but I guess it goes to the whole panel, and
maybe goes to a Congressman as well to begin with. So the
Defense Department is said to be consistently over budget over
the years, both in equipment procurement and in acquisitions. I
understand in fact of the 92 major defense acquisitions, 75
percent are over budget, and 20 percent of the programs are
over budget by more than 50 percent. I wonder well first of
all, whether the Congressman would like to speak about that
issue and then also, back to CBO again whether you have done
any analysis or maybe Dr. Adams has done analysis, as to why is
that the case. And I have been here for eight years trying to
get some explanation from DOD on some of these things. To the
entire panel.
Mr. Talent. Sure well, you know I will comment on it Mr.
Chairman. Yeah we need procurement reform. I go into some depth
anyway in the statement and so does the Perry-Hadley Panel and
I think there are savings that can be achieved from that. I
said before there was a price to weakness, well, you know one
of the issues when you are underfunding Procurement and
Modernization over time, and particularly when you underfund it
and then you are inconsistent with it as well, you contribute,
when I say you by the way I mean the government, you are
contributing to the driving up of costs.
One thing for example, normally the costs of programs go
down as you buy them out, as you buy them in volume. Okay?
Well, yes the DDG-1000 Destroyer's going to cost a lot more per
copy if you buy only one or two, as opposed to the 32 that you
originally decided to buy. The reason why these programs and
the numbers are cut back over time is because we do not have
the money to go out and buy the requirements. So yes, the per
copy cost goes up.
The defense industrial base is capable of seeing the
direction this government is going in, and when we are not
funding these budgets adequately, they do not put a lot of
money into the defense industrial base. We do not really have a
military industrial complex anymore. If we do we have a much
smaller one than we used to. We only have two aircraft, at
least prime aircraft manufacturers, any more; all of that has
slimmed down. Well the smaller a defense industrial base that
is undercapitalized has less competition and is less capable of
producing these systems and these platforms at an efficient
price.
Now there are a lot of things internal to the department;
and I mean in my statement what I said was, I think in an
effort to bring down costs, and this is not a new thing by the
way, every secretary that I served under wanted to bring down
procurement costs, and Congress passed several pieces of
legislation to do that. Typically what is resulted is increase
in processes, you know the number of people involved in
supervising these programs and the number of desks that
decisions have to go through. And as we pointed out on the
panel what that does is it reduces accountability and
responsibility within a chain of line management. So, the
answer is, if you are going to have more process or the same
amount of process, make certain that there are people
designated to be in charge of the particular programs, that
they have the authority, and that they are held accountable for
what they produce. Another very important thing, is to reduce
the design bill cycle which you know now can be upwards of 20
years, reduce it down to five to seven years maximum and just
say, look we are going to get the capability that we can get by
producing these platforms in five to seven years. We are going
to get them in the field. We are going to get hulls in the
water. We are going to get aircraft in the sky. We are going to
get tanks and track vehicles on the ground, and then we will
have evolutionary upgrades over time. But part of the
difficulty has been the funding line.
Mr. Garrett. I understand.
Mr. Adams. Let me comment on that Mr. Chairman. Years ago a
very wise person in the defense procurement world, Norm
Augustine, defined something called Augustine's Law; and
Augustine's Law basically pointed on a trajectory given the
increase in unit costs of hardware programs that would lead us
by 2054, which now does not look that far away, where we would
have essentially one airplane in the air capability of the
United States military. The Air Force would get it three days a
week, and the Navy would get it three days a week, and the
Marine Corp would get it one day a week, and, of course, they
would work. And he was right. Augustine ended up being the
Chief Executive Officer for the Martin Marietta Corporation and
a very distinguished defense events industrial based
spokesperson.
The problem in procurement is it goes way past this
Administration and way back in history as Senator Talent has
said, and one of the very effective pieces I think that the
Perry-Hadley Report does talk about is procurement. The problem
is it is very difficult to fix. And it is very difficult to fix
because the incentive structure is wrong. The incentive
structure both in the services and in the industry is backwards
from an incentives structure that would lead to the kind of
efficiencies you would want in procurement. For the services,
getting a program into the budget is the top priority. If you
get the program into the budget and get a Program Element 9 for
it and begin the program, you then worry later about the fact
that it is going to cost you more than you originally
projected, but it looks cheaper at the start and that is a way
to get it into the budget. So the incentive is to get it into
the planning process. For the industry, the incentive is to get
the contract. So if you put the program in at a very cheap rate
at an R&D level you hope to make up that benefit in the
procurement of the program when the dollars grow.
So the incentive for the services is backwards, the
incentive for the industry is backward, and the end result is
we end up with what I call the ``Adams Law of Defense
Procurement'' which is almost everything we buy costs us twice
as much, takes twice as long, and gives us about half the
performance that it should, and it starts with the incentive
structure. It is very hard to change those incentives even with
powerhouse administration at the Pentagon, even within the
Pentagon the incentives structure is to get it in the budget
first. So it is an enormously difficult problem. Only one
Secretary of Defense, or Deputy Secretary, that I know of has
begun to even get a handle on it, and that is Dave Packard, who
was Deputy Secretary back in the 1970s. And Dave Packard, who
came from Hewlett Packard, therefore had a lot of private
sector management experience, managed to start to get his arms
around the procurement process, and then of course like all
senior officials left office.
So I have watched this cycle of reforming procurement go on
for probably 40 years now, and there is not a new idea in the
barrel and nobody yet has figured out how to get the right
incentive structure.
Mr. Mosher. We have not done independent analysis of this,
but there is a very rich literature going back many years as
both the other witnesses have suggested that suggests that it
is 20 to 30 percent cost growth in weapon systems; it is not an
iron law that obviously many factors that happen; it is not a
lot of physics but you have incentives and there are just many
things that happen. DOD tends to buy weapon systems that are at
the cutting edge of technology, which is always a perilous
place to try to predict what costs are going to be, and
although there are incentives that they talk about, well-
meaning people can come up with estimates that turn out to be
low when you try to deal with the reality of putting systems
together. So there are a lot of reasons why costs of weapon
systems grow and as I said, the history is long that is 20 to
30 percent on average for weapon systems cost growth.
Mr. Talent. There are examples of programs that they have
done right or that they have fixed midstream. I mean C-17 is an
example. When Bill Perry took office, C-17 was a very troubled
program and he fixed it, and he did it through the kinds of
procedures that we recommended. He took personal control of it.
He took charge. He had the authority. He had the
responsibility. He was accountable and he brought the plane in
under budget and on time. The F-18, the ENF, is an example of a
really outstanding program. That was an evolutionary upgrade
which points to the direction that I think we need to go in.
Again, we have to accept responsibility with the rest of
the government because when we have funding that is not up to
the task, they feel they have to cram a lot of technology into
the platforms they are given. I am concerned about this cargo
tankard they are going to try because they need cargo and they
need tankards, so they are going to try and build a cargo
tankard. Well I hope they can do it, but if there are problems
with it, maybe because they are trying to put two functions
into one plane. So I think there is responsibility in a lot of
different areas.
Mr. Garrett. I appreciate that, and just as I said, sitting
here for eight years there is just a mountain of frustration of
trying to ever be able to look to CBO or look to the DOD when
they come here to testify to say, is what we really should be
anticipating and not in this year's budget but out of the 10
year budget. I guess the commonality here is nothing is going
to change any time soon. Gentleman.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Let me thank all of
you for your testimony this morning. Senator Talent, let me
begin with you because I was a little bit struck that in your
testimony nowhere do you mention the very important connection
between the strength of the U.S. economy and the strength of
our military. I assume you do not dispute the idea that the
strength of our military flows in large part because of our
strong economy. Is that correct?
Mr. Talent. Yeah, I mean our economic wealth and prosperity
has been many times in history a key aspect of our military
strength. It goes the other way too.
Mr. Van Hollen. Absolutely, and do you agree with what the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mullen, said
that our debt is currently the largest threat to our national
security? Do you agree with that assessment?
Mr. Talent. I think there are three, and I would not want
to choose. I think the vital importance of getting back to
sustained economic growth and job growth is hugely important,
and I sense within the free market and the private sector that
the government wants that to happen and it wants to encourage
that to happen. I think the issue with the debt is hugely
important. Now, you guys are the experts, but to me the core of
that problem is the structural, and I am going to try and state
this as neutrally as possibly, a structural mismatch between
the revenue that is dedicated to the entitlement programs and
the cost of the entitlement programs. And the rest of the
budget, yes it is a factor, but a minor factor. And then the
third thing would be these national security challenges. So I
would say it is one of three.
Mr. Van Hollen. Right. So I take it that you clearly
disagree with the conclusions of the two bipartisan commissions
with respect to defense spending and the importance of trying
to address that issue as part of an overall strategy to
strengthen our economy. Do you disagree----
Mr. Talent. Those are budget-driven analyses.
Mr. Van Hollen. I will get to that in a minute, but if you
could just indicate whether or not you agree with what Admiral
Mullen said, which, and I quote, ``With the increasing defense
budget, which is almost double, it has not forced us to make
the hard trades. It has not forced us to prioritize. It has not
forced us to do the analysis.'' Simple question, do you agree
with that statement by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff?
Mr. Talent. No, I agree with his statements a few years ago
when he suggested we needed to spend four percent of the GDP or
we are not going to have a capable military. If I can explain.
I do not see how he can say hard choices have not been made
when the service which he used to be the Chief of Staff is
headed down to 210 to 240 ships, a level which nobody believes
will allow us to be a global Navy. I mean, if that is not a
hard choice that is being made. He is retired ships, he and his
successor chiefs, have retired ships because the cost of
maintenance was too high, and so the numbers of them is going
down. That is a pretty hard choice.
Mr. Van Hollen. I think, Senator, what he is doing is
strategy in the grand sense with respect to the situation we
face with the deficit and the debt. You mention in your written
testimony the rising power of China. Nowhere do you mention the
fact that China is the largest holder, foreign holder, of our
debt, and the influence that foreign entities can gain over the
United States through the holdings of those debts.
I mean, that is not raised there. Now, I could not agree
with you more that the defense budget should be driven by
strategy, not by budget, and Dr. Adams mentioned that. I think
there is agreement on that. As you well know, you will find
across the political spectrum, very different views as to what
needs to be done to make sure that the United States remains
number one. From the Cato Institute on the more libertarian
side, to other think tanks on the left and everywhere in
between. But I certainly do not dispute the basic premise that
defense is our number one obligation and it needs to be built
off a strategy. The question is what strategy, and there I have
to ask you, a number of times you have mentioned sort of
pegging defense spending to GDP. My question to you is, is not
that just doing it by the math? Well you are, are you not? I
mean you are picking an artificial number. That is not driven
by strategy, is it?
Mr. Talent. Well, I am actually glad you asked it because
it gives me an opportunity to make a point. It is our belief,
at Heritage and when we advocated at Four Percent for Freedom,
that that was approximately what we needed. That percentage
would produce what we needed in order to provide for the
capabilities of the DOD according to a strategic-based
analysis, because it would have freed up about another $40 to
$50 billion a year that we could have put into modernization
and procurement. The reason though that we phrased it in terms
of a percentage of the GDP was to make an overall point, which
I think is a point that maybe we can all agree on, and we ought
to stop and think about this because it is so easy on the
Budget Committee to think of any expenditure of government as
kind of an enemy that you want to reduce and as too big.
Let's go back and look at this strategically for just a
second. At the end of World War II the leaders of the United
States on a bipartisan basis changed strategically their
approach to the world. They had been playing a secondary role
outside of the western hemisphere. That was a tradition in
American foreign policy. Well they recognized it had not been a
success, that policy, in the first half of the twentieth
century. We had two world wars and then we were entering a
nuclear age, an age of asymmetric weapons, when another world
war would just simply be intolerable, and so what they decided
to do was to engage, to be more proactive, to manage risk and
conflict instead of letting it get out of control with a view
towards achieving three things, three baseline things:
preventing the spread of totalitarian domination, protecting
the American homeland, and doing that without a third world
war. Now here is my point.
Mr. Van Hollen. No. Look I am very familiar with that
history, really I am, and my point was a pretty simple one.
That I agreed with your assessment that military strategy
should be based on strategy, not budgets, and that there is an
inconsistency with that in picking an artificial GDP number.
Now if what you are saying is, you have looked at the strategy
and your conclusion is that, forevermore into the future, four
percent is what is needed. There seems to be a little
inconsistency there.
Mr. Talent. Not forevermore, just for the foreseeable
future.
Mr. Van Hollen. Dr. Adams, if you could just expand on your
testimony regarding the approach of the Quadrennial Defense
Review and how you can do exactly what I think everybody in
this room would like to do, which is make sure that we do have
a military strategy that is based on making sure we protect our
vital interests, but that we do it recognizing that the economy
and the debt is also an important part of our overall strategy.
And to talk about one without considering any of the other is
to take a very narrow view about the power of the United States
and how we project power and interest.
Mr. Adams. Yeah, I would be happy to address that. The
reality historically for the United States or any country in
the world has always been that their resources and their
strategy are linked. And that resources issue is not just
budgetary resources, it is human resources, it is economic
resources, it is the industrial capacity of the country, the
productive capacity of the country, the trading capacity of the
country. All of those issues are part of what any decent
strategist would call grand strategy. It is not just about
military capability, and we have had a tendency to focus just
on military capability as what defines American leadership in
the world. It is an important element; it is not the only
element, and it is largely a supporting element to a broader
sense of strategy.
We also have a deficit in this country of thinking about
strategy in the broader sense. So that when produce strategic
documents, they tend to be documents that come from the
Department of Defense, which has typically and rightly a
concern about the military capabilities of the United States,
but it comes the dominant strategic thinker for the government
of the United States. Stepping back and looking at our
capacities as a country. Stepping back and looking at the
global situation we face, looking at our mixture of tools in
the tool kit; civilian tools, military tools, trading tools,
investment tools, all the elements that go into state craft and
grand strategy is where the focus really should be.
The major problem that I had with the Quadrennial Defense
Review and, arguably, with the Perry-Hadley Report as well, was
that it took too narrow a view of what strategy is, and it did
so saying we must simply cover every single potential danger,
risk, threat, challenge, or difficulty that the United States
may face in the world and build a military capability to deal
with it. The major weakness of the Quadrennial Defense Review
mirrored in the Perry-Hadley Panel, was to say all missions
must be fulfilled, all missions are equal, all missions must
have reduced risk to zero. No country in the world has ever
been able to do that. No country in the world will ever be able
to do that.
So every country measures its risks and challenges,
evaluates what risks it is prepared to accept, weighs its
defense commitments in the context of its broader domestic
internal economy, its capacity to produce, its involvement in
the global economy, the stability of its currency, its trading
relationships. That is grand strategy. We have not done that
and we have tended to be biased in terms of the military
instrument here.
Our view in doing work that we did for the Rivlin-Domenici
Panel was to say, is there within a resource-constrained world,
because it always is and always will be, a way of providing a
scaling of the challenges that America may face on the military
side that allows us to build capable military forces that
retain the global superiority that we have today? This was in
other words a strategy, not a numbers-driven exercise. Frankly
in my judgment a share of GDP as a way of measuring defenses is
a totally numbers-driven exercise; it is math, not strategy. So
we tried to tailor it to what do you do in the world? What is
the appropriate role for the United States? How likely and
unlikely, and what capabilities do we need for dealing with
nuclear challenges? How likely and unlikely, and what
capabilities do we need to deal with potential risks of
conventional war and conventional deterrence? How likely and
what resources do we need to deal with terrorism? What do we
need in terms of capacity to steam the world seas? What do we
need to handle insurgencies in fragile states and how important
are all of those missions in terms of our overall security for
the United States? How much of them are really military
responsibilities or the responsibilities of some other capacity
in the US government? Which I certainly encourage this
Committee to take a good look at. And therefore, what is an
appropriate level of expenditure and an appropriate level of
forces that we would need to handle those challenges?
And as I say without exhausting you with the details on it
at this point, what we came to was a conclusion that we would
retain a globally dominant military capability with 15 percent
fewer resources over the next 10 years than currently projected
in the Department of Defense budget, that retains the capacity
to steam the oceans, that retains the capacity to deploy
forces, that would be a smaller conventional force but more at
the point of the spear than in the infrastructure because that
is how you would have to rebalance that capability, and you can
accomplish America's national security purposes for 15 percent
fewer resources than currently projected. It is both math and
strategy. And these Budget Committee members have to deal with
both of those things, math and strategy. Math is important,
strategy wears a dollar sign.
Mr. Flores. I am going to try to get in two questions
quickly if I can. Mr. Mosher can you recap for us, you pointed
out the rapidly increasing price of health care on our
military. Can you go through those metrics again quickly? And
maybe we can get that slide back up as well.
Mr. Mosher. Sure. Certainly, Mr. Flores. I, see if we
could, it would be the second slide. It is actually also Figure
4 in the prepared statement in front of you. You can see that
the growth is going to from 2011 to 2030, roughly double in the
military health system costs. That is what we have here. And
the point I made before was if you would look at the year 2000
to the 2011 we have seen a doubling since then.
Now a number of those, you know, a lot of that growth if
you look at the bottom three lines which is the military
personnel involved in the providing medical service and
research, et cetera, and then the direct care which is what is
provided in the military treatment facilities, and then
purchased care and contracts which is the services that DOD
purchases through contracts with private sector providers.
Those three lines have been with us for a long time, and what
started to happen after 2000, there were a number of benefits
that were added, the big one is the TRICARE for life accrual
payments and that is a big wedge there; but you also see that
the direct care and the purchase care lines, the dark blue and
the medium blue line, those start to grow significantly. And it
is the growth that we see in the DOD experience focusing on the
last six years because that is when a number of policies that
were taken, and new policies have sort of taken place, and so
if we do it much earlier it is hard to do the measure. But that
growth has been much higher, as I say, and in some cases three
times higher than the national growth rates per user.
There is been another factor in those numbers and that is
that you have seen an increase in the number of dependents and
retirees who have come into the system, under 65 retirees. And
so whereas in 2000, I believe the numbers were about 75 percent
of those who are eligible among family members, dependents and
retirees, that number's gone up to 85 percent. So you have more
people joining the system.
Mr. Flores. I think you are making the picture pretty
clear, in other words we are creating obligations for people
who have moved out of the military and are not serving and are
becoming an increasing part of our defense cost. My question
would move more to somebody who is been on the frontline of
this, and that would be for Senator Talent. What are your
suggestions as far as what changes you would propose to try to
mitigate the explosion of costs in this particular part of our
defense budget?
Mr. Talent. Well, if you are talking about military health
care, I think it is really important to meet and talk with a
community of retired folks and talk about how you can provide
the services that we are providing at lesser costs. And
generally I believe that is to try and make it a program where
you are expanding their choices and therefore creating greater
competitions so that they will hold down costs. I think that is
the way. Now what I said in my statement was that I think the
increase in compensation is fully justified by the performance
of these individuals, because they have preserved the peace,
they have protected our interests, and they have done it with a
declining share of the federal budget and a declining share of
the GDP. This is the point I was making, rather than thinking
of defense spending as a failure, we should think of what we
have achieved at a small percentage of the GDP that has been
declining basically over time.
Mr. Flores. I agree with you. I think many people have done
a lot for very little.
Mr. Talent. No question.
Mr. Flores. I want to move on to another quick question.
Mr. Talent. The way it is structured now, we have to great
an incentive for them to leave the service too early and then
we lose the benefit of their experience in training.
Mr. Flores. One other question, you talked about the C-17
experience and what Bill Perry was able to do and I have
another experience and that has to do with USS Missouri, which
was built by General Dynamics, it came in under budget,
delivered nine months early. It seems like those were more the
exception than the rule, when it comes to defense procurement.
How do we inculcate those experiences into defense procurement
more broadly?
Mr. Talent. Now that is a really good question. I
personally think it is going to be easier to do; it will be
easier to do in the aircraft side, because you are producing
higher volumes of platforms, and because if you just think of
an aircraft production line as opposed to a ship building
production line, you are not moving as heavy or as big of
stuff. I would encourage you, if you have not done it and you
have an opportunity to visit both lines, and you will see; and
that is why I think there are more successful experiments on
the aircraft side. There are more contractors who have done
really good lean manufacturing techniques, and really perfected
it and gotten us platforms at low per copy cost.
I think ship building is going to be a bigger challenge,
but if on the government side it can say look this is the kind
of funding we are going to provide. It is a reasonable funding
in terms of the kind of ships that we expect. We are going to
have to do a lot more in terms of ship building if we want to
protect the size of the Navy. And then set targets for them and
hold them accountable, and supervise them with small groups of
empowered people within the DOD, and avoid what both my
colleagues here have been talking about, requirements creep.
You cannot do everything with every platform. So get hulls in
the water. And I think you can make it better over time but
there is no substitute for senior people taking responsibility
and being accountable for the outcome.
There is a quote from John Lehman in my statement which is
very interesting because John points out in World War II we had
1,000 people in the ship building bureau. We produced 1,000
ships a year. When he was Secretary of the Navy I think we had
2,500 people and we were producing like 20 ships a year,
something like that. Now we have got 4,000 people, we are
producing six ships a year. And it is not because it is not
good people, it is the confused authority and accountability.
Mr. Flores. Thank you.
Mr. Garrett. Thank the gentleman. Thank the panel. Ms.
Schwartz.
Ms. Schwartz. Well I really appreciate some of the
conversation we are having and I think it is incredibly
important one to have. So thank you to the ranking member for
asking for this hearing and for us being very attentive to I
think what are really two issues. One is that certainly on this
side of the aisle, but I think all of us agree very strongly
that we are first and foremost committed to a strong defense to
be prepared for any future, current or future concerns and
threats to our nation and that is our number one priority as
members of Congress and as a nation to be safe and secure.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the debt and in
reducing the deficit, and are well aware of the fact that the
Department of Defense is a good chunk of our budget, and I
think you have talked about how much it is. It is 60 percent of
our discretionary budget. We spend a lot of time on this
committee and in other committees focusing on 12 percent of our
budget which is the non-defense, non-security discretionary
budget, and yet every external expert, and many of us I think
both Republican and Democrat on this committee, feel very
strongly that everything has to be on the table. We took a vote
in this committee while we were doing the budget and there was
strong support, bipartisan support, for including Department of
Defense in our call for greater efficiency, greater
accountability in the use of public dollars, and in helping us
to be able to reduce our deficit.
And in fact, ignoring the Department of Defense budget and
taking it out of this process, which as I understand it we
often have done. You could have anything you want, no
accountability for the way they spend the money and it has
really hurt us and it will hurt us in the future if we ignore
the Department of Defense.
So to me it seems, and maybe this is unfair, but just
completely unacceptable to not have the Department of Defense
be a part of helping reduce the deficit. And what we are
talking about is some of the things that Mr. Mosher you have
talked about and Dr. Adams talked about, which is demanding
greater efficiency in what they do and simply in procurement.
Not simple, but in overhead. Do we need this many
administrators? I mean do we need in the rank, in the
Department of Defense how many supervisors do we need? How many
senior officials do we need to be watching the store that
actually still cannot tell us how many subcontractors they
have? How many contractors they have? What they really spend on
procurement. Can they not reduce their cost by one percent, two
percent, three percent, four percent? Mr. Talent talked about
wanting to shift that money into other ways of doing things. I
think there is been some discussion about wanting to modernized
our forces and modernize our purchasing of equipment. I think
many of us agree with that. But my real question, two areas
really simply is, we talked about some of it and asked Mr.
Mosher, but about the efficiencies. Simply how can it not be
possible to get greater efficiencies out of this large of a
system, these many dollars, to demand that? And my second
question, that may be for either Mr. Mosher or Dr. Adams to
address very briefly the issue of health care costs. We have
been very hesitant to go this direction because of our
commitment to providing quality health care for our active
military, but in fact we are calling on the entire health care
system, certainly under Medicare and Medicaid, and maybe the
private system too, to do greater efficiencies and to improve
quality and coordination, and reduce costs in that way. Can we
not do that in a system we actually have more control over, if
anything, which is the military one? So, in one minute or less
if you would just comment on those two areas that would be very
helpful. Mr. Mosher.
Mr. Mosher. Just very briefly, we did not analyze
efficiency in our piece, and we have not looked at it
carefully, but obviously there are always places to get
efficiencies, but I would be hesitant to speak about the
magnitude that you could get from them.
As to health care, you know I think I have shown the growth
and one of the points that I wanted to make when Mr. Flores was
asking a question was one of the reasons you have seen such
growth, well there have been two-fold, is that the military
health care system, as other health plans that become more
expensive, the military system for those who have a choice has
seen a cheaper and cheaper option over time. So you have seen
much more of people moving into the system, and just to give
you an example, for retirees for example, that is the under 65
retirees, according to DOD's numbers, their out-of-pocket
expenses are about $900 a year for a family in that system. So
let's say you pay your premium and then you are out-of-pocket
as your co-pays. Co-pays have not really been adjusted since
the early 1990s. And if you compare that to someone who has
health care in the private sector, their out-of-pocket expenses
are roughly $5,500 a year. So it is $900 versus $5,500; it is a
factor of what you know six. That would be one way if you are
trying to get the cost of the system under control, we would
look at that sort of thing. CBO has done this annual volume
every year that looks at options for reducing the budget and we
have several options in there that look at health care as
things you might do to try to control the cost of health care
in DOD's system.
Ms. Schwartz. I believe we are out of time. I do not know
whether we would admit Dr. Adams to make a comment about the
efficiencies would be great.
Mr. Adams. Just two points Congresswoman. The efficiency
question is usually subsumed in the phrase ``waste, fraud and
abuse.'' There is not a line item in the Defense Department
budget to call waste, fraud and abuse. It is in fact, an
extraordinarily large infrastructure. Everything the US
government does, anywhere that it does it, is done in the
Department of Defense in miniature. Every function is performed
in the Defense Department and we have created an unbelievably
large infrastructure to do it. The infrastructure the Pentagon
estimates is 42 percent of the budget. There are 340,000 people
doing what are essentially commercial functions. There are
560,000 uniformed forces who never deploy because they are
involved in managing the infrastructure. We have probably the
worst ``tooth-to-tail'' ratio in terms of combat forces at the
point of the spear and infrastructure behind it of almost all
the industrialized militaries in the world, according to
McKinsey. It is a huge, huge problem.
CBO, I think, in the report that Dave Mosher referred to,
rightly targets infrastructure or rightly targets O&M as an
area of concern because that is where most of this is buried.
It is somewhere buried in the civilian payroll in O&M, which is
40 percent of O&M. It is buried in the functions that they are
doing and it is very hard to get your arms around it and so I
encourage CBO to do more arm-getting-around in this subject
because it will help us to decipher exactly what is going on
here. But the rate of growth in O&M is about one-and-a-half to
two-and-a-half percent per year whether you like it or not, and
the only way that it comes down, and I think this is important
to note, is the way budgets come down is they come down, which
sounds just like a tautology, but the reality is when you set a
lower budget level, it induces a level of efficiency. Usually
efficiency does not happen bottom-up because people are used to
doing business that way. When at the top the services say you
will have less for base operating expenses, be more efficient,
people find ways, and we did find this in the 1990s. One of the
healthy effects of the build-down of the 1990s was that it in
lowering the defense top line, choices had to be made. And the
choices can be very efficient when they come from the top down
so budget constraint and budget discipline is an important
element in inducing efficiency and operations and lowering the
infrastructure cost.
Ms. Schwartz. Changing the culture. Thank you very much and
thank you Mr. Chairman for your indulgence.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you. The gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you Mr. Chairman. That actually ties in
to the question I was going to ask. Let's stay on this topic of
the infrastructure and the efficiency because coming out of the
private sector one of the first things I would try and do if I
wanted to get my arms around any particular situation is try
and get as much data as I could about it and in my world that
might imply an audit and you heard the Ranking Member, and I
think correctly so, identify the Department of Defense as
either one of or the only major agency that has never been able
to audit itself or have an audit performed on it. I think I
have heard even that the Defense Department claims it is beyond
an audit. That it is not able to be audited.
And I guess my question to you gentlemen is should we
tolerate that? And if the answer is no, because I think the
answer should be no, how do we fix it? How do we at least start
the process of fixing what we seem to recognize here as a
problem without getting the information? How do we audit the
Department of Defense? And I will throw that open to anybody.
Mr. Mosher. Well, we are not auditors so I would not
presume to tell you how you should audit them. We account the
budget but we are not auditors. That would be GAO with probably
the auditors. I mean I will say that on the O&M question that
Mrs. Schwartz raised, one of the challenges is getting good
data on O&M, and that Gordon raised. It is very difficult to
get good data on Operations and Maintenance spending.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why?
Mr. Mosher. While we get the data that DOD provides to us.
So I am not saying that it is impossible to get good data, I am
saying that the data that we receive, that we the Congress
receive on Operations and Maintenance is relatively limited and
it makes it difficult to dig into the very complicated things
that go on in the O&M account. One of the problems that we have
and we have a study that we have released in, I believe,
January where we looked at some of these issues but we had
difficulty doing it in large part because once supplemental
money is appropriated for the wars and when you start looking
at what DOD has now actually spent on O&M, those moneys are
comingled. So it is very difficult to separate what war effort
money would be. That is the very legitimate things that you
need to be doing to fund our soldiers and airmen and sailors
overseas fighting wars to what DOD needs to do in its day-to-
day, in its base budget: activities it gets to get those forces
ready, to train the forces, to develop weapons, and it is very
difficult to separate those moneys once they have been
commingled because DOD does not track it that way.
We have some recommendations where we talk about some ways
to do it but it is not about auditing, that is we did not take
it that far. What we did is we looked at where additional
money, additional information would help the Congress in trying
to understand that O&M account. And just so you know, we are
also doing a study at the request of the House Armed Services
Committee where we are looking at how DOD models the
requirements and how it comes up with its budget for Operations
and Maintenance, operational readiness specifically. And so we
have gone to all the services and we are in the process of
doing that and should have something on that in the fall.
Mr. Talent. I think the Department absolutely ought to be
tasked to improve its auditing performance. Now I will just
tell you, the O&M budget is not going to go down as long as we
have an inventory that is this old because they have to spend
the money to maintain it. I am sure that we can reduce some of
the combat support, combat service support personnel. You do
not have to have the guy in uniform taking the tickets at the
movie theatre but then you are going to have to hire somebody
privately to do it. Congress is going to have to authorize
privatization by the way too.
Mr. Mulvaney. Let me press you on this point because I
think you and I generally philosophically would agree on a lot
of things. As a conservative, how can I in good conscience even
contemplate this four percent for freedom concept? How can I
even contemplate plussing up any defense spending until I solve
each and every one of the issues that Mr. Mosher just
addressed? How can I in good conscience go to the tax payers
and say listen I want to spend more money on defense when I do
not have any clue how the money that we are spending now is
being spent?
Mr. Talent. Because there is a tremendous connection. In
the first place, we ought to get the savings and that is what
the Perry-Hadley Commission said, that is what Heritage says,
that is what I say, and then you are going to have to devote it
to recapitalizing the inventory and modernizing the accounts.
If you do not, you are going to generate huge extra costs that
are going to swallow anything that you have saved. And that is
been the history of the last 15 years. We predicted in the
1990s that the O&M accounts would go up precisely because of
this; and while there is a connection between the economy and
military preparedness, there is also a connection between
military preparedness and the economy. If we are weak and are
perceived as being weak around the world it increases the level
of instability and risk which decreases economic growth. I gave
an example in my testimony. The United States maintaining
stability in the Northwest Pacific around the Korean Peninsula
has prevented a war there for the last 60 years. How good has
that been for the economy? And the increasing instability last
year in the Western Pacific as China started throwing their
weight around, was not good for economic growth. It caused a
lot of issues among our allies. That is a hugely important part
of the world. So you have to recognize the connections but yes,
let's get the savings. What we are saying is realistically,
there is a no way that Secretary Gates is talking about $15
billion a year he hopes he can get. They have been trying to
get this for 15 or 20 years. I would love to get that. It is
not going to be enough to do everything we need to do. We do
not even have a new bomber program plan and we are flying 50-
year-old bombers. Remember, decisions you are making now are
going to affect what this force structure is 10 or 15 or 20
years from now. Our guys are going to be flying 70-year-old
bombers and that is not consistent with the United States
protecting its security.
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Adams I apologize I am out of time. I
leave it to the discretion of the Chairman, but thank you
gentlemen.
Mr. Adams. Over to the Chair whether he wants me to answer
or not. Briefly put, we believe that this begins with mission
discipline and one of the things that is striking about the
conversation so far is that there is not been much discussion
about mission discipline in the Department of Defense. We
recommended with the Rivlin-Domenici Panel that we take 100,000
people out of the active duty force structure solely in
infrastructure positions. Now, for those who then say well then
you are going to have to hire contractors, you are going to get
some civilian to do it because you are taking out of the combat
force, no, it is linked to mission discipline. If we tell the
military here are the things that are important, here are the
priorities, here is the thing you are going to do, you are in
fact going to need less infrastructure to do it, but my bottom
line here is you start the process of eliciting the data you
want by imposing budgetary discipline in the areas where you
want that budgetary discipline imposed and O&M is one of the
key areas to impose that discipline. So some of this has to
happen through leadership, top-down decision, and mission
discipline that says you are going to require less
infrastructure to perform these missions.
Mr. Garrett. Gentleman from New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you Mr. Chair. Gentlemen, thank you for
joining us. Senator Talent, have you been employed by or served
as a partner in the Fleishman-Hillard or Mercury
Communications?
Mr. Talent. I was with Fleishman-Hillard and then there was
a corporate reorganization and it became Mercury, which is the
sister company in the Omnicom umbrella.
Mr. Tonko. Because I have a release from Fleishman-Hillard
that says the firm's area of focus is the defense and aerospace
industry and by the firm's own description and I quote, ``We
leverage our long-standing relationships with industry
influences.'' And I assume with something like defense, those
influences include us members of Congress, so the firm's stated
aim here is to help defense industry firms and I quote, ``Win
new programs and keep existing projects.'' So, Senator, is it
as serving as an independent arbiter on the QDR Review Panel,
is it fair to say that either through your work with Fleishman-
Hillard or with Mercury in the past that your job was to
advance defense as an industry?
Mr. Talent. No, not in that- We have defense clients. I
offer strategic advice from time to time. I do not lobby. My
views on this subject date back to 1993. Everything that I have
said and done here is consistent with what I said and did
entirely in my career including when I was in public life. So
this is not something that I have come to lately when I took
this position. Anybody who knows me knows that through three
different administrations, Republican, Democrat, I have been
consistently concerned about underfunding the military and I
have criticized on a bipartisan basis, policies that I thought
contributed to that.
Mr. Tonko. And it would be fair to state, I believe, though
that their efforts here are to advance new programs and keep
existing projects that firm up investment in defense. With the
acquisition of weapons systems having been the area of
inefficiency and cost growth at the Pentagon, I would like to
focus on in recent years that this area has been particularly
egregious. The GAO recently estimated that acquisition costs
for the Pentagon's major defense programs grew by some $300
billion or 25 percent above initial estimates. The GAO cited
two main reasons for that growth. First, that DOD's processes
for funding programs create, and I quote, ``An unhealthy
competition for funds that encourages sponsors of weapon system
programs to pursue overly ambitious capabilities and to
underestimate those costs.'' So we have a systemic problem that
encourages private contractors to feed us technology of
debatable utility for an unrealistic price.
The second reason GAO cited for that phenomenal growth rate
in acquisition costs is that the Pentagon's process for
acquiring weapon systems allows, and again I quote,
``Acquisition programs to proceed through key decision points
without sufficiently reliable information on funding, schedule,
and technology upon which to make sound decisions.'' So, I
would ask the panel, do you agree with that assessment or do
you think that recent reforms to DOD's acquisition system
adequately address these causes? Mr. Mosher.
Mr. Mosher. We have not looked at that, nor is that an area
that we tend to examine, but Mr. Garrett you did ask a question
earlier and I was remiss in saying that in our estimates in
this work that we did, and the estimates we always do, we try
use those cost growth figures to estimate what costs will be,
and so we try to capture historical cost growth in the systems
that we estimate but we have not done independent analysis of
the causes of these sorts of things.
Mr. Talent. I would say yes and no. Yes there is a problem
with enacting either on the basis of not enough information. I
would say though it is more a question of there are too many
people trying to get the information and nobody's accountable.
And no, they have not done enough to deal with it. On the issue
of infrastructure and particularly personnel, as personnel
costs have grown the chiefs in particular have made every
effort to reduce the number of personnel in their services
because they want to get the platforms, they do not want to pay
for the people. In particular, the Air Force and the Navy, I
think reduced too far which is why we now have a process for
example where we have to cross deck sailors; sailors come in
from one task force, or steaming in from one helicopter to go
on another task force that is going out. They have had an
incentive to try and reduce personnel and where they could do
it, they have done it because they have been trying to protect
other parts of the budget.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Dr. Adams.
Mr. Adams. The last part of the question is the one that I
wanted to address, are the current forms likely to get a handle
on the problem that you have described? And the honest answer
is it is too early to tell. My analysis of those proposals is
probably they are too weak to have such an impact. I see
nothing in the data so far. GAO provides the most compelling
data that we have on cost growth. Nothing in the present data
suggests that the overall judgment that I have about the
ability to control procurement costs has been fixed by any of
the current procurement reforms. It is really tilting at a
windmill because the incentive structure is wrong.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Ribble.
Mr. Ribble. Thank you for your testimony today and Senator
Talent this is a little surreal for me. Back in 1995, when you
were Chairman of the Small Business Committee of the House
side, I was sitting on that side giving testimony while you
were at the chair. I would like to ask the same question to you
and to Dr. Adams. One of the things that intrigues me is it
seems a little bit like we are continuing to defend our country
as if we are in the very close post-World War II era. We have
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of troops stationed in
safe harbor nations like Germany and Japan, and other places
around the globe. Are those numbers appropriate given the speed
in which we can move people about the globe and equipment?
Mr. Talent. Well, the basis, first of all with regard to
base closure. We did a number of rounds of domestic base
closure. I voted for all of them and I am not sure you guys
would know, I mean, have they actually determined that we saved
any money? I do not know that we have because we have to invest
upfront costs in closing a base. And the bases are there to
help us get in and out of places. We could not have done what
we have done in Iraq and Afghanistan without the bases, in
Kuwait and Qatar. If we did not have the troops, or the bases,
in Germany we would not have a place to evacuate the wounded.
It is pathways in and out. So if you do not do that and I think
we should be constantly looking at infrastructure, but
understand that we are still going to have the ability to get
in and out.
Mr. Ribble. Yeah, and I am not really looking at
infrastructure per say, I am looking at troop count.
Mr. Talent. They have tried to reduce, in fact, have in
Europe and in Korea, they have reduced footprints. I mean,
again these are not people who have tried to have more
personnel. This is why I simply dispute the idea they have not
made hard choices. They have made a number of hard choices. I
can submit you a huge list of them, I do not have time I guess
to talk about it because they have been under increasing
budgetary pressure. So you have to maintain the bases, or you
have to substitute something for them. You can operate off the
naval vessels, then you need a bigger Navy, or you need more
cargo lift. Well you cannot shut down the C-17 line because you
got to get the people and the power from here to there one way
or another. So, it is not my sense that you are going to get a
lot out of the foreign bases or reducing those footprints. It
may be possible, and if you can, you should. I would love to
tell you there is some silver bullet that you can get out of
the rest of the budget, but the budget's O&M is going up. The
budget's personnel, he just said that is going up, its overseas
contingencies; maybe that will go down. Remember even if the
draw-down in Afghanistan is successful and I certainly hope it
is, we are going to go back to 60,000 to 70,000 troops, which
is almost twice as many as we had when the President took over.
And I am not saying he is wrong, in doing that. The idea we are
not going to do counterinsurgency, I mean I do not know how you
can draw that conclusion given what we have done the last 20
years. That leaves procurement and modernization basically. So
if you pressure them, it is got to come out of procurement and
modernization, which is where it is come out of.
One other point I want to make about the overall budget
picture. Everything should be on the table. Defense has been a
declining portion, both of the GDP and the federal budget,
which is why I said in this statement, if you resolve the
broader issues between the mismatch between revenue and
entitlement programs, there is going to be enough money to pay
for defense. If you do not, not funding these basic
requirements, is not going to keep the government from going
bankrupt. I think that is just a statement of fact.
Mr. Ribble. Dr. Adams.
Mr. Adams. Yeah, a couple of points to make. First off, in
the work that we did for the Rivlin-Domenici Panel, we
explicitly come to the question that you asked in the narrowest
sense. That is to say there are areas where the United States
has forward deployed forces where one can, I think, safely say
those forces could be reduced, not eliminated but reduced. And
Europe is the biggest one of them right now, at about somewhere
between 80,000 and 100,000 depending on how you count Naval
forces and you probably could bring that down to 20,000 or
30,000 where you would be operating the health infrastructures
at Ramstein and places where you need capacity because you are
doing deployments elsewhere and not have the combat for forward
deployed combat forces that you have there today. And in fact,
the Defense Department's considering bringing a brigade combat
team out of Europe, we would say two brigade combat teams could
safely come out of Europe.
The deployment in Asia, we also think could come down in
terms of the ground forces, specifically. It is not a large
presence but we would not bring it down as heavily as we would
in Europe because the security situation is less certain in the
Asian theatre than it is in the European theatre, but in ground
forces terms we are unlikely to be using those ground forces in
areas where we think they are deployed forward to be used,
largely Korea. We are certainly not going to a ground war with
China. So there is opportunity there. The reality in budgetary
terms is, of course, is that you do not save any resources
unless you bring down the size of the force structure to match.
So if you actually bring forces down and a trip to force
structures so you match the numbers that you have brought back,
it may not be the same people, but it may come from somewhere
else. You can easily do that.
Let me address one other question that was raised or
implied by your question, and that is this question of
counterinsurgency. I want to come back to that because it is
maybe the first time in this discussion so far that we have
really addressed a strategic or military mission-related issue.
And I think there is a very important argument that we put on
the table here that we have not in fact been conducting major
counterinsurgency operations for the last 20 years. We have
been conducting them for the last 10 years in countries we did
not invade because of insurgencies. We invaded those countries
because we had a regime change prospect in mind. Explicitly
that was policy. Remove Saddam Hussein, remove the Taliban. We
inherited an insurgency in part stimulated by the capability
they would put in there to remove a force in a country that did
not have a fragile government. The reality is we are not going
to fight insurgents around the world. We are going to choose
where we fight. We are going to choose where we deploy forces.
There are areas with major battles raging today we would not
dream of deploying American military, Democratic Republic of
Congo comes to mind for example. That we will not engage in
counterinsurgency warfare on a global basis because no sensible
president is going to decide that it is America's military
mission to fight whatever an insurgent is, wherever he or she
is, somewhere around the world.
So it strikes us at least, and this is part of our
strategic analysis for Rivlin-Domenici, that the
counterinsurgency, nation-building, global policing role with
ground forces in a lot of countries doing something called
counterinsurgency is a very unlikely future mission for the
American military. It is if you will the wrong lesson of Iraq
and Afghanistan. We are unlikely to do 250,000 person
deployments in a counterinsurgency mode somewhere else in the
world.
Mr. Ribble. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Yarmuth.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Senator Talent I just
want to follow up on the line of questioning that Mr. Tonko had
started. This really is not about credibility but I am just
confused about something because as you said, the views you
expressed today have been long held views and this is somewhat
of a chicken and egg situation but it goes to also kind of the
revolving door that we have these days. I assume that one
reason you are retained by the people who pay you is because
you were, you held these views.
Mr. Talent. No. The reason I was retained, not because of
any specific view in any particular area of public policy, but
because of a perception that I understood how the Congress
operated and could give good strategic advice to clients who
cared about that and very little of what I have done over the
years has been related to defense. It is mostly in other areas,
health care regulation, that sort of thing.
Mr. Yarmuth. Well, and you tried to make a distinction. I
just asked you to explain because to me it is a distinction
without a difference. The fact that you are not lobbying but
you are being paid for it.
Mr. Talent. No I was just explaining what I do. And I felt
the question went to what I do.
Mr. Yarmuth. Okay, fine. Thank you very much. Again, your
views are your views and I accept that.
Mr. Talent. It really has gone back 20 years. And it is
really, whatever else I have done, this has been very
bipartisan to what I have said and I believe very strongly that
the views that I hold are necessary to a successful foreign
policy no matter what point of view you are coming from. I
wrote an article in 2009, at great length about this, advising
that these needs be taken care of in order to make the incoming
president's foreign policy successful, and I bet that he wishes
right now that he had increased in capabilities when he had
that stimulus bill in front of him.
Mr. Yarmuth. Well, that is water under the bridge
unfortunately. Following up a little bit on the foreign
presence that we have, and I know this differs from country to
country, but I address this to you Mr. Mosher first. To what
extent do foreign countries subsidize our presence there and is
it a significant factor or not? And is that an opportunity
perhaps to write the budget a little bit?
Mr. Mosher. You know, this has obviously been a very
difficult political issue for a long time. There was long
debates about burden sharing within NATO, and in Japan, and you
know there is also this problem that you are not asking, nor do
you want to ask foreign governments to pay for our forces
themselves. That would not be right. So it tends to boil down
to infrastructure and you know paying for bases and paying for
those. And there are varying degrees of support in different
countries, and I said Japan and NATO being the most advanced,
that is the most well-developed. You know, that ends up being a
political decision that a president and a congress and another
country has to make about supporting that arrangement, and you
know every country is different. Yes, there are potentially
some savings if you were to do it, but it is not going to solve
our budget deficit problem.
Mr. Yarmuth. Dr. Adams, you mentioned earlier in your
prepared testimony that you would like to have the opportunity
to discuss some other recommendations that the Quadrennial
Commission had come up with ways we might do things. I will
give you remainder of my time to talk about a few of those, if
you want.
Mr. Adams. Well, let me come back for a moment to this
question of mission because I think a strategy driven
conversation is in order at this point in our history. The
major critique that I had of the Quadrennial Defense Review
that we had and one of the major critiques that we had of the
Perry-Hadley Commission was the real failure in both cases to
say some threats are more likely than others. Some missions are
more likely than others, and some elements of risk are more
acceptable than others. Any good strategist will tell you that
that calculated against resources is exactly what a strategist
does. He says, what are we likely to do, what are we less
likely to do, what is not likely to happen, how much do we
really need to hedge? We have precious little guidance from
either of those exercises to do that because both of them were
consciously developed independently of any sense of limitations
on resources. The consequence is really weighing, for example,
what the likelihood of the use of combat forces is going to be
in Europe, and what would one can then reduce the force in
Europe as a result has not been done.
The real weighing of the likelihood of a major ground
warfare in Asia, has not been weighed. It will not happen
against China, it would be mad to go into a ground war in
China. It might happen in Korea, but the Korean capability that
exists in South Korea is vastly different than what it was that
we faced in 1950 when the North Koreans came across the 38th
Parallel. Where you are going to face conventional forces?
Where are we going to deploy 250,000 in a conventional mode?
And if you start weighing the cases and saying, is it Iran?
Unlikely. Is it Pakistan? 160 angry Pakistanis coming at our
military force is not a prospect I think anybody would lightly
weigh. You begin to run out of cases. You begin to run out of
scenarios for major combat deployments of American forces, and
that does not mean you reduce American combat capabilities to
zero. That is not what we are talking about. It is an
appropriate hedge to then rethink how much you need in the
ground force, how much of it is active duty, how much of it is
reserve, how much you exercise it, where you exercise it, and
how you are likely to use it. And you do a similar analysis in
any mission area that you think is important to American
national security. What is the global steaming tempo of the
United States Navy? What need it be? What should it be?
We have managed to retain global naval superiority for the
last 60 or 70 years, even with a shrinking Navy. In large part
because no other country is as crazy as we are to develop as
large a Navy as we have. So we have the globally dominant Navy,
even at its current size. There is no other Navy that comes
close, and no Navy within reach within decades. No country that
even looks like it has the intentions of going to that length.
So if your mission area is global presence at sea, we have and
still have and would have in the future global presence at sea.
I have already mentioned my own views with respect to
counterinsurgency nation-building exercises in the military. We
are structuring, exercising, forming, training our military
today in pursuit of DOD Directive 3000.05 and the 24 Doctrine
from the United States Army as if we were going to pursue major
large-scale insurgency operations on a global basis. If we look
at the global scenario, we do not see that as a likely exercise
of American military forces, nay if anything it is not likely
to be well received given the experiences that we have had in
Iraq and Afghanistan.
So you set priorities among missions. We think dealing with
terrorists organizations, particularly the global Al-Qaeda
network is a key priority. Does it demand a large ground force?
No. We specifically tailor our forces and we use largely
Special Forces for that threat to deal with the kinetic edge of
what is a broad problem of law enforcement, finances, and
military operations, and governance stability in other
countries, and so on through the chart. In other words in each
area a hardnosed analysis that says, what is the threat, what
is the issue, what is the real risk, what are the tools we use,
and how do we calculate that risk? It leads you to a strategist
answer which is some risks are more acceptable than others, and
it leads us to the conclusion that on almost all areas that I
can think of, 10 years out and a trillion dollars less than the
more than $6.5 trillion currently projected, we still have a
globally dominant military in every threat area I can imagine.
Mr. Talent. Mr. Chairman, this is the third or fourth time
that my good friend and colleague on this panel has criticized
Perry-Hadley. Nobody is asked me for a response to that. Am I
going to have an opportunity? I feel Bill Perry and Steve
Hadley would be very upset if I do not say something.
Mr. Lankford [presiding]. Let me do this. Senator Talent, I
do concur on that one. I am going to put us back on schedule
with a five minute clock on it just for all those future that
are coming up behind because we are bumping up against noon in
a hurry, and I know several schedules are against that. I have
the first series of questions at this point, and I will defer
to you to begin my time and we will honor with the five minute
time limit.
Mr. Talent. And I will try and do it quickly. Look, we did
a strategic analysis. The whole first chapter was about a grand
strategy because you do define what you need in terms of
defense, in terms of what your foreign policy objectives are.
So we set forth what we thought the enduring national interest
and objectives of the United States were based on the strategic
habits on a bipartisan basis of the presidents of the last four
years, identified the five threats, and decided what force
structure would be necessary to meet them. We knew we were
resource constrained. The force structure we recommended
specifically says, look it would be nice to increase the size
of the Army and the Marines, but that is not the top priority.
The top priority is increasing the size of the Navy and
recapitalizing the whole force. This is specific understanding
that resources are not unlimited.
Now, Mr. Adams, with his usual eloquence and civility talks
about the strategic analysis they have done instead of math.
Later on you heard him, though, and what he said described what
strategic analysis really is. Which is basically, look, tell
them what their budget ceiling is, subject them to some pain,
and force them to make some hard choices. In other words, it is
a budget-driven type process. Now he talked about risks that
are extremely unlikely. What you are seeing with that analysis
is two things that happen all the time. One, an assumption, and
we're not talking about it very much, is just assuming risks
away. You are going to say we are not going to have to do
counter-insurrection again, put a large number of troops on the
ground. Exactly what they said in the 1990s. They cut the force
then, we had to put them on the ground, and it created a huge
number of costs.
The other is the assumption that you know more than you
know throughout the planning horizon. We are talking about
planning 10, 20 years down the road. The world is an unstable
place. So yes, you have to be resource constrained, but you
have to understand what you do not know and as Secretary
Rumsfeld said one time, ``What the unknown unknowns are, as
well.'' And I thank you for giving me the opportunity.
Mr. Lankford. No, I understand. A well equipped military
personnel as far as a well trained becomes a large part of our
edge worldwide and has been in many of our conflicts.
Mr. Talent. We tend to get hit where we are not prepared.
Mr. Lankford. Yeah, I understand. That is part of the
frustration that weapons procurement systems, that where we
tend to see large cost overruns at times. There is also a
balance of experimenting we know with a new drug being formed.
Sometimes they go down a long way and it ends up being a dead
end and it does not work and they lose a lot of money in the
process. It is just very painful when we do that in the public
eye with the modernization system. We also have a frustration
right now with the number of times that Guard and Reserve
members are headed back a third or fourth tour, the way we have
cut back on active duty and now we are very dependent on a very
protracted that we did not expect 10 years ago that now we are
deeply into and we have people that have private lives as well
as public service in that, and that are being asked to serve
again and again and again in these different tours.
Let me come back to a couple of questions on this in the
two minutes that I have. How do we create some incentives for
efficiency? We have talked about it several times. Whether it
be in modernizing weapons and procurement systems, give me a
one-two of the low hanging fruit of how we create an incentive
for efficiencies in some of these systems. Type of contract,
way the contract is overseen, the frequency of contracts,
whatever it may be. Anyone can jump in but they need to be
brief.
Mr. Talent. Look, I think that the people response over the
top and they have their weapons programs that they like, and
you have to exercise control because like the Air Force always
wants fighters. Does not mean that you do not need fighters,
but I think they have an incentive. I mean they want the cost
overruns because it undermines the credibility of the program,
and means they can buy fewer platforms and have fewer programs.
But I think what they are failing to do, and I have said this
several times, I do not think anybody here is really
disagreeing with this either, they are failing to establish
clear chains of command empowering people in line management,
and then giving them the responsibility and the authority to
keep these programs on budget and on time. The other thing is
they are trying to get too much capability in many cases with
platforms. Instead of settling for something incremental and
getting it out into the field.
Mr. Lankford. Dr. Adams. Can I ask you a quick question as
well? You referred earlier to a private versus commercial that
you are saying that there are some folks that are military
uniformed that should be more commercial, I think was the term
that you used on that. Can you expand on that some?
Mr. Adams. They are performing essentially commercial
functions, that is to say, they are doing things that you would
do in the private sector in the economy rather than things that
you would do in the Department of Defense. The answer to that
is not necessarily, however to convert 100,000 people to
private sector entrepreneurs because as I said earlier, it is
mission related. You can shrink the entire infrastructure, and
that would be one place to target in shrinking the entire
industry.
Mr. Lankford. You are saying take that task, not say, 10
people did it, the military needs to be 10 people over here,
but that task needs to be pushed over and they would bid it out
for a cheaper amount.
Mr. Adams. Exactly. It is not necessarily, the argument is
not necessarily one for privatization. It is some of those
functions when you have shrunk the mission set and focused on
the risks is you may not require a lot of those functions to be
performed.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. Thank you very much. Mr. Ryan. You are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. Thank you Mr. Chairman. So Mr. Talent,
Senator. I was interested in what you were saying, the military
equals stability which equals economic growth, and for example,
up in the North Korea region. One of the issues I know I have,
and I think a lot of people on this Committee have, and I think
a lot of people in the country have, is they see us spending
hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars in the military,
and compared to 30 or 40 years ago, and industrial towns like
the one I come from in Youngstown, Ohio, and throughout the
industrial Midwest, we seem to be seeing less and less of that
money being spent and driven back into the economy of the
United States.
Mr. Talent. Right.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. And not only, as I think Mr. Mulvaney
said about auditing, it seems like you are even saying that $10
to $15 billion a year would be great if we could get to that
number in savings.
So I have two issues, one is we are spending a lot of this
military money in the Northwest Pacific area as you stated and
now we are going to sign trade agreements with South Korea. We
have huge globalization, which has put thousands of Americans
out of work, and yet those people are still paying taxes to
fund the military, to have the economic stability, so that we
can have a global economy, although it is kept their wages
stagnant for 30 years. So there is a level of frustration in
the country when we are spending all of this money and we are
not seeing it driven back into the manufacturing defense
industrial base in the United States of America. So four
percent of the GDP is a big number, but many of us here
advocate for increases in transportation for example, where we
are at one maybe two percent of the GDP, when China and India
are at nine or 10 or 11 percent of their GDP. And back in the
day, we were at eight, nine percent of our GDP. So we need to
figure out how we are going to one, get this money driven back
in the United States because we are also advocating for
transportation and that puts our building trades right back to
work. How do we go about doing that? How do we figure out how
we start bringing some of this economic stability to benefit
average people in Youngstown, Ohio?
Mr. Talent. I agree. I was a huge advocate for
infrastructure, by the way, when I was on your side of the
table. And I think when you have a debt problem, you have to do
two things. You have to decide where you do not want to spend,
and you have to decide where you do continue to need to spend
in order to support the economy so that you can get out of the
debt situation.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. You believe investments should be made?
Mr. Talent. Yeah, exactly. I think, part of the problem
here is that when you have hugely increased deployments, which
we have had the last 20 years, you have a reduced force in
terms of number of personnel. You are not buying the platforms,
the equipment, you know the ship's planes that they need, and
you are not modernizing. You get huge amounts of stress which
costs money. This is basically the reason that the Operation
and Maintenance budget has gone up and then that has deprived
procurement and modernization of the funding that it needs. And
I think we are all in agreement that that is a problem, we have
different opinions about how it happened and what we should do
about it.
One of the things I used to say all the time when I was in
your position and people would ask me, what do we do for
manufacturing and manufacturing jobs? I said, well one
consensus thing I think it could be a robust defense
manufacturing base.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. Yeah, we all agree with that, but that is
not the case. These companies take a lot of their work
offshore. They are spending a lot of money in other countries.
The Berry Amendment has got a loophole so big you can you know
drive an Abrams tank through it, and you know, it is just this
problem that we have been having. I know the nine years I have
been here, I have been trying to deal with it, and it is going
to be very difficult for anybody to advocate for four percent
of the GDP being spent on the defense industrial base when we
know that money is not going into RTI Titanium in Niles, Ohio.
It is going to a Russian company for example. And these
examples are you know everywhere, so you know I think we have
got to clear that up.
And the second point I would just like to make and have you
give a brief comment on it because we only have 30 seconds. It
seems to me the people making the money in the United States,
the big corporations who benefit from this military investment
and stabilization, I believe should be helping us pay for these
investments. And I do not think it is a big sacrifice to say go
back to the Clinton Era levels for the top one percent who will
benefit from this military investment, who will benefit from
the economic stability, and who will benefit from the global
trade. Quickly if you can.
Mr. Talent. Look, I am here to talk about defense issues; I
have my opinion about other fiscal policies. Heritage has
written a lot about the tax situation. I would say to you, I
will take the Heritage and the panel hat off and just say as
Jim Talent, I mean my concern about the tax situation is that
what we all want is more tax revenue but that does not
necessarily mean higher tax rates. And there is a link between
the rate of taxation, and the actual economic growth. I mean, I
know there is an awful lot of research, I'm going into
dangerous waters here because I am certainly not an expert,
that shows no matter what you do with the tax system you get
what about 18.5 percent of the GDP in revenue to the
government. So if you increase taxes, the danger is you do not
get higher revenue, and you do get fewer jobs.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. I would just say it seems like there is a
major service being provided here for multinational
corporations that take advantage of these sea lanes and the
protection of the United States Navy and the stability that is
provided in Asia. That is a service that the government's
providing, and I believe it is not you know inappropriate for
us to ask them to help us continue this policy.
Mr. Talent. Well, we can agree that everybody ought to pay
their fare share. Thank you.
Mr. Ryan of Ohio. Then we are in agreement.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Mr. Young recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Young. First, thank you to all our panelists and the
fascinating discussion here and as a member of not just the
Budget Committee but the Armed Services Committee let me share
with you the perspective of a freshman member of Congress.
Within days of being sworn in, you can imagine we are asked to
make all manner of different platform sort of decisions.
Expeditionary fighting vehicle, fund or defund. If you are
going to fund, do you decrease the funding?
Next decision, you know, two engines or one engine for this
aircraft platform? Next decision, there is no strategic context
to so many of these decisions articulated by the
Administration. This is not meant to be partisan. These
challenges go back a number of years, a number of
administrations. We have to find some way out of this. Now,
both Senator Talent and Dr. Adams to your credit, I think did
discuss the strategic implications of investing more or
investing less in our military. I wish our Administration could
articulate the same sorts of things and I would like perhaps a
discussion for another day to get into some of the mission
discipline concerns or perhaps we need less discipline. I think
there are probably intelligent and intelligible arguments that
say, no we are not committed enough in certain areas, we need
to invest further. I am frankly open to both arguments, but
they need to be made, and the Administration is just not doing
it.
Now, there is a $400 billion defense savings initiative
that our current President has launched, and Dr. Adams, I saw
you quoted recently, perhaps out of context, we know how that
happens around here, but quote, ``This review is going too fast
to mean something,'' is what the press indicated you had said.
And I share those concerns that perhaps it is going too fast to
very critically look at what our grand strategy should be as a
country. What our role should be in the world. That, of course,
should drive what missions we are asking our military to
perform, then prioritize each of those respective missions.
That, in turn, should drive our force structure, our R&D
decisions. Along the way let's cut out the waste and
inefficiency, there are certainly opportunities to do so and I
am open to that. The question is this, how absent choosing some
dollar figure $400 billion of cuts to enforce some discipline
on our bureaucracy. Absent that, how can we get the Pentagon,
the Administration to articulate what our role should be in the
world and all the other things that fall beneath? Do we need to
scrap the QDR and replace it with something else? Do we need to
just improve the QDR or are we left with this very
uncomfortable situation where we are asking managers of our
military, of our Pentagon, to manage down to a dollar figure?
Something I am entirely comfortable doing, frankly, in the
USDA, but less comfortable doing in DOD. I will give Dr. Adams
about two minutes to answer that, followed by Senator Talent.
Mr. Adams. Happy to take a crack at it. It is a very big,
and I think very important question. We, over the past 30 or 40
years, and particularly over the past 20, have basically
allowed administration after administration, whether it is
Democrat or Republican, to get away with having the Department
of Defense be the primary strategic planner for the United
States government when it comes to our international
engagement. It is quite stunning when you think about it. Until
this past year there has not been a strategic planning document
of any kind from the Department of State to the Agency of
International Development, and while there is been a national
security strategy from the White House, it has followed, most
of the time, the Defense Department's strategic planning
document, not preceded it. So, we have allowed it to happen,
and just as a bracket I want to say it so that Senator Talent
does not think I disagree with him on everything, I think while
I disagreed with the content, the strategic planning document
that the Bush White House did, the first one they did, was a
masterpiece of strategic thinking. It was actually quite good.
I disagreed with its thrust, but they actually prioritized what
they thought was important and de-prioritized what they thought
was less important.
Mr. Talent. Which Bush White House?
Mr. Adams. The Bush White House. The second Bush White
House.
The other part as I said in my earlier remarks, I am not
sure whether you were here yet or not, Congressman, was that
resources and strategy are always related. So strategy wears a
dollar sign as Bernard Brodie said, it is always resource-
constrained, so you plan with that knowledge in mind. You do
not plan with it absent from your mind. You know, therefore,
that you can never reduce risk everywhere all the time to zero.
You have to prioritize your risks and capabilities.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman if I can have 30 seconds to allow
Senator Talent to respond.
Mr. Talent. Look, I agree very much with what you are
saying. I think this is something Gordon and I agree on. The
lack of strategic clarity, I wrote a huge article on this, the
lack of direction from the highest level of civilian authority
since the Cold War ended through now, almost four presidents,
is extremely frustrating. What we had doing the Perry-Hadley
Commission is to look at what they had actually done from
administration to administration and deduce from that the
strategic, what we call the strategic habits of the United
States, and to deduce from that the interests and objectives
that we needed to defend.
Mr. Young. I guess the counterpoint would be, should those
habits change, and I look forward to that robust dialogue.
Mr. Talent. I do not think DOD is hungering to do
deployments out there. That has never been. They really want
the deployments reduced. It is, and I agree with him also, with
Gordon also, it is been a default thing because we have not
planned, and we have not had clarity. We have sent troops in
because we do not prepare anything else, so look I agree very
much with that comment and I think a hearing on that would be
great.
Mr. Young. Great, thank you.
Mr. Lankford. Recognize Ms. Kaptur for five minutes.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you Mr. Chairman, gentlemen welcome and I
want to associate myself with Mr. Amash's remarks. There are
discussions going on inside DOD right now about, well, in terms
of threat levels, what is the role of the Marine Corps in the
21st Century? I think that a hearing on their perceptions of
the threat and then following suit on systems makes a great
deal of sense because often systems seem to lead us rather than
a connection to the threat level.
I also want to associate myself with Mr. Ryan's remarks in
terms of outsourcing with the F-35 and the amount we are going
to expend on that. I just returned from Italy, visiting some of
our bases there, and the amount of outsourcing that is going to
go on in that is incredible.
And so those of us who represent states where DOD is
closing facilities, whether it is the dual sourcing on engines
for the F-35, or whether it is the expeditionary fighting
vehicle, Ohio is hit very hard by that. So, I am very much for
production in this country and also very concerned about what I
have learned in my career on contractors and the amount that
that is costing us and getting a straight answer out of DOD on
how much more we are spending because of this growing reliance
on contractors as opposed to in-sourcing. I hope in your
research you will focus on some of that because I think each of
you is really providing the country with a great service.
I just wanted to say I heard a number yesterday that if we
reduced unemployment to seven percent, we would cut our deficit
in half. That is an astounding number and I want to focus my
remaining short time on those in the military who are returning
to us who have no jobs. It is a staggering figure. The post-9/
11 veterans, according to data from May of this year, shows the
unemployment rate was 12.1 percent, for younger male veterans
aged 18 to 24, 26.9 percent and they are coming back to places
like I represent where the unemployment rate has been way over
the national average.
The suicide rate corresponds to what is happening there,
with what they are facing with the foreclosure rate and so
forth in our parts of the country are truly very difficult.
And so my question to you really has to do with, we are
wasting an enormous amount of human capital in these returning
veterans. And how would we better position these returning vets
in readjustment to capture their talents and to get them
reemployed? In the work that you are doing, especially where
they are coming back in the economically distressed areas, how
can we leverage the skills of our returning service members to
improve outcomes for them who have served us, and to gain
useful assets for our country and providing a better outcome
across the board? It seems DOD drops them and the VA does not
really completely pick them up. What do we do in order to
reduce this unemployment level and focus on this large pool of
232,000 veterans, a quarter of a million veterans just since
post-9/11, that are out there unemployed?
Mr. Adams. Let me take a first crack at that Congressman.
It is a very important question. The issue for me has always
come down to push versus pull. There are obviously government
programs that we can do that help people try to adjust,
transfer skills, move into employment and so on. That is a push
side. My sense, though, is that the history of base closures,
which is a proxy here for what I am about to say, is that the
demonstrated evidence from base closures is the most successful
transition for communities and institutions and businesses and
people who work in communities when a base closes, is the
health of the local economy. The best thing that we can do, in
my judgment, to get people like that employed and use their
skills is if we focus on restoring the health of the American
economy because that is going to create the context in which
employers want to hire them, have money that they can hire them
with, they are going to provide them with opportunities. So you
need both a push and a pull approach.
Ms. Kaptur. I hear what you are saying, but it is not
working fast enough.
Mr. Adams. Right, I understand that.
Ms. Kaptur. Right, and it is a real problem.
Mr. Adams. Understood.
Ms. Kaptur. In communities across this country.
Mr. Talent. A concrete suggestion. DOD is, I assume they
are doing because they are supposed to do when Veterans leave,
an examination of their baseline medical condition. They are
supposed to do that when they come in and then also when they
leave, almost an exit type of thing. Now, that is an
opportunity, and I would think you might be able to do this at
very little cost, to sort of expand that to talk to them about
their employment profile, their ambitions, their skills, et
cetera, so that you get that. I do not think DOD should
continue, so then you need to hand that off either to VA or
Labor, and you have got a good profile there and some guidance
for that individual, and some opportunity. So you may want to
ask what DOD is doing when people leave. What they ask, what
kind of suggestions they make to them, because they have got
them at that point.
Ms. Kaptur. Well if I use their medical exam as any
indicator of how we should deal with unemployment and
reemployment of these Vets, I would not want to trust DOD on
it.
Mr. Talent. Yeah, I worked on that issue with Senator
Clinton; it has is been like four years, so I am not aware but
they are supposed to be doing that better, but you asked, and
that was the only concrete suggestion I had.
Mr. Kaptur. Right, I know that my time is up but I just
wanted to say I hope I have sensitized you to this issue. It is
a serious, serious problem, and I can also say Mr. Chairman, in
closing that for instance if they try to go to community
colleges to use their GI benefits, there are many of them they
cannot concentrate in normal classes. This subset of our
society, this is the new America. They are coming home to us
and they are out there. They are alone many times. They do not
group like the World War II vets. They are in our homeless
shelters. They are in our food lines. This is not the way to
treat America's returning vets. Some group of intelligent
people has to help us keep a focus on this subset of our
population. Thank you.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Dr. Adams I know that you have an
appointment that is coming up soon. You feel free to be able to
step out when you need to. We had asked you to be able to stay
through noon and obviously it is ten after at this, point.
Mr. Adams. Right. I am going to have to leave shortly,
thank you.
Mr. Lankford. If you need to be able to slip out, feel free
to be able to do that. We are glad to be able to have you and
your time. I recognize Mr. McClintock for five minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. I am afraid I had to miss the
last hour so if you have already covered this just tell me so
and we will move on. I agree with Ronald Reagan that Defense is
not a budget issue. You spend what you need to spend in order
to defend your country. If you fail to do that you end up
without a country, but that does not mean that you spend more
than you need to spend. So if I could ask Mr. Talent and Mr.
Adams just in a minute's overview, what do we need that we do
not have and what do we not need that we do have?
Mr. Adams. I have offered at some sense I think in the
hearing so far of what I think we do not need and can probably
do without and safely build down to, given the fact that as I
said earlier, 10 years out and 15 percent fewer resources we
will still have the world's dominant military. Now there are a
lot of specific inside that about that I would recommend some
things up and some things down, but I think that is dominant.
It is interesting though that you do cite President Reagan
because President Reagan did have that view, and when Gramm-
Rudman-Hollings passed, he learned that indeed Defense is in
part a resource issue. That resources do constrain our
defenses, and the history that we had of 1985 to 1998 was that
our defense resources, along with most federal spending, went
down as part of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings and then Budget
Enforcement Act Deficit Reduction exercise.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Adams, actually I agreed with your
earlier analysis which is you do not set a budget number and
then figure out what you can buy with it, you figure out what
you need and then adjust your budget number to meet those
needs.
Mr. Adams. Well I think you actually do both, it is
interactive. Strategy wears a dollar sign as I said earlier.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Talent any thoughts?
Mr. Talent. Well, look, on a very practical level. What I
have recommended is we have increase the size of the Navy. It
is about 285 now, it is headed down because there is a 30 year
average life of the ships, and we are buying six or seven a
year, and you can figure out that means we are going down.
Now the Perry-Hadley Panel recommended the Bottom-up Review
force structure, this came out in 1993, I think it was 340
ships or so, and to increase ship building and try and get us
up to there. That was the force structure. It Les Aspin's force
structure, that the government thought we needed in the 1990s.
This was before the global war against terrorism or whatever it
is you want to call it.
So I think increasing the size of the Navy and then
recapitalizing the equipment in the rest of the force because
it is impossible to have an Armed Services where people are
flying or driving and trying to maintain and keep in place you
know inventories that are 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 years old, and
that is what is driving up your O&M costs. So I would just say
this, you mentioned Reagan, an investment, getting that done as
quickly as possible is going to save you money, and not doing
it is going to cost you more money, and that is the history
really of the last 50 years.
Mr. McClintock. Let me ask you a couple questions been
bothering me about you know what we are paying for that we
probably do not need, and one of them that screams out is why
we are paying to defend Europe from the Soviet Union 20 years
after the Soviet Union seized to exist?
Mr. Talent. We should not be, it is my view, we should not
be maintaining commitments abroad primarily to serve somebody
else. This should be designed to protect America's vital
interest. Now, the Perry-Hadley Commission recognized four
enduring national interests we need to defend. One is defense
of the homeland, which is increasingly a challenge in an age of
asymmetric weapons. Second is freedom of the commons, you know
the air, the sea, the space, all directly related to our
economy and our quality of life. Preservation of an acceptable,
non-totalitarian balance of power in the Eurasian space, and if
you look at where we have been involved in the last really 60
years, but in the last 20 years, I mean look at it; it is from
Korea, the Western Pacific, Southern Asia, et cetera because of
a sense if that spins out of control somehow it is going to
affect the American security negatively. And then a fourth was,
the provision of a kind of humanitarian sort of goods to
people, at least participating in a delivery system.
Mr. McClintock. Is that not Europe's responsibility with
respect to Europe and its area of influence and interest?
Mr. Talent. Look, I do not believe, personally, I think we
can discuss what the European Allies ought to be doing that
they are not doing. And this question came up, how do we get
the Allies to take more of a burden; yes it would be great. But
the precondition to that is a belief that the United States is
going to remain committed. Because if we do not remain
committed and we are not showing leadership, they are much less
likely to step up than they are to try and come to a deal with
the Russians, who invaded Georgia two years ago.
Mr. McClintock. I cannot get to this final question but I
would appreciate your directing me where I can get more
information on it, and that is a subject that you brought up,
procurement. How is it that we end up ordering new weapon
systems without setting aside the dollars necessary, not only
to meet our needs but also to assure that we can obtain these
copies at an affordable per copy price?
Mr. Talent. Yeah, because as all of us I think agree, the
procurement system is in many respects screwed up. And I would,
on this subject certainly, I would advise to the members of the
Committee that they take the time to read the chapter in here.
I do not think the chapter on procurement reform is one that
anybody would disagree with on a philosophical point of view,
and I thought it was very powerful, and I really did not have
any hand in it. It was the people on the panel who had done
this, I mean really savvy type veteran of the system, and it
sure makes a lot of sense to me and that is one of the things,
I think, we are all in agreement, we need to do and do as
quickly as possible.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Gentlelady from Florida is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you Mr. Chairman. We have
heard in this committee over the last number of months, many of
our Republican colleagues espoused the need to slash
discretionary spending, and Medicare as we know it and direct
some pretty painful cuts. Knowing that 60 percent of our
discretionary budget goes to the Defense Department, if we
couch Defense as a sacred cow that is untouchable, then
everything is a sacred cow because Senator Talent you have
criticized the president for proposing for $400 billion in
defense cuts, and I think you said at the time, that defense
spending is not the cause of our deficits and those cuts would
not make a large difference in reducing the deficit.
Mr. Talent. I think I said it was fantasy to propose that.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Okay. So that is even stronger.
Mr. Talent. Right. If I did not say that, I said it in the
first draft and then took it out later.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. You are underscoring what I am
suggesting that you said, rather than running from it. The
defense budget makes up one-fifth of the entire federal budget,
and I mean we have got bipartisan consensus that we are going
to have to put sacred cows on the table in order to make a dent
in the deficit. By your logic, would you argue that non-defense
discretionary spending should also be excluded from a deficit
reduction because that is even less, that is even more of a
drop in the bucket and further, let me finish my question
please.
Mr. Talent. Oh, I am sorry.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. By the same logic, conversely would
you argue that more revenues should be part of the solution
because that is an area in which we can, if significance, in
terms of the impact on deficit reduction is your marker, it
would seem to me that you should be for putting revenue on the
table and for making sure that we can address this effort in a
significant way. And against things that are not significant,
like slashing indiscriminately non-discretionary, discretionary
non-defense revenue, which like you said is a drop in the
bucket.
Mr. Talent. All right. I thank you, and I am sorry to
interrupt, and by the way, before the hearing closes I want to
apologize to Mr. Van Hollen because I insisted on giving him
more answer than he gave me question on a couple of points.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Your apology is cutting into my five
minutes, so if you would.
Mr. Talent. I keep forgetting how disciplined you are. On
defense, my concern here is that if you underfund basic
capabilities that are needed to deal with risks that are not
going to go away, you end up causing a whole lot more in
expenditures than you save. I think a classic example, is when
the government cut the size of the Army in 1990s in the belief,
which I think was a budget driven belief, that we would not
have to put large numbers of troops on the ground, it meant
that we could not prosecute the Afghanistan and Iraq-
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So let me just ask you, so your
point was not that we should not touch defense, we just should
not indiscriminately touch it.
Mr. Talent. Right, and we should put the savings back into
things that we do need.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So the criticism of the President's
$400 billion in proposed cuts is not general criticism? Was it
specific to what he was proposing to cut?
Mr. Talent. Well, he did not say what he was proposing. I
am prefer the President's approach of the last several years
because a part of this, to be frank, is the President arguing
with himself, because his own Administration proposed, at least
modest real increases in the defense budget until that speech.
And he has not been specific about what he wants to do. I have
no problem with finding savings but I do not want to cut the
top line. Find the savings, and then put into the things that
we need to put it in to.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But you would retreat from your
statement, that we should not touch defense because it just
does not cause the deficit; it is not a significant impact on
the deficit and so therefore it should be untouchable.
Mr. Talent. With respect, I never said defense was
untouchable. I said the savings that we can achieve in defense
we should put back into things that we need more within the
department's budget.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. That is not what I have you on the
record as saying, from what I understand. But let me just ask
Mr. Mosher a question. We are spending nearly $50 billion a
year on military retirement benefits, and if we look, direct
your attention to that chart up there, there have been a lot of
defense analysts secluding the conclusions of the Quadrennial
Review of Military Compensation, who criticized the current
system as not being fair or efficient. You can only collect
military retirement benefits, unless you are disabled, after
serving 20 years. That means that most of the individuals
deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan, including many in my
district, who are not going to get any retirement benefits,
because as you can see they really only were serving for four,
five, six years. So, to me that does not seem fair, especially
given that members of Congress, Congressional staff, law
enforcement officers, firefighters, can accrue pension benefits
after five years. We accrue them after six. So is the current
retirement system for military fair and efficient, and if not,
how could we make it better?
Mr. Mosher. I cannot speak to fairness and efficiency. We
have not analyzed that in any detailed way. What I can say is
that there have been numerous proposals over the decades to try
to change the military retirement system, and there are
defenders on both sides. You know, there are advantages as you
point out, what that is called cliff-vesting, you do not get
anything until you reach 20 years except for some disability
cases. So you cliff-vest, and that creates an incentive for
people to leave afterwards. Right? Sooner than you might want
them otherwise, and for folks particularly in those first 10
years of service, it tends not to entice them to stick around
for that pension. You know, once they get beyond ten years,
then people tend to stick around because they are a little
older, a pension means more, and it is closer to them.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. It is worth it to them.
Mr. Mosher. It becomes worth it to them, but that is the
way the system is designed and there are pros and cons to it
and what you say is absolutely true, people who do not serve
the 20 years do not get the money and a lot of people enlist
and then leave. I mean it is often it is a choice on their
part. They do not want the military life. You could do
something that would be like a TSP system which would be sort
of a hybrid, a small defined benefit program infers and then a
contributory program. You could do something that would be like
the old CSRS system, which was that federal system where you
had a defined benefit only, you did not have to worry about the
state of the market at the time. Or you could have something
that is much more like a 401k, that many people have in the
private sector; but all those have advantages and disadvantages
and I guess the right people to talk about this would be the
folks at DOD who could talk about. You know there is a force
management issue as well. There is an equity issue, clearly. If
I am the managers of personnel in DOD, how is it that I ensure
that I get the force structure that I want that has the
capabilities that I want, that has the pyramid structure that I
want, because you know as you move up in rank there are fewer
and fewer people at those ranks. And it is a very complicated
discussion, but yes, clearly there are people who have argued
that it needs to be changed, and there are people who have
argued that you know it has some advantages.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Right the point and the concern is
that there is quite a bit of sacrifice without really anything
to show for it at the end.
Mr. Mosher. In terms of a pension, you are absolutely
correct.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Yeah. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you Mr. Van Hollen, just a quick
question.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you Mr. Chairman, about three minutes
ago the Chairman turned to me and said to me do I have any
closing statements, I said no and that was until Senator Talent
mentioned that the President's $400 billion in proposed defense
spending cuts was quote, ``a fantasy.'' I would just point out
that if that is your standard, I would ask you to look at the
members of the President's Bipartisan Fiscal Commission. The
president proposed $400 billion over 12 years, which would
allow the current defense budget to grow at the rate of
inflation.
The Bipartisan Commission, recommended a $1 trillion in
cuts, so by the standard that $400 billion over 12 years is
fantasy, I am assuming that you put such individuals like
Senator Coburn, Senator Crapo, former Senator Craig, Senator
Domenici, in the land of the totally delusional. We have got to
get serious about our budget deficit. To say that 20 percent of
our budget is a trivial contribution to that national effort, I
think neglects the very important duties that we have. And I
will just end by where we started. I agree with you that our
defense spending has to be driven by strategy. We have had that
conversation. That is why I think putting an artificial GDP
percentage on it is math and not strategy. Part of that
strategy requires United States to retain the economic power
and full potential that it has. If we do not deal with this
deficit and debt as the current Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff has said, we will all be in a world of hurt and that will
hurt our military, and it will hurt the ability of the United
States to project its interest, power, and values around the
world. And so, I just ask you when we throw around phrases like
fantasy for $400 billion, put that in the context of what
bipartisan commissions have recommended. Thank you Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Mr. Talent did you want to make a
quick response to that?
Mr. Talent. Well, what I think it is fantasy to believe
that we can cut that much out of the defense budget over the
next 10 years and protect American security within an
acceptable margin of risk. That happens to be my view, strongly
stated. I understand that the members and the people you talked
about disagree. I do think that the Simpson-Bowles report, as
far as it referred to defense spending was budget-driven rather
than strategic-driven. Now as far as the Administration is
concerned, I certainly meant no disrespect.
I do think this is a situation where the Administration in
its first two years has been proposing, and I thought this was
not everything we needed to do but it was partly, modest real
increases in the defense budget. And now the president has
unveiled this idea of cutting the defense budget over the next
10 years.
So I think that it is an internally inconsistent position,
and I mean if I were still on the HASK and I would had
officials of the DOD in front of me, I would say well, if this
new position is right then does that mean the old one was
wrong? And if the old position was right, does that mean the
new one is wrong? But I appreciate what you are saying and I
agree with much of it. And now I get a chance to apologize
personally to you, like I said, giving you more answer than you
gave me.
Mr. Van Hollen. No apologies necessary on that front
Senator.
Mr. Talent. Thank you.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you both for your testimony. Thank
you Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you and we are still waiting on the
details of what that $400 billion cut is over the next decade,
and so that is part of the ongoing pursuit of this, as well, is
when to recommend it, but it is another one to be able to get
the details of that. Obviously defense spending is falling
dramatically over the last 50 years and a percent of the
federal budget and what we are doing. But it is just a matter
of being judicious with that process. So and I do appreciate
you all coming and being a part of the panel today. With that
we are adjourned.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Peter T. King follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Peter T. King, Chairman,
Committee on Homeland Security

I would like to take the opportunity to thank Chairman Ryan for
holding this hearing regarding the National Security budget. I also
thank the Chairman, Ranking Member Van Hollen, and Members of the
Committee for considering my statement and including it in the record.
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano has warned that our
Nation is currently at its highest level of a terrorist threat since
September 11, 2001. We must work to ensure that the Department of
Homeland Security is receiving sufficient funding to keep our Nation
safe.
Homeland Security is National Security. When Secretary Napolitano
testified before the House Committee on Homeland Security on March 3,
2011, she stated, ``The demands on DHS have never been greater and the
threats we face pose new challenges that require an innovative and
focused response.'' According to Attorney General Eric Holder, during
2009 and 2010, 126 people were indicted for terrorist attacks, 50 of
which were U.S. citizens. This week, on July 5, 2011, the Justice
Department issued an indictment against Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame who is
charged with providing material support to the terrorist group, al
Shabaab. Also this week, new threats to aviation security were
reported, which should remind all Americans how important airport
security truly is.
There are imminent terrorist threats to our Homeland, and this
Congress has a primary responsibility to the American people to protect
the Homeland and ensure the proper funding to address any possible
security threats.
In assessing the most important budgeting priorities, we must first
look to Federal grant funding for our local and state law enforcement
partners in regions of the highest security risk. In the budget put
forth by this Committee, and the subsequent Fiscal Year 2012 Homeland
Security Appropriations bill, grants including the Urban Area Security
Initiative, the State Homeland Security Grant Program, the Transit
Security Grant Program, the Port Security Grant Program, and other
grant programs for emergency communications systems and emergency
medical response were cut by 50%, from nearly $2 billion to $1 billion.
Such cuts jeopardize our security and make our Nation less safe.
As your Committee rightfully gives great importance to funding our
Armed Forces fighting terrorism overseas, we must not become complacent
at home. As a Representative from New York, my constituents know first-
hand the tragedy of a terrorist attack and the heroic work of our first
responders. Although we must reduce spending and shrink the deficit, we
must avoid cuts to these critical grants that would severely weaken our
Nation's ability to defend against future plots.
Budgeting sufficient funding to protect our Homeland will not only
protect the lives of Americans, but prevent the devastating economic
harm that followed the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
Chairman Ryan, I again commend you for holding this important
hearing. I trust that you and our colleagues who serve on the Budget
Committee will agree that decreasing funding for Homeland Security, as
we prepare to reflect on the 10th Anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist
attacks, will put our country at risk and is not in the best interests
of the safety and security of the American people. I look forward to
working with you to address the challenges ahead.

[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m. the Committee was adjourned.]


