- THE BROKEN BUDGET PROCESS: PERSPECTIVES FROM FORMER CBO DIRECTORS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE BROKEN BUDGET PROCESS:
PERSPECTIVES FROM FORMER CBO DIRECTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

Available on the Internet:
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=budget

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-346 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin, Chairman
SCOTT GARRETT, New Jersey            CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland,
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho              Ranking Minority Member
JOHN CAMPBELL, California            ALLYSON Y. SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
KEN CALVERT, California              MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 BILL PASCRELL, Jr., New Jersey
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             TIM RYAN, Ohio
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
BILL FLORES, Texas                   KATHY CASTOR, Florida
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                PAUL TONKO, New York
TODD C. YOUNG, Indiana               KAREN BASS, California
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan
TODD ROKITA, Indiana
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
ROB WOODALL, Georgia

Professional Staff

Austin Smythe, Staff Director
Thomas S. Kahn, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

Page
Hearing held in Washington, DC, September 21, 2011...............     1

Hon. Paul Ryan, Chairman, Committee on the Budget............     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Hon. Chris Van Hollen, ranking minority member, Committee on
the Budget.................................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Alice M. Rivlin, Brookings Institution and Georgetown
University.................................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Rudolph G. Penner, institute fellow, the Urban Institute.....    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11

THE BROKEN BUDGET PROCESS:
PERSPECTIVES FROM FORMER CBO DIRECTORS

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Paul Ryan, [Chairman of
the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ryan, Calvert, Price, McClintock,
Stutzman, Lankford, Black, Mulvaney, Huelskamp, Young, Amash,
Guinta, Van Hollen, Doggett, Blumenauer, McCollum, Pascrell,
Wasserman Schultz.
Chairman Ryan. The committee will come to order. Welcome
all to this hearing. The purpose of today's hearing is to
highlight the need to reform our broken budget process. This
summer, we got a first-hand look at how bad things have gotten.
After a request from the president to increase the debt limit,
Congress was seemingly faced with basically two impossible
choices. Either hand the president a blank check to continue
these unsustainable spending policies, or let America default.
Fortunately, Congress was able to chart a middle course that
coupled immediate spending restraints with a process to cut at
least a dollars worth of spending for every dollar increase in
the debt limit. But it should not have gotten to this point and
that is the point. Congress created a budget process that was
intended to prevent this kind of ad-hoc policy making. Clearly,
the process is not working.
The budget proposed by the president in February offered no
plan to deal with what he has since acknowledged as the
nation's growing physical challenges. Meanwhile, it has been
874 days. I will say that again. It has been 874 days since the
Senate even bothered to try to pass a budget. Congress has
struggled with this process for a long time. This year's
breakdown in the federal budget process, however, could not
have happened at a worse time. Right now, it is contributing to
the crippling uncertainty about fiscal policy that is
discouraging businesses from making the kind of long-term
investments that create jobs. There are parts of the budget
process that are irredeemably broken, but other parts still
work well, even if they could use some improvement.
In the 1974 Budget Act, it called on Congress to review the
entire federal budget to both ascertain the economic impacts of
our budget decisions and to help us make informed choices about
how to raise revenue and how to allocate spending. To
accomplish this, the Act established the House and the Senate
Budget Committees and charged them with the responsibility to
develop and enforce annual budget resolutions.
In addition, it created CBO, to give us non-partisan,
objective budget estimates and economic projections. CBO is far
from perfect, but it is important to note that before CBO was
created, Congress was reliant on the executive branch for
budget projections and cost estimates of legislation. I do not
agree with everything CBO produces, but I do think CBO strives
to provide us with non-partisan, independent analysis to help
us do our jobs.
Today, we are going to be hearing from two former CBO
directors. Actually, the first two former CBO directors. In
addition to being former CBO directors, Alice Rivlin and Rudy
Penner, are witnesses here today, have had long careers as
budget experts in Washington, and we are fortunate to have the
benefit our their wisdom today. Before I yield, I want to
emphasize one point. There is a lot we can do to fix our broken
budget process, but process reform alone cannot work unless
members of Congress have the will to make it work. Reform or no
reform it will take political courage and leadership to get our
fiscal house in order. I am proud to have worked with members
of this Committee to pass this year's budget on time and even
those members who disagreed with our reforms contributed to
that process for which I am grateful. To his credit Mr. Van
Hollen offered a substitute budget during floor consideration
of the budget resolution. That is how the process is supposed
to work. Americans deserve a real debate about our fiscal
future and the budget process is an appropriate form for that
debate. Let's fix what is broken and build upon what is working
and with that I would like to yield to the Ranking Member, Mr.
Van Hollen.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Paul Ryan follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul Ryan, Chairman,
Committee on the Budget

Welcome all, to this hearing.
The purpose of today's hearing is to highlight the need to reform
our broken budget process.
This summer, we got a first-hand look at how bad things have
gotten.
After a request from the President to increase the debt limit,
Congress was seemingly faced with two impossible choices: Either hand
the President a blank check to continue his unsustainable spending
policies, or let America default.
Fortunately, Congress was able to chart a middle course that
coupled immediate spending restraints with a process to cut at least a
dollar's worth of spending for every dollar increase in the debt limit.
But it shouldn't have gotten to this point. Congress created a
budget process that was intended to prevent this kind of ad hoc
policymaking.
Clearly, that process isn't working.
The budget proposed by the President in February offered no plan to
deal with what he has since acknowledged are the nation's growing
fiscal challenges.
Meanwhile, it has been 874 days since the Senate even bothered to
pass a budget.
Congress has struggled with this process for a long time. This
year's breakdown in the federal budget process, however, could not have
happened at a worse time.
Right now, it is contributing to the crippling uncertainty about
fiscal policy that is discouraging businesses from making the kinds of
long-term investments that create jobs.
There are parts of the budget process that are irredeemably broken,
but other parts still work well, even if they could use improvement.
The 1974 Budget Act called on Congress to review the entire federal
budget to both ascertain the economic impacts of our budget decisions
and to help us make informed choices about how to raise revenue and
allocate spending.
To accomplish this, the Act established the House and Senate Budget
Committees and charged them with the responsibility to develop and
enforce annual budget resolutions.
In addition, it created CBO to give us non-partisan, objective
budget estimates and economic projections.
CBO is far from perfect. But it is important to note that before
CBO was created, Congress was reliant on the Executive Branch for
budget projections and cost estimates of legislation.
I don't agree with everything CBO produces, but I do think CBO
strives to provide us with non-partisan, independent analysis to help
us do our jobs.
Today, we will be hearing from two former CBO directors--the first
two, in fact.
In addition to being former CBO directors, both Alice Rivlin and
Rudy Penner, our witnesses today, have had long careers as budget
experts in Washington. We are fortunate to have the benefit of their
wisdom today.
Before I yield, I want to emphasize one point: There's a lot we can
do to fix our broken budget process, but process reform can't work
unless members of Congress have the will to make it work.
Reform or no reform, it will take political courage and leadership
to get our fiscal house in order.
I am proud to have worked with members of this committee to pass
this year's House budget on time. And even those members who disagreed
with our reforms contributed to that process, for which I am grateful.
To his credit, Mr. Van Hollen offered a substitute budget during
floor consideration of the budget resolution.
Americans deserve a real debate over our fiscal future, and the
budget process is an appropriate forum for that debate. Let's fix
what's broken and build upon what's working.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Van Hollen.

Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you, thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, and thank you for calling this hearing to explore
ways that we might be able to improve the budget process and I
join my friend the Chairman in welcoming our distinguished
witnesses here today, two veterans of the budget process. And I
do think there are some budget process measures that can help
to improve the process. The Chairman mentioned the
establishment of the Congressional Budget Office. I have
introduced, along with many colleagues on this Committee, a
piece of legislation that would expedite congressional
consideration of spending cut proposals and other measures
proposed by the president, by the Executive Branch to give
those an expedited review in certain areas of the budget. I
also believe that the PAYGO rule that has been in effect at
different periods has played a useful, even though limited,
role in trying to prevent the deficit from getting even worse.
However I want to now turn to the Chairman's concluding point.
Our rules, our congressional rules, our congressional
process are like flashing yellow lights like stop signs. When
Congress chooses to ignore them they do not do any good and
unlike stop signs that are enforced by an external police
power, Congress of course, is the ultimate enforcer of its own
rules. Which means when it decides to blow through the yellow
flashing lights or the stop signs it can decide to do that,
which brings me to my main point and the point the Chairman
concluded on which is the real challenge we face is not a
change in the rules. There may be some things we can do to
modify and improve them. I do not disagree with that and I
welcome the opportunity to explore this but our fundamental
problem is not the budget process rules; it is the lack of
political consensus and it is the lack of political will. We
are now in an era of divided government. We have a Democratic
president. We have a very close Democratic majority in the
Senate. We have Republican control in the House. In the era of
divided government the only thing that stands between divided
government that works for the country and dysfunctional
government is the willingness to compromise. And I do not mean
just find common ground because all of us have very different
views on how to tackle some of these issues. So it is going to
require a compromise in order to move some of these issues
forward and I will just conclude with that because this is the
Budget Committee; we spend a lot of time looking at the
deficit.
We have within the last 18 months had three groups, three
bipartisan groups that looked at ways to try and address our
deficit problem over the long run. We had Rivlin-Domenici. We
had Simpson-Bowles. We have the Gang of Six that does not have
a piece of legislation but has a concept. All three of those
situations represent the kind of framework that is put together
when you have bipartisan compromise. Nobody liked every
provision in those recommendations. I certainly did not, but
the overall framework addressed the way forward in a bipartisan
way. Again not finding common ground because not everybody
agreed with every provision in those reports but tough
compromises made to try and advance the good of the country.
So again I welcome the opportunity to explore ways to
improve the budget process but as you said Mr. Chairman I think
we all recognize at the end of the day, especially in the areas
of divided government, only principled compromise can help move
us forward for the good of the country and I thank you.
Chairman Ryan. Thank you and since you are the only two
witnesses we will not restrict you to the hard five minutes. So
Dr. Rivlin why do we not start with you and then Rudy we will
go with you.
[The prepared statement of Chris Van Hollen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Chris Van Hollen, Ranking Minority Member,
Committee on the Budget

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing on the budget
process. And I join my friend, the Chairman, in welcoming our
distinguished witnesses here today, two veterans of the budget process.
I do think there are some measures, budget process measures, that
can help improve the process. The Chairman mentioned the establishment
of the Congressional Budget Office. I've introduced, along with many
colleagues on this committee, a piece of legislation that would
expedite Congressional consideration of spending cut proposals and
other measures proposed by the President and by the executive branch,
to give those an expedited review in certain areas of the budget.
I also believe that the PAYGO rule that has been in effect during
different periods has played a useful, even though limited, role in
trying to prevent the deficit from getting even worse. However I want
now to turn to the Chairman's concluding point. Our rules, our
Congressional rules on Congressional process, are like flashing yellow
lights, and like stop signs. When Congress chooses to ignore them they
don't do any good, and unlike stop signs that are enforced by an
external police power, Congress of course, is the ultimate enforcer of
its own rules. Which means when it decides to blow through the flashing
yellow lights or the stop signs it can decide to do that.
That brings me to my main point that the Chairman concluded on,
which is that the real challenge that we face is not a change in the
rules, there may some things that we can do to modify and improve, I
don't disagree with that and I welcome the opportunity to explore this,
but our fundamental is not the budget process rules, it's the lack of
political consensus and it's the lack of political will. We're now in
an era of divided government. We have a Democratic president, we have a
very close Democratic majority in the Senate, and we have Republican
control in the House. And in an era of divided government the only
thing that stands between divided government that works for the country
and dysfunctional government is the willingness to compromise. And I
don't mean just finding common ground because some of us have very
different views on how to tackle some of these issues. So, it is going
to require compromise in order to move some of these issues forward.
And I'll just conclude with that because this is the Budget
Committee, we've spent a lot of time looking at the deficit. We have,
in the last 18 months, had three groups, three bipartisan groups that
looked at ways to try and address our deficit problem over the long
run. We had Rivlin-Domenici, we had Simpson-Bowles, and we have the
Gang of Six--who doesn't have legislation but has a concept. All three
of those situations represent the kind of framework that's been put
together when you have bipartisan compromise. Nobody liked every
provision in those recommendations; I certainly didn't, but the overall
framework addressed the way forward in a bipartisan way. Again, not
finding common ground because not everybody agreed with every provision
in every one of those reports, but tough compromises were made to try
and advance the good of the country.
So, again I welcome the opportunity to explore ways to improve the
budget process but as you said, Mr. Chairman, I think we all recognize
at the end of the day, especially in the era of divided government,
only principled compromise can help move us forward for the good of the
country. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF ALICE M. RIVLIN, SENIOR FELLOW, BROOKINGS
INSTITUTE; AND RUDOLPH G. PENNER, INSTITUTE FELLOW, URBAN
INSTITUTE

STATEMENT OF ALICE M. RIVLIN

Dr. Rivlin. Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, Mr. Van
Hollen. There is no doubt that the budget process is broken.
The clearest evidence is the fact that we are all counting on
this Joint Select Committee with its extraordinary powers and
its unusual composition to avoid total gridlock or a replay of
the near catastrophic debt ceiling brinkmanship of this summer.
Now I am an optimist about the chances that the Joint Select
Committee with the strong support of the president and the
leadership in both Houses and both parties will be able to
agree on actions that will stabilize the rising debt and set
the Federal budget on a sustainable path.
However, even if the Joint Select Committee succeeds the
budget process has failed. Our much vaunted democracy should
not have to abandon its normal decision processes and
concentrate power in the hands of ad hoc group even if one of
them is Mr. Van Hollen, to solve a budget problem. The regular
budget process of which this Committee is an essential part
should have functioned long before now to put in place both a
near term budget and a sustainable long term plan.
Congress has no choice; you have to fix the budget process
but as the Chairman pointed out in his opening remarks a better
process will not make budget decisions easy or create the will
to compromise and solve problems without which a diverse
democracy cannot move forward. Process can either hamper
decision making or facilitate it but only at the margins. The
current congressional process makes it harder to make fiscally
responsible budget decisions for reasons I will get to in a
minute, but bad process is a symptom not a cause of
unwillingness to make the compromises necessary to solve hard
problems. No process will work unless the participants want it
to work.
Now budget making, as no one needs to tell you, is
inherently hard. Even the budget of a small town or a small
company is difficult to agree on because there are always more
claims than resources. The budget of a huge country presents
added dimensions of difficulty since the government's budget
affects the economy and is affected by it in ways that are hard
to document and provide room for sharp disagreement.
In the United States we have a special problem. The checks
and balances built into the Constitution make budgeting
especially complex and require a multistage process that
greatly compounds the difficulty of getting budget decisions
made. Countries with a Westminster type parliamentary system do
not consume as much time and energy or rhetoric in making
budgets as we do. The results may not be better but the process
is far more efficient. The prime minister's party or coalition
writes the budget and the parliament after a short debate
approves it, sounds great. Voting down the budget means a new
election so it is not done lightly, but our Constitution was
not designed for efficiency. On the contrary the founding
fathers designed a system of checks and balances that disburses
power and slows the decision making process sometimes to the
point of gridlock.
Moreover since the power centers or sub-power centers such
as executive agencies and congressional committees rarely want
to relinquish their particular piece of decision making
authority as new actors and responsibilities are added the
process tends to accrete complexities over time until it
becomes dysfunctional. The congressional budget process is at
that point. It needs a complete overhaul to enable it to
function effectively within the limits of our Constitution.
The Budget Act of 1974, which created the Budget Committees
and the Congressional Budget Office, which I am glad to hear
good things spoken about because I am very proud of it as I
know Rudy is too, it created the framework for the decisions.
Before its enactment, as the Chairman noted, Congress had the
power of the purse but no organized way of exercising it and
was very dependent on the administration for analysis.
The weakness of the 1974 reforms, however, contributed to
the breakdown of the process that we are witnessing today.
First, the process was unnecessarily complicated and hard
to understand. The schedule for making budget decisions was
lengthy and complex and, in fact, in the beginning it was
worse; there were two budget resolutions. Even slipping the
fiscal year to October 1, did not allow time for all the
complex steps to be completed on time. Moreover the new process
had been layered on top of an already redundant committee
structure. As far back as 1971, I testified that the
distinction between authorizing and appropriating had blurred
over the years and that budget reform should involve abolishing
that distinction altogether. My proposed committee structure
had program committees with jurisdiction over spending areas,
defense, health, et cetera, a revenue committee and a budget
committee in each House. You can imagine how well that went
over.
Second, much of the spending side of the budget, the
mandatory programs was essentially unaffected by the budget
process. In 1974, mandatory programs not counting interest were
only 11 percent of total spending. In 2010, however, the
mandatory portion was 55 percent of the total. Moreover these
programs especially Medicare and Medicaid are the main drivers
of projected spending over the next decade and beyond.
Third, the time horizon for many decisions was too short.
The budget impact of spending programs and tax changes may
build up slowly and become increasingly expensive over time or
it may be deliberately designed to do that. Over the years the
participants have struggled with different ways of taking a
longer view. Five year window, 10 year window, you know the
history but never solved the problem. Moreover the major
retirement programs which now drive the budget can only be
changed with substantial lead time and are not part of the
regular budget process.
So that leads me to a few very general principles of how to
reform. First, include all spending and revenue in the budget
process. Under the current process a dwindling portion of the
budget is subject to annual scrutiny and increasingly complex
rules while major mandatory programs and the tax code operate
on automatic pilot. No wonder the process broke down and the
Joint Select Committee had to be created to bring revenues and
mandatory spending into a comprehensive decision process. And
no wonder the Congress has chosen to put increasing proportions
of spending into the mandatory category and into the tax code.
Now I am not suggesting that you review Medicare or Social
Security laws or the Tax Code in detail every year. That would
be chaotic. In fact changes in retirement programs and taxes
should be made as infrequently as possible with long lead times
so that people and businesses can plan their lives. But the
Congress must bring the retirement programs and tax
expenditures into a process of periodic review and decision so
that you can actually control the major drivers of the budget
and the deficit and the debt. It should vote a comprehensive
long term budget, review actual spending and revenues in
relation to the intended long term budget, and have a process
for deciding what to do if the numbers are veering
significantly from the intended track.
Second, take a longer view. Discretionary spending should
be reviewed less frequently, moving to a biennial
appropriations process would help, it would give the Congress
more time for oversight and the Executive Branch more time for
planning and implementation. Mandatory spending and tax
expenditures should be reviewed, perhaps, every five or six
years.
Third, simplify the structure and reduce the number of
decision points. Reforming the budget process will be next to
impossible unless the Congress is willing to revamp the whole
committee structure with respect to activities that impact the
budget. I still believe that authorizing and appropriating are
no longer meaningful distinctions and having the major
mandatory programs under the jurisdiction of the tax writing
committees is not sensible. Too much work for them. A better
structure would be to create six or eight program or spending
committees, a revenue committee and a budget committee to put
it all together.
Finally, recognize that our Constitution requires
willingness to compromise as both the Chairman and the Ranking
Member have eloquently said. The founding fathers bequeathed us
a system of checks and balances that make it very hard to get
decisions made unless the participants work tirelessly to make
it work. It requires negotiation between the Executive and
Legislative Branches, between the two Houses of Congress even
when all are controlled by the same party. I am a veteran of
the first two years of the Clinton Administration. Believe me
it is harder to negotiate with your own folks. It requires
negotiation and compromise between the political parties
especially but not exclusively when different parties are in
control. No budget process reform will work well until
participants realize that making this complex structure
function requires a patient willingness to try to understand
each other and to work together to make sustainable budgets.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Alice M. Rivlin follows:]

Prepared Statement of Alice M. Rivlin,*
Brookings Institution and Georgetown University

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee: There is no doubt that
the budget process is broken. The clearest evidence is the fact that we
are all counting on the Joint Select Committee (JSC)--with its
extraordinary powers and unusual composition--to avoid total gridlock
or a replay of the near-catastrophic debt ceiling brinkmanship. I am an
optimist about the chances that the JSC, with the strong support of the
president and the leadership in both houses and both parties, will be
able to agree on actions that will stabilize the rising debt and set
the federal budget on a sustainable path. However, even if the JSC
succeeds, the budget process has failed. Our much-vaunted democracy
should not have to abandon its normal decision processes and
concentrate power in the hands of an ad hoc group to solve a budget
problem. The regular budget process, of which this Committee is an
essential part, should have functioned long before now to put in place
both a near-term budget and a sustainable long term plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Alice M. Rivlin is a Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution
and a Visiting Professor at Georgetown University. The views expressed
in this statement are strictly her own and do not necessarily reflect
those of staff members, officers, or trustees of the Brookings
Institution or Georgetown University.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress has no choice: you have to fix the budget process. But a
better budget process will not make budget decisions easy or create the
will to compromise and solve problems, without which a diverse
democracy cannot move forward. Process can either hamper decision-
making or facilitate it, but only at the margins. The current
congressional budget process certainly makes it harder to make fiscally
responsible budget decisions, for reasons I will get to in a minute.
But bad process is a symptom, not a cause of unwillingness to make the
compromises necessary to solve hard problems. No process will work well
unless the participants in the process want it to work.
Budget-making is inherently hard. Even the budget of a small town
or a small company is difficult to agree on because there are always
more claims than resources. The budget of a huge country presents an
added dimension of difficulty, since the government's budget affects
the economy and is affected by it in ways that are often hard to
document and provide room for sharp disagreement. Moreover, in the
United States the checks and balances built into the Constitution make
budgeting especially complex, and require a multi-stage process that
greatly compounds the difficulty of getting budget decisions made.
Countries with Westminster-type parliamentary systems do not
consume as much time, energy, or rhetoric in making budgets as we do.
The results may not be better, but the process is far more efficient.
The prime minister's party or coalition writes the budget and the
parliament, after a short debate, approves it. Voting down the budget
means a new election, so it is not done lightly.
But our Constitution was not designed for efficiency. On the
contrary, coming off a revolution against a king they perceived as
dictatorial, the Founding Fathers designed a system of checks and
balances that disperses power and slows the decision-making process,
sometimes to the point of gridlock. Moreover, since the power centers
(or sub-power centers, such as executive agencies or congressional
committees) rarely want to relinquish their particular piece of
decision-making authority as new actors and responsibilities are added,
the process tends to accrete complexities over time until it becomes
dysfunctional. The budget process is at that point. It needs complete
overhaul to enable it to function effectively within the limits of our
Constitution.
why the process broke down
The Budget and Impoundment Act of 1974, which created the Budget
Committees, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and the current
framework for budget decisions, was a much-needed reform. Before its
enactment, Congress theoretically had the power of the purse under the
Constitution, but no organized way of exercising it. The executive
branch, whose power was much better centralized by the Office of
Management and Budget for the benefit of the President, wielded
disproportionate budgetary power. But weaknesses in the 1974 reforms
contributed to the break-down of the process we are witnessing today.
First, the process was unnecessarily complicated and hard to
understand. The schedule for making budget decisions was lengthy and
complex. (In fact, originally there were two budget resolutions.) Even
slipping the fiscal year to October 1 did not allow time for all the
complex steps to be completed on time. Moreover, the new process had
been layered on top of an already redundant committee structure. I
testified in 1971 that the distinction between authorizing and
appropriating had blurred over the years and budget reform should
involve abolishing the distinction altogether. My proposed committee
structure had ``program committees'' with jurisdiction over spending
areas (defense, health, etc.), a revenue committee and a budget
committee in each house. You can imagine how well that went over!
Second, much of the spending side of the budget--the mandatory
programs--was essentially unaffected by the budget process. In 1974
mandatory programs, not counting interest, were only 11 percent of
total spending. In 2010, the mandatory portion was 55 percent of the
total. Moreover, these programs, especially Medicare and Medicaid, are
the main drivers of projected spending over the next decade and beyond.
Third, the time horizon for many decisions was too short. The
budget impact of spending programs and tax changes may build up slowly
and become increasingly expensive over time (or may be deliberately
designed to do that). Over the years, the participants struggled with
different ways of taking a longer view (five-year window, ten-year
window), but never solved the problem. Moreover, the major retirement
programs, which now drive the budget, can only be changed with
substantial lead time and are not part of the regular budget process.
essential ingredients of an effective budget process
Process reform is normally incremental, but the time for
incremental reforms in the budget process is over. The Congress should
blow it up and start over from first principles. Let me offer some
general prescriptions.

Include all spending and revenue in the budget process
Under the current process, a dwindling portion of the budget
(discretionary spending) is subject to annual scrutiny and increasingly
complex rules, while major mandatory programs and the tax code operate
on automatic pilot. No wonder the process broke down and the JSC had to
be created to bring revenues and mandatory spending into a
comprehensive decision process. And no wonder the Congress has chosen
to put increasing proportions of spending into the mandatory category
and into the tax code.
I am not suggesting that the Medicare or Social Security laws or
the tax code be reviewed in detail every year. In fact, changes in
retirement programs and taxes should be made as infrequently as
possible and with long lead times, so that people and businesses can
plan their lives. But the Congress must bring the retirement programs
and tax expenditures into a process of periodic review and decision, so
that you can actually control the major drivers of the budget, the
deficit and the debt. It should vote a comprehensive long-term budget,
review actual spending and revenues in relation to the intended long-
term budget, and have a process for deciding what to do if the numbers
are veering significantly from the intended track.

Take a longer view
Discretionary spending should be reviewed less frequently. Moving
to biennial appropriations would help. It would give the Congress more
time for oversight and the executive branch more time for planning and
implementation. Mandatory spending and tax expenditures should also be
reviewed, perhaps on a five or six year cycle.

Simplify the structure and reduce the number of decision
points
Reforming the budget process will be next to impossible unless the
Congress is willing to revamp the whole committee structure with
respect to activities that impact the budget. Authorizing and
appropriating are no longer meaningful distinctions, and having the
major mandatory programs under the jurisdiction of the tax-writing
committees is not sensible. A better structure would be to create six
to eight program or spending committees, a revenue committee and a
budget committee (to put it all together).
above all, recognize that our constitution
requires willingness to compromise
The Founding fathers bequeathed us a system of checks and balances
that make it extremely difficult to get decisions made unless
participants work tirelessly to make it work. It requires negotiation
between the legislative and executive branches and between the two
houses of Congress, even when all are controlled by the same party. It
requires negotiation and compromise between the political parties,
especially but not exclusively when different parties are in control of
one house or one branch. No budget process reform will work well until
participants realize that making this complex structure function
requires a patient willingness to try to understand each other and to
work together to make responsible, sustainable budgets.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the Committee.

Chairman Ryan. Thank you Alice. Dr. Penner.

STATEMENT OF RUDOLPH G. PENNER

Dr. Penner. Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank you Mr. Van
Hollen and other members of the Committee for this opportunity
to testify. It is tempting to believe that if only we could
come up with some clever budget rules, fiscal prudence would
follow. But as you implied Mr. Chairman and Mr. Van Hollen as
well, it does not work that way. The desire for fiscal
responsibility must come first then rules can be important in
strengthening the efforts of those supporting fiscally
responsible policies.
Rules can also protect those who are fiscally responsible
from the special interest that will inevitably oppose them. The
problem in recent years has not been a lack of rules. It has
instead been the failure of the Congress to follow rules that
are already on the books. You said Mr. Chairman the Senate has
not passed a normal budget in two years so I guess the Budget
Control Act is now their budget. Last year the House failed to
pass a budget for the first time in the history of the modern
budget process and also it is a very rare event for
appropriations to be finished on time.
This suggests to me that it may be more productive to think
about changes in the structures of spending programs and tax
policies that would allow us to control deficits more easily.
For example, my colleague Gene Steuerle and I have written on
how automatic triggers could slow benefit growth to raise
revenues when Social Security is forecasted to have financial
problems. Such triggers have been used in many other countries.
It is possible to structure a broad based low marginal rate tax
that yields revenues growing more rapidly than GDP. But nothing
is foolproof. The Congress put an automatic trigger for
Medicare in the Prescription Drug Bill. It later suspended it
before it took full effect.
As Alice emphasized we have to find better ways of
controlling mandatory spending. Now that is especially true of
Medicare and in my view it is necessary to alter Medicare so
that it is subjected to a fixed budget. The premium support
system suggested by you Mr. Chairman and in the Domenici-Rivlin
Report would serve that purpose. We can argue about how large
the Medicare budget should be, but once that is settled we
would have a lever with which to control it.
Turning to issues more directly related to the existing
budget process I will discuss three commonly proposed rules
changes that I think are bad, two that I would adopt, and one I
am not so sure of.
I used to think it would be a very good idea to replace the
concurrent budget resolution with a joint resolution that would
be signed into law or vetoed by the president, thus getting
agreement on the outlines of the budget early in the process.
But given the difficulty that Congress has faced in recent
years about passing any budget at all, I guess I now think it
totally impractical to get agreement with the president in a
timely fashion.
I rarely, rarely disagree with Alice but one of her ideas
that I am not too enthusiastic about is the notion of biennial
budgeting. As Alice said budgets are extremely complex. They
are never perfect. I think we should try to improve them every
year and besides economic and other conditions often change
unexpectedly and by large amounts.
Third, the Balanced Budget Amendment is not a good idea.
The first response of a state when it feels constrained is to
engage in some outrageous budget gimmickry and over the long
run states have created a host of independent agencies and off-
budget accounts that make state budgets extremely hard to
understand. Admittedly, balanced budget provisions exercise
restraints in a severe recession but that is not a good time to
have it.
Two things that should be done, here I very much agree with
Alice that the budget horizon should be lengthened to deal with
the long run and the Congress should set an explicit target for
stabilizing the debt GDP ratio and the date for doing it. The
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget has suggested
techniques for enforcing such a target using a sequester as a
last resort.
Second, we badly need a new baseline. The current law
baseline as CBO must now compute it is useless because so many
tax cuts and spending increases have passed on a temporary
basis even though we are essentially certain that they will be
extended. Most groups suggesting fiscal reforms start with the
current policy baseline but different groups tend to interpret
current policy differently. Codifying of current policy version
which admittedly will not be perfect could help end much
confusion.
The last idea that I am not so sure about has often been
suggested, it is the notion of creating a joint House and
Senate budget committee. Congress can then start the debate
with one resolution but I defer with those with legislative
experience to assess whether this would really be a good idea,
but I certainly think it should be given considerable thought.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Rudolph G. Penner follows:]

Prepared Statement of Rudolph G. Penner, Institute Fellow,
the Urban Institute\1\

It is tempting to believe that if only we could come up with some
clever budget rules, fiscal prudence would follow. Unfortunately, it
does not work that way. The desire for fiscal responsibility must come
first. Then rules can be important in strengthening the efforts of
those supporting fiscally responsible policies. They also can protect
those who are fiscally responsible from the special interests that will
inevitably oppose them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The views expressed are those of the author and should not be
attributed to the Urban Institute, its trustees, or its funders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The problem in recent years has not been a lack of rules. It has
instead been the failure of the Congress to follow rules that are
already on the books. The Senate has not passed a normal budget in 2
years (The caps imposed by the Budget Control Act of 2011 have recently
been deemed to constitute a budget.) and last year the House failed to
pass a budget for the first time in the history of the modern budget
process. It is hard to think up useful rules governing the development
of a budget resolution when no budget resolution passes the entire
Congress.
The Congress almost never passes appropriations on time. That makes
it very difficult for the bureaucracy to make rational plans.
rules versus changes in the structure of programs
The difficulty in following rules and schedules may imply that it
is more promising to think about changes in the structure of spending
programs or in the tax structure that would make deficits easier to
control. It is Social Security and health spending that now create our
biggest budget challenges. The two areas constitute almost half of
noninterest spending. Both areas are growing faster than tax revenues.
Part of the problem is that Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid,
along with some less important health programs, are open-ended. That is
to say, they are not subjected to a budget. The law defines an eligible
population and the benefits to which they are entitled and then we pay
for everyone who shows up. A lot more people are showing up these days
as baby boomers retire in larger and larger numbers.
My colleague Eugene Steuerle and I have written about automatic
triggers that might be used to make Social Security more secure
financially.\2\ Upon a finding by the actuary that the program is in
trouble, the spending and/or tax structure could be altered
automatically to put the program on a more sustainable course. For
example, the full retirement age could be increased automatically,
indexing could be changed to reduce benefit growth, or the tax base
could be raised. Sweden has designed a system in which the generosity
of the index applied to new and future retirees is automatically made
less generous whenever the present value of future revenues falls short
of the present value of future expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Rudolph G. Penner and C. Eugene Steuerle, ``Stabilizing Future
Fiscal Policy: It's Time to Pull the Trigger,'' an Urban Institute
Research Report, August 2007.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Steuerle and I also wrote favorably regarding the automatic
Medicare trigger that was embedded in the Prescription Drug Act. Upon a
finding that indicated that the system was in financial trouble, the
president was to issue recommendations that would improve the program's
financial outlook, and the Congress was supposed to consider the
recommendations in an expedited manner. The actuary found that the
system was in trouble; President Bush made some money saving
recommendations; and then nothing happened. The Congress passed a new
rule that relieved them of the burden of considering the
recommendations. The experience shows that nothing is foolproof. The
Congress can create laws and change laws at any time.
Medicare can be put on a budget through a premium support approach
and Medicaid can be controlled through a block grant, as suggested in
the budget you put forward Mr. Chairman and in the Domenici-Rivlin
report.\3\ The amount of money that should be put behind these ideas
can be debated, but once the debate is resolved Congress has a more
direct way of controlling total expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Debt Reduction Task Force 2010, ``Restoring America's Future:
Reviving the Economy, Cutting Spending and Debt, and Creating a Simple
Pro-Growth Tax System'', Washington, DC, Bipartisan Policy Center.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the revenue side, a revenue neutral tax reform that broadens the
tax base and lowers marginal rates can be designed to provide a revenue
stream that grows faster than GDP in the long run. Such a system was
designed by a committee that I co-chaired for the National Academies of
Science and Public Administration.\4\ Admittedly, the revenue growth
was largely fueled by the elimination of the exclusion from taxable
income of the cost of employer provided health insurance. The exclusion
is currently a major drag on revenue growth because of rapidly growing
health costs. However, we designed our system before health reform
passed. Now one has to worry that the removal of the exclusion would
drive many more people into subsidized exchanges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Committee on the Fiscal Future of the United States (National
Academy of Public Administration and National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences, 2010, ``Choosing the Nation's Fiscal
Future'', Washington, DC, National Academies Press.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
proposals for changing the budget process
There are some proposals for changing the budget process that I
oppose, some that should be adopted, and others that deserve more
study.
A Joint Resolution--It has often been suggested that the Congress
pass a Joint Budget Resolution that would replace the Concurrent Budget
Resolution called for in present law. A Joint Resolution is a law that
would be signed or vetoed by the president. A Concurrent Resolution is
not a law and is not signed by the president. Proponents of this change
argue that it would be useful for the president and the Congress to
agree to a budget early thus avoiding time consuming debates later in
the year. Because it would have the force of law, the budget resolution
should be easier to enforce.
I must confess that I was for a Joint Resolution before I was
against it. I now believe that it would be impractical to reach an
agreement between the president and the two houses of Congress early in
the year. As noted earlier the Congress has had problems reaching an
agreement itself. Finding an agreement with the president would
probably involve a protracted bargaining session that would take far
too much time.
A few years ago, then Chairman Nussle and Representative Cardin put
forward a proposal for a Joint Resolution that had a fallback
provision. If the president and the Congress did not reach agreement
within a specified time period, the Congress would then revert to a
Concurrent Resolution. This would be a better approach than not having
a fallback, but I suspect it would be necessary to revert to a
Concurrent Resolution almost every year.
Biennial Budgeting--Many have suggested that the Congress prepare a
budget only every two years, thus leaving more time for oversight of
programs. I have never liked this idea. I see budgeting as an iterative
process in which we are constantly groping for a better allocation of
resources. It is an extremely complicated process that we never get
quite right and it useful to return to the problem at least once a
year. I would say that even if conditions remained constant, but they
don't. There tend to be significant unpredicted changes in the economy
each year and budget projections can vary dramatically. One might
diminish the problem by relying more on supplementals, but
supplementals tend to be hard to discipline. Besides, what if political
conditions suddenly favored some budget consolidation, but it happened
in an off year. One might miss an important opportunity.
A Balanced Budget Amendment--Forty nine states have laws or
constitutional provisions that favor a balanced budget. They vary
greatly from state to state. Some only require that balanced budgets be
proposed and some only require that budget for current operations be
balanced and allow borrowing for capital projects.
Such laws have greatly distorted state budgets. First, they have
driven many state activities off budget. There are more than 30,000
independent agencies and off-budget accounts at the state and local
level that are not subjected to a balanced budget requirement. Second,
they promote the use of accounting gimmicks as a first response when
states get into trouble. For both reasons state budget become very hard
to understand.
It is true that governments eventually run out of gimmicks in a
severe recession and balanced budget rules start to have a real
restraining effect, but it is not a good time for restraint. Over the
longer run the main restraint on states comes from the rating agencies
whose rulings can have a significant impact on the interest rates on
state debt. In my view, balanced budget rules only have a sporadic
restraining effect that generally comes at just the wrong time.
A balanced budget amendment would reduce the ability of the Federal
government to respond to recessions and other emergencies. If
exceptions are put in the amendment, they will almost certainly be
abused. It was not so long ago that the Congress declared the 2000
census to be an emergency, even though we knew that we had to have one
since 1789.
Lengthening the Budget Time Horizon--The Committee for a
Responsible Federal Budget has proposed a series of process changes
that would take a longer term view of the budget.\5\ Most important the
Congress would set a target at which it would stabilize the debt-GDP
ratio and announce the year in which the target would be achieved. It
sets out a number of enforcement mechanisms with an automatic sequester
as a last resort.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, Getting Back in the
Black, November 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Choosing a New Baseline--The current law baseline now used by the
Congress in budget deliberations has become almost totally useless. The
problem arises because of Congress' propensity to pass deficit
increasing measures for short time periods. Consequently, all the Bush
tax cuts are now scheduled to expire at the end of 2012, including
those for the middle class; it is assumed the alternative minimum tax
will soon afflict millions more taxpayers; numerous other tax
provisions that are routinely renewed every year are assumed to expire;
and Medicare reimbursements will be cut to the bone. These unrealistic
assumptions lead to unrealistically rosy deficit projections.
This is not an easy problem to fix, because there is no such thing
as a perfect baseline. However, I believe that it would be more
sensible to have a new baseline that assumed that all temporary tax
measures are renewed. On the spending side of the baseline, it is now
assumed that authorizations for programs, such as TANF, highways, etc.,
are automatically renewed when necessary. The most important problem
with my approach is that it does not take account of instances where
the Congress truly wants a tax or spending measure to be temporary, but
this is rare. My proposed baseline has the major advantage that it is
much better predictor of where policy and deficits are going than the
current law baseline.
A Joint Budget Committee--It has often been suggested that the
House and Senate combine to form a Joint Budget Committee. The same
resolution would be put before each house of the Congress and even if
the resolution was successfully amended, the end results should be
easier to reconcile than if you start with two different resolutions
from two separate committees.
I am not absolutely convinced that this proposal is a good idea. I
would defer to those with actual legislative experience who are in a
better position to judge, but I do think it worthy of consideration.

Chairman Ryan. Thank you very much. Dr. Rivlin, when we
wrote the 1974 Budget Act mandatory spending was 11 percent of
spending and back in those days it was called backdoor
spending. It was 11 percent then now it is approaching 60
percent. You both suggest that we should budget for these, that
we should put these on budget. How exactly do you think we
ought to doit? Should we put hard caps with sequesters? What do
you think is the best way to bring this category, the largest
category of government on budget? And I will just ask Dr.
Rivlin and then Dr. Penner.
Dr. Rivlin. Well first I think it is hard, but a way you
could go is to have the Congress vote on a long term budget. I
mean really long like 20, 30 years for those mandatory
programs, and I believe also for tax expenditures. Those are
the two big categories that are on automatic pilot and not that
really dealt with in the budget process. And then you look at
it periodically, every five years or even oftener and you
decide what to do. Now you could have some kind of automatic
enforcement mechanism if you are veering off track, say on
Medicare, then you could have some kind of sequester. That is
hard.
I would really like to have the Congress without a
sequester or a sort of Damocles. Have an explicit vote on what
you are going to do about this veering off track when it
happens and in the case of Medicare if you do have something
that is a defined contribution plan then at that moment you
could say costs are going up and it seems to be faster than we
anticipated and we have got to decide what we are going to do
about that. Do we raise the cap, et cetera? But you need an
explicit decision moment on the mandatory programs and these
tax expenditures in which you review what you thought was going
to happen, what has happened and what to do about it.
Chairman Ryan. So Dr. Penner both of you said we should go
to a defined contribution which is the type of system premium
support is. We can debate how you do it, growth rates and all
of those things on Medicare but lock in that growth rate and
then revisit it to make sure that it is sticking within trend.
And Dr. Penner you mentioned that the debt-to-GDP ratio
triggers with some kind of an enforcement mechanism such as a
sequester behind that. Is that what both of you are basically
saying? So Medicare's the big problem with respect to drivers
of our debt. That is the biggest unfunded liability. You are
saying take an entitlement like this, put it on the kind of
track you just mentioned and then if you are veering off that
path then have a backup mechanism to make sure you get back on
the track.
Dr. Rivlin. Right. With respect to Medicare if you really
did premium support you would not be veering off track.
Chairman Ryan. Right.
Dr. Rivlin. But for others like Medicaid or tax
expenditures I mean those are really big and they are
expenditures and you have to look every once in a while at what
is happening there and the present process does not give you a
moment for doing that.
Chairman Ryan. Dr. Penner?
Dr. Penner. I just very much agree with everything Alice
said and if you did indeed have a premium support system for
Medicare you could vote on the budget every year. I mean other
countries, Canada, United Kingdom they have fixed budgets for
their health system. In Canada every hospital has a budget and
has to live within that. So you can set long run targets and
you can adjust continually depending on conditions.
With regard to Social Security it was really not on a
completely automatic pilot until the mid-1970s. Before that it
was assumed that benefits would be fixed in money terms and
that, of course, with growing payroll tax revenues meant that
the Congress could every now and again increase those benefits
depending on conditions.
In the late 60s and early 70s the Congress increased
benefits enormously and there was a feeling that I believed in
at the time that the Congress could not discipline itself with
regard to Social Security. So instead they put it on automatic
pilot thinking that would save money in the long run. Now I am
very dubious about that theory. I wish we were back in a system
where the Congress had more discretion depending on what is
happening to wages in the economy and all sorts of other things
to alter these benefits. And you would want to design the
program so they altered them in a good direction so they were
not in a position of having to cut. Now with this automatic
system it becomes sort of symmetrical. Sometimes you would be
in a position where you should cut them and sometimes maybe
increase them but the bottom line is that we have not done
anything at all and we just let the automatic pilot fly on.
Chairman Ryan. Dr. Rivlin you said something that really
peaked my interest about the way we organize ourselves here on
committees and things like this and you have been at this for a
long time. It is a fairly dysfunctional way: the separation
between authorizing and appropriation. Are you suggesting that
we go to more of a streamline system where, say, jurisdiction
is clean, broken up by budget function or something like that,
and authorizers also do the appropriating as well? Is that the
kind of system you are talking about?
Dr. Rivlin. Exactly. And I am not sure it is a very
meaningful distinction. But if it is it is done by the same
people.
Chairman Ryan. Right, so I remember there was a Dryer
Commission in 1995, I think, that did this and they said break
it up by budget functions. Budget Committee sends the numbers
to the authorizers/appropriators and authorizers have a
subcommittee, an appropriations subcommittee, so the people who
are doing the oversight and looking at these programs for the
long term and short term also do the appropriating. Is the kind
of system you are talking about?
Dr. Rivlin. Yes. I thought of it just as there is a Defense
Committee.
Chairman Ryan. Yeah.
Dr. Rivlin. And it spends its time worrying about defense
strategy and how much money we want to spend for defense and
its relationship to the Budget Committee as you describe.
Chairman Ryan. Okay, I am going to get some pretty nasty
looks from some people here in a minute because I keep going
down this path.
Dr. Rivlin. It is not a popular idea.
Chairman Ryan. No I know it is not. Let me ask you about
baselining. So Dr. Penner you talk about the base, let's put
aside the assumptions within the baseline. You know doc fix and
tax policy. I want to quote Governor Cuomo who called the
baseline budgeting process in New York a sham and deceptive and
a contributor to the dysfunctional budget process. Here is his
quote.
Who was responsible for setting the growth in the state's
budget, the answer is shockingly no one. It is dictated by
hundreds of rates and formulas that are immobilized throughout
New York State laws that govern different programs, formulas
that have been built into the law over decades without regard
to fiscal realities, performance or accountability.
We face the same problem here in Washington. The
assumptions of what ought to be in the baseline whenever there
is a reduction in the growth of a program like mandatory it is
considered a cut. When in real terms it actually is an
increase. Should we go after that? Should we revisit the actual
composition of a baseline which is really the definition of
autopilot?
Dr. Penner. I think that would be very useful. I mean what
is going on now is that we have a discriminatory budget
structure. We look at discretionary and mandatory quite
separately and when you cut a discretionary program it is
really not cut usually in real terms. Whereas as you said
Medicare can be growing at an extremely rapid rate and any
slowdown in the growth is called a cut and the same tends to be
true of Social Security.
So I think that would be very useful. I think it would be
helped if, in fact, we had fixed targets for Medicare that
would help control it. Another way of helping I think would be
a change in the way we display the budget, where every year you
have a kind of source and uses of funds and then you can see
very clearly how much of your tax revenues and boring goes to
Medicare, how much it has increased or to Medicaid and that
would be very helpful as well.
Chairman Ryan. Yes, Doctor?
Dr. Rivlin. I think Rudy goes too far. You need a baseline.
If you are going to sit down and look at the budget you need to
say where do we start? And in terms of Medicare and Social
Security for instance it does not make any sense to say we
start with what we are spending this year because next year
there are going to be more old people and 10 years from now
there are going to be a lot more old people. So it makes a lot
of sense to compute what would be the spending given the number
of claimants that we expect.
Chairman Ryan. A per capita adjustment in the baseline. I
heard.
Dr. Rivlin. Well not necessarily. I am saying that with
respect to entitlement programs, programs that depend on the
characteristic of the beneficiaries you really need to know how
many beneficiaries there are and so you need to adjust for
that.
With respect to discretionary spending it is essentially
arbitrary. You could decide we are going to start with this
year's budget or you could decide a lot of these programs will
have higher cost because of inflation. Now we are not in an
inflationary period now but suppose you were and that they are
going to need to provide the same service, they are going to
need more money and you could start there. It does not matter
so long as you decide and everybody understands what it is. But
you do need a baseline.
Dr. Penner. Well I was not implying Mr. Chairman that we
should not compute the kinds of things that Alice says we
should compute. That is to say what are the spending
implications of the current law? But I am suggesting additional
displays which make it clearer than in our present system just
how much that is costing.
Chairman Ryan. Right. Thank you. Mr. Van Hollen.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Let me thank again
the witnesses for their testimony. As I listen to your
testimony it sort of led me back to some of the comments that
you made early on, the chairman and I made in which Dr. Rivlin
ends her written testimony on essentially in big bold letters
in the sentence. ``Above all recognize that our Constitution
requires a willingness to compromise'' because we can invent
all the budget rules that we want but if at the end of the day
there is not a willingness to compromise especially in the area
of divided government it becomes a very difficult.
And Dr. Penner as I look at your testimony and I have to
say I agree with your review of some of the budget processes.
Joint resolution no, I think the key points there, biennial
budgeting. Frankly I am kind of agnostic on that. I am willing
to listen to people.
Balance budget amendment, you pointed out that there are a
lot of gimmicks that are played with that. Ultimately with that
as well it is a matter of enforcement. I mean I do not think
anyone should kid themselves thinking if there was a balanced
budget that it would not be subject to the same kind of game
plan you see at the state level. But also ultimately who is
going to enforce it, the courts? They are not going to get in
the middle of a big battle over that.
Lengthening the budget time horizon? I think all of us in
this Committee realize that the time structure is designed in a
way that you do not get very much credit for politically tough
decisions because you only look in the 10 year window while a
lot of changes take place over a period of time, whether it is
on the revenue side or cutting spending. So I think that is
something we should look at.
Baseline, I am happy to engage in a conversation on
baseline, too. But I think if you look at both your testimony
you would acknowledge, and this is my point, that really the
recommendations you are making for addressing this issue are
really beyond the purview of budget process. You are really
making decisions with respect to fundamental policy choices.
For example, when you set up a sequester mechanism, if we
were to do that, you have to decide now. What subject to
sequester? Are you going to include revenue when you miss your
debt to GDP target, or deficit to GDP target? All those
questions come into play right up front. We have sort of all
discovered that as you go through these different exercises.
Dr. Penner, you mentioned the Rivlin-Domenici Commission
recommendation regarding premium support. You did not mention
that their overall approach is sort of 50 percent on the
revenue side 50 percent on the cut side, and that other
bipartisan groups that have looked at these challenges have
come up with similar frameworks. You mentioned one of the tax
approaches broadening the base that was discussed in choosing
the nation's fiscal future. Great piece of work, but as you
know you outlined four different fiscal scenarios here and had
a lot of different proposals with respect to how you raise
revenue including raising payroll taxes, right?
Dr. Penner. That is right.
Mr. Van Hollen. Okay, so the point here is that biennial
budgeting, some of this little stuff we can work around the
edges but the fundamental crunch comes with making the
political choices. And I just throw that question, is that not
the case?
Dr. Rivlin. Absolutely.
Dr. Penner. No disagreement here.
Dr. Rivlin. If you are criticizing us for not making your
job easy, you are right.
Mr. Van Hollen. I am not. I just I think that we can and I
am willing to engage in you know process and discussion and
looking into how we can change this as I have said. I have
introduced legislation cosponsored by a number of our
colleagues with respect to expedited rescission. It can I think
make a little difference around the margins potentially. But
with respect to the fundamental issues every one of the
proposals that you have put forward, the two of you, with
respect to really changing the direction is not really a budget
process proposal. It presumes fundamental political choices
about how we are going to get there I believe.
Dr. Rivlin. I think that is right, if I may chime back in,
but there are things that you can do to make it easier to
grapple with the hard choices and right now the fact that
entitlements and tax expenditures are sort of outside your
purview and you are spending enormous amounts of time on a
small part of the budget. That is silly and you can fix that.
Mr. Van Hollen. Well I think there are things you can do to
focus more attention and discussion on as you said tax
expenditures. The other thing is as someone who is on temporary
leave from the Ways and Means Committee I am happy to vote now
for all your proposals with respect to my other colleagues on
other committees.
But I do think that all of these issues should be subject
to more scrutiny and I think there are things we can do as you
say to make it easier. I am just making the point that you are
making too, which is there is no budget process magic bullet
here, and the point I made in my testimony, when you look at
the different groups that have grappled with it, it is not as
if this has not been part of our national conversation for the
last 18 months in terms of looking at these fundamental
choices. I mean we have Dr. Rivlin and the Rivlin-Domenici
Commission. Dr. Penner you were part of the National Academy of
Sciences study and grappled with these exact issues. Simpson-
Bowles did, Gang of Six did and my point is if at the end of
the day we take Dr. Rivlin's advice, and what I think Dr.
Penner's advice, which is that you have got to make these tough
political decisions and be subject to compromise.
My only point is we now look to the bipartisan groups that
have grappled with this and what kind of compromises did they
frame? Again not with respect to every particular piece of it,
people will differ but in terms of the fundamental approach.
There are three clear products that demonstrate and reflect
what happens when people of good will and good faith get
together and grapple with these questions. Would you agree with
that, Dr. Rivlin?
Dr. Rivlin. I would. I mean there are differences obviously
but the basic arithmetic of the problem drives you to similar
solutions.
Mr. Van Hollen. Dr. Penner?
Dr. Penner. Yes, the problem now is not a lack of options.
We have literally dozens of them as you say from various
committees. The problem is a matter of compromising among those
options.
Mr. Van Hollen. Thank you.
Chairman Ryan. It is Mrs. Black.
Mrs. Black. Thank you Mr. Chairman and I want to thank both
the witnesses for your very enlightening remarks that you did
make. I want to go to the regulatory increases and spending
that piece. In formulating the baseline CBO makes so-called
technical adjustments to account for regulatory policies that
would change direct spending. Do you think that this process is
significantly transparent to Congress so that we are made fully
aware of the spending policy changes that are being made
administratively without further congressional enactment? Ms.
Rivlin.
Dr. Rivlin. I do not really know. I mean I would talk that
through with Dr. Elmendorf but I assume they are trying as hard
as they can to make it as clear as possible. If there are other
things you need to understand, ask.
Dr. Penner. They do report on a regular basis in terms of
their estimate, both of the private spending implications and
public spending implications, the regulatory changes. It is
pretty dense stuff I will admit, but I think as Alice said if
it is not clear enough you could work with CBO to change the
format.
Mrs. Black. Let me go to another subject on the CBO versus
the Joint Tax Committee or Joint Committee on Taxation.
Responsibility for estimating the budgetary effect of
legislation is divided between CBO and JCT with JCT responsible
for providing estimates from most revenue measures while CBO is
responsible for all the legislative. From your experience at
CBO what challenges do you think that this arrangement poses or
are there challenges there?
Dr. Rivlin. Well I was the first director so I inherited
this division of responsibility and as we staffed up in our tax
division we tried to figure out how do we do this best? But my
experience was pretty good. I think it worked reasonably well.
The staff of the Joint Tax Committee is very competent and they
have been doing this for a long time and there was a lot of
back and forth between the two staffs and I do not remember it
being especially difficult.
Dr. Penner. I would agree. The division of responsibilities
was actually codified on my watch and made clear in the
legislation. I did not object to that. I thought it was a good
idea to clarify these things. I cannot say that I ever
experienced real difficulties because of this division of
responsibilities. It worked very well. They always cooperated
very well with us. Sometimes we had disagreements but that was
a rare event.
Mrs. Black. Well I appreciate both your testimony and also
in the questioning because we certainly want to find things
that work well and then fine tune the things that do not. Thank
you very much. Mr. Chairman I yield back my time.
Chairman Ryan. Mr. Blumenauer.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you Mr. Chairman. I must say I have
appreciated the food for thought that you are offering up. Just
sort of take a moment to exhale amongst some of the activities
around here. I am looking at some big picture items. I
particularly appreciate your putting before us the potential of
changing the dysfunctional congressional structure itself. I
was taken by your proposal to sort of merge authorizing and
appropriating. I think you were right 40 years ago and I think,
certainly, you are correct today. It is interesting how
authorizers increasingly are attempting to sidestep
appropriators and with mixed success and how our friends in the
Appropriations Committee routinely weigh into the policymaking.
I am hopeful that there may be an opportunity for us at some
point to step back and look at this because ultimately this is
a notion of broader congressional dysfunction, the size of
committees and the inability to actually get things done. You
are suggesting, not only I think, fiscal restraint but an
opportunity to exercise what policymakers should do which is
actually policy make.
Dr. Penner, I appreciate your reference to not falling
victim to gimmicks. I note the late Senator Hatfield recently
passed away and one who stood tall against the so-called
Balanced Budget Amendment, which is something sidestepping our
responsibility. And I am particularly interested in the notion
of our being on autopilot with the mandatory spending with tax
expenditures.
I am thinking about ways that we might be able to break the
cycle and I would like to just put one item before you. Dr.
Rivlin, we talked briefly before the hearing about the
infrastructure issue. An area that is not given much attention
sadly is the infrastructure deficit. We have user fees that
have gotten all out of cycle that have required trust funds to
be propped up by general funds and these are areas,
particularly the Highway Trust Fund, where we are talking about
long term investments. Do you think that there is some approach
that would involve a capital budget in trying to zero in
separately on the user fees that support some of the
infrastructure that could maybe help get out of the budget
conundrum and be able to lead towards better policymaking?
Dr. Rivlin. Well I think they are two separate issues. One
is how do you get more investment in infrastructure? And I
think everybody thinks we need that and how do you fund it in a
way that is more conducive to efficiency? And you and I have
talked about road use pricing and congestion fees and that sort
of thing. And I think more shifting to user fees in
infrastructure is a good thing.
However, I think of that as a separate conversation. I do
not think that a capital budget for the federal government
would be particularly helpful and for a couple of reasons.
Unlike states and cities the federal government actually does
not do much direct investing in capital goods except in the
military. Most of the investment in what you would really think
of as capital goods, battleships, whatever; we do not use them
anymore; aircraft carriers or our military hardware.
On the domestic side it is mostly grants to state and local
governments, a grants from the Highway Trust Fund or whatever,
matching grants. That makes it much more difficult to have them
in the capital budget but the more important thing is
immediately everybody who is conscious of not just the
infrastructure deficit but the skills deficit and other
deficits will say, ``But wait a minute infrastructure is an
investment but so is investment in the skills of the
workforce.'' And you get an ever expanding definition of what
is investment which leads me to believe it is not a terribly
useful concept at the Federal level.
Dr. Penner. I agree completely. You talk about budget
gimmickry; if the presumption is that it is okay to borrow to
finance capital, whereas you should pay for current
expenditures up front then I think experiences show on that
almost everything gets defined as being capital. In the case of
the New York City bankruptcy long ago they went so far as to
call janitor salaries capital because they worked on buildings
after all.
So it is just very hard to control that and also there are
all kinds of measurement problems. The fact that you do not
really know what you get from a grant. The way most of the
highway grants are constructed, they do not really provide much
incentive to states to actually build highways.
And then of course you have the much more difficult
measurement problems if you consider education to be capital or
research and development to be capital. And if you do not, then
you have a capital budget then you are discriminating against
those things.
Chairman Ryan. Thank you. Mr. Stutzman.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank you for
being here today. I want to touch a little bit on biennial
budgeting and Dr. Rivlin your comments you mention supporting
the concept. I am a big fan of biennial budgeting. I come from
the State of Indiana.
Dr. Rivlin. I am a Hoosier, too.
Mr. Stutzman. That is right; from Bloomington. And we have
biennial budgeting there and our Governor Mitch Daniels, former
OMB director, has done a fantastic job and we have a balanced
budget in Indiana. I will say this, I think gimmicks can always
happen whether you have a balanced budget amendment, whether
you have a biennial budget. It is up to decision makers to make
wise decisions and it does not matter what parameters we put
around ourselves, anybody can still go around those rules.
I would like, if you could Dr. Rivlin, to kind of give us
an idea what a federal biennial budget could look like? Could
work like? And also what some of the benefits and maybe some of
the downsides are?
Dr. Rivlin. I think the main benefit is that it saves
everybody time. The Congress does not have to do this every
year, it can do other things in the other year, and especially
the Executive Branch which spends an enormous amount of time
working on the budget every year and presenting it to Congress
and appearing before these unnecessarily duplicative committees
to defend the budget and chews up a lot of time when they ought
to be running their programs. So I think that is the main
benefit and there are always problems. The Indiana Legislature
is notorious for holding the clock and running longer than they
are allowed to and all those things. And that would maybe
happen here, but the other thing is Rudy is right that
conditions change and if you have a hurricane or something you
have to deal with it, and you have to deal with that now. You
have to do that, but I think the saving that you would get and
the ability to have a longer planning horizon.
Members of the Appropriations Committee with whom I have
discussed this over the years have always thought they had more
control if they appropriated every year. I think they would
have more control if they did not because you cannot change
things. It gets back to incremental budgeting. You cannot
change things very much if the fiscal year is about to start.
And you can change them more if you have a little longer
planning horizon.
Mr. Stutzman. Go ahead.
Dr. Penner. I am against them mainly because changing
conditions. I think if you had a biennial system you would have
enormous number of supplementals and supplementals are
extremely difficult to discipline.
Mr. Stutzman. In Indiana we can always open the budget back
up in the off year and if there is a situation that needs to be
addressed the governor can always call us back and we can
address that issue in particular. And I think if we continue to
keep the earmark controls, the self-will of making sure that we
do not spend more money than what is necessary in a particular
situation whether we are dealing with emergency spending on a
hurricane or any natural disasters, any of those things. We can
always come back and address those particular issues and I
think oversight is needed more today than ever before in our
budgeting process and that is obviously why we are having this
hearing. Dr. Rivlin, could you touch a little bit on a balance
budget amendment and your position on a balance budget
amendment?
Dr. Rivlin. I am against it. The difference between a state
and the federal government is the State of Indiana basically
does not have to worry about the impact of its budget on the
national economy; the federal government does. And so it is not
always desirable to have balance in the Federal budget. Now we
should balance over the cycle and when you start thinking about
writing a balanced budget amendment then you start writing in
lots of exceptions. Suppose a war starts in the middle of the
year. Suppose we have a sharp recession and you get so many
exceptions written into the law. My colleague Charlie Schultz
said all of a sudden you are writing algebra into the
Constitution and I think that is undesirable. That you should
simply try to do the best you can to have a sensible fiscal
policy and that means that you balance over the cycle and you
have a sustainable budget going forward, but I would not put it
in the Constitution.
Chairman Ryan. Thank you. Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. Pascrell. Mr. Chairman thank you for putting us
together today and I found something that you and I do agree
on, and I felt I should make that announcement.
Chairman Ryan. Take note.
Mr. Pascrell. I think in your discussion and your remarks
about real growth, you used the term in the budget which are
marbleized, cemented, whatever term you want to use. And I
think that may be an important area for compromise and
resolution. I think we ought to take a look at that very
seriously and I think there is a lot of money involved that we
can debate and come to some kind of agreement. So I would not
make that an addendum to what you said. I think it is very
important and this is an area I think we should take a look.
Chairman Ryan. I will make sure I quote more Democrats that
I agree with, like Governor Cuomo in the future to get the
consensus, so thank you.
Mr. Pascrell. Well that helped. I would also take a look at
something folks on both sides of the aisle have talked about
and distinguish between the mandatory part of the budget and
discretionary parts of the budget. If you take a look at, and
we have two very prominent panelists today, that perhaps
looking at a longer term budget for the mandatory and a yearly
budget in terms of discretionary. So what if we had a two-year
budget? And I think it is utter nonsense. We can have a
skeleton, we can have protocol, we can have this model of a 10-
year budget, but you saw what happened the last time we did
this and it did not work out. And we were moved from 2000 to
2008 and 2009, and you go back at the prognostications about
what would be produced, what would not, and then what really
happened. So there is a real danger here.
Our side of the aisle took tremendous hits last year
because we certainly did not pass a budget. It does not look
like it is going to be happening this year either and it is
beyond our control almost because on the other end of the
Capitol is an arcane society that we need 60 votes to get
something to vote on.
Chairman Ryan. We keep agreeing with each other. There is
something happening here.
Mr. Pascrell. It will get better or maybe not. So I would
like to ask a question Ms. Rivlin. Let me give you an example
of that on health care, mild subject for a Wednesday morning. I
want to ask about the delivery system reforms that were
included in the Health Care Reform Act. How do we save Medicare
money? In February, before the Ways and Means Committee, I
asked a question to the CMS actuaries, Rick Foster, I think his
name was, and this is what he said to me: He testified that he
did, indeed, believe that the reforms in health care had the
potential to create great savings in Medicare. We are talking
about process, here. I like results. We are talking about
process today and how we get to those results.
Unfortunately, we cannot score the actual savings very well
because these reforms are innovative ideas, we do not really
know how they are going to turn out. There is no data to
project the savings, so we have to give it a few years before
we find out. Ms. Rivlin, do you agree with this assessment? In
your estimation, is this correct?
Dr. Rivlin. Yes. I do. I think that many of the delivery
system reforms and mechanisms for getting delivery system
reforms that are being talked about now and that are actually
embedded in the Affordable Care Act are very good ones, very
promising ones. It is likely that we will get some serious
improvement in the cost-effectiveness of health care, but the
evidence is too weak for it to be counted on.
Mr. Pascrell. But does it not reflect, really, the weakness
of the scoring system of legislation, that we ask CBO to
reflect upon? This is both sides of the aisle, I think, are
involved in this. I really think that when you are talking
about examining the process, by which we put the budget
forward, that scoring legislation needs to be reviewed and
perhaps changed, do you think?
Dr. Rivlin. No, I do not. Let me defend my former
colleagues at the CBO. I think you must have scoring for the
reasons we have been talking about that you need to know to a
reasonable degree of certainty what something will cost or how
much it will save. And the CBO does the best it can to rely on
hard evidence and if there were, for example, a set of
experiments that said a particular delivery system changed,
what these results, and you could measure them, CBO would use
that information, but there are not. And once you loosen the
rules and say it is anybody's guess, then you have lost the
usefulness of having a scorekeeper.
Mr. Pascrell. Mr. Chairman, would you not say, and this is
my final question if I may, if these experiments that I am
referring to in the Health Care Act, which you are not
particularly thrilled about, but if these experiments created a
substantial service, and we could be talking about anything,
any legislation, now; I am talking about Healthcare. Does this
mean Medicare's solvency would have to be reevaluated? That is
the point that I am trying to make.
Chairman Ryan. We are out of time, but the same debate
occurs on the tax side of the ledger, which is do we get
reality based scoring based on dynamic changes in personal
behavior because of changes in the law? So, can we do things
that create preventative medicine, disease management, which
will ultimately save money? Well, they do not know how to
quantify that at CBO right now. Maybe we will learn how to do
that. Do we increase economic growth and therefore revenues of
the federal government by lowering tax rates and broadening the
tax base? We think so, based on evidence, but they do not
quantify it that way right now. Perhaps, we ought to try having
these models speculate on what they think the world might be
under these policies, then we use a static analysis and track
the measurement of those over time and then see which one
proves to be more close to reality and then go with that. So,
Dr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank the
panelists for their service and for their testimony. And I do
not want to get too sidetracked here, but I have to pick up on
this health care issue because as a physician, I could tell you
that I adamantly oppose the quote reforms that were put in
place. And CBO was pretty doggone clear about where the savings
were coming from, at least $500 billion of it, $150 billion,
essentially, for decreasing the choices for seniors in the
Medicare Advantage Program, and $350 billion through the
opportunity to have a 15 member panel of individuals here in
Washington to deny care to seniors if they did not meet the
bottom line. So, the CBO was pretty doggone clear about where
that money was coming from and it is the denial of care for
seniors.
I am in my fourth term here and have been frustrated from
the very moment I arrived, that all of the inertia here in
Washington is to spend money. So when people say that nobody
wants to talk about process, that it is not an attractive issue
at all, but process in our spending drives policy. And so I
want to commend the chairman for calling this hearing, because
I think it is incredibly important.
Dr. Rivlin, you said something that I think is absolutely
to the point, and that is that we need to make it, ``Easier to
grapple with the hard choices.'' And we have all touched on, I
think, the frustration that we have with CBO and the scoring
mechanism that appears to be less dynamic or realistic in
reflecting the policies that have already been put in place. I
think we basically agree that is a challenge or a problem. What
are the solutions that could be put in place to allow the CBO
to have greater capability to reflect the dynamism of the
policies that are put in place? Dr. Rivlin?
Dr. Rivlin. I think they are trying as hard as they can and
they produce analyses, for example, of the impact of tax cuts,
and there is some evidence, certainly, that reducing some kinds
of taxes contributes to economic growth, but there is also
evidence that a higher deficit is bad for economic growth, and
if you are getting both, they sort of cancel each other out.
Mr. Price. And I want to talk about the policy side. I am
truly interested in the process, because CBO, they are good
folks that are working over there. They are trying as hard as
they can under the rules that they have, but sometimes,
oftentimes, they are tens or hundreds of billions of dollars
off in what actually has occurred, if you go back in history.
That is not their fault. I would suggest it is the fault of the
process. So, help me understand how we can improve the process,
Dr. Penner, if you will maybe.
Dr. Penner. Well, let me make a very general point about
all of this, the last two interchanges. All of these estimates
are very uncertain as you are implying. We do not have good
data, we do not have good models or maybe we have too many
models. And the Congress does not deal well with uncertainty. I
am always amazed how the 10 year baseline projections are taken
as so we know with 100 percent certainty that we are going to
go right along there and the whole deliberations over the
budgets assume that. I think other countries do a better job of
dealing with uncertainty and I think the thing to do is to
build mechanisms into programs, I would call them trigger
mechanism, so that if things do not turn out the way you
expect, especially if something costs much more than you
expect, that there would be an automatic mechanism for slowing
down the spending in that kind of program. But we will never
eliminate the problem of huge uncertainty, especially in the
medical area.
Mr. Price. So an automatic sequestering in any program?
Dr. Penner. Well, there need not be a sequester. I mean,
most countries apply these mechanisms to Social Security where
you might have an automatic, very gradual increase for the
retirement age, for example, if the system goes astray. Some
would like to do it on the tax side, maybe with an automatic
increase in the tax base. Again, things that would bring the
system into line.
Mr. Price. Dr. Rivlin? Any comments on the dynamism?
Dr. Rivlin. Well, I agree with Rudy. There is a great deal
of uncertainty and people who are very strong proponents of a
particular thing, whether it is a tax cut or a delivery system
change in health care, always believe that it is going to work.
And the evidence is not as strong as they often think it is. I
mean, for example, in the middle of the 1990s, we raised taxes
at the top bracket. Any modeler would have said that is going
to cut into economic growth and we got a burst of economic
growth. So it is very hard to make sure that you have got these
dynamic things right.
Mr. Price. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Ryan. Mr. Lankford?
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, and thank you for being here as
well. In your testimony the dynamic part of it I am with you.
It is difficult because I have seen multiple models. I just
left a meeting before where one of the members was saying if we
change the particulate levels a little bit, again, then it will
save $350 billion next year in health care costs. It is just
one of those things that is very interesting. How do you
determine that? Just a raw guess in the middle of it, but being
able to find some way to have a trigger, some way to be able to
manage that.
Let me bounce a couple questions off of you. Let's be
optimistic that we can both balance our budget and get on top
of it. And I am a proponent of a balanced budget amendment, I
understand where your coming from on that, I can see both sides
on it. I would love to see Congress be responsible and be able
to do it on their own, I just do not see a tremendous level of
long-term responsibility year after year. And just maintaining
that and having a parent in the legislative room, I think, is
an asset. Just saying, I know you are going to do the
responsible thing because you are going to do the responsible
thing.
Dr. Rivlin. Well, I think both of us are for the Congress
forcing itself to do the responsible thing. I am only saying
that I would not write it into the Constitution.
Mr. Lankford. I understand that. Optimistically out there,
is there a benefit to having a rainy day fund, for a disaster
mentality, something that is set aside and that is funded, or
does that just mandate every year? You are going to always
spend that because you will make up a disaster because you have
got the money set aside?
Dr. Rivlin. No, I think that disaster funding should be
done on the basis of taking as careful a look as you can at the
average cost of disasters, and pre-funding it and if you run
out of money then that is another problem. Many disasters, the
average frequency, over several years, is pretty predictable.
Dr. Penner. I agree with that. We should have some sort of
allocation for emergencies of that sort.
Mr. Lankford. We just talked about supplementals and I
understand that supplementals will always be an issue. I think
it is just one of those things that we can assume, we are going
to have a hurricane, a set of tornadoes, or an earthquake
pretty reliably at any given point based on our history on it.
Let me ask you as well, some of our committee structures,
and some of your statements I really appreciate on how the
committee structure itself seems to slow down oversight and
managing budget, dealing with appropriations, authorizations,
the tax, the budget, all of those things, as well as an
oversight. If you want to have oversight over an agency, it is
almost impossible to have real oversight over an agency,
because the oversight is spread out over multiple different
committees because our agencies are not aligned up with our
committee structure. Whether that is by design, or whether that
is by accident, it is working still the same. It is very
difficult to do an oversight.
Broadening out from the budget and tax areas, is there a
need to do a broad-scale reform of how we do committees in the
House to align it better with our agencies and also to align it
better with an efficient budget process?
Dr. Rivlin. I think so. The testimony I referred to was, I
believe, and then this is back when the chairman was in
diapers, it was, I believe, it was before a select committee on
committees. This was a moment at which the Congress decided it
should reform its committee structure and did not end up doing
it, or only partially, I guess. But, yes, I think it is time to
revamp the whole thing.
Mr. Lankford. Okay.
Dr. Penner. I must confess, when I was CBO director, there
was nothing I feared more than to get into an argument about
committee jurisdiction. Certainly, there is a logical case. If
you want a really radical view, the budget process was invented
because we have this peculiar custom of making spending and tax
decisions in separate committees. Before the Civil War, Ways
and Means was Ways and Means. They did both spending and taxes
at the same time. And most countries do that, most countries
have a kind of super, let's call it a Budget Committee, that
makes appropriation decisions and tax decisions all at the same
time. And I think ultimately, that is where you should go, but
there are, as Alice suggests, more modest ways of better
aligning the committee structure with departments and programs.
Mr. Lankford. That is my other question. Is there a way to
be able to get a year ahead in our planning process, going back
to 1920 and before, is there a way to be able to get to a
number? That when the president presents a number, the House,
the Senate and the president have already agreed on what that
top line number is and we are really arguing about the details
within and how to shuffle that. So that the president does not
submit one number, the Senate does another, the House does a
number, and this drags all the way out and creates tremendous
uncertainty until the fiscal year and then we bump up against
it.
Dr. Rivlin. That really is the concept of the Joint Budget
Resolution signed by the president, which Rudy once favored and
now does not. I think only because he thinks it would not
happen. But, that is the basic idea that everybody agrees on
the top line even by functions and then works within it. Sounds
like a very good idea if you could do it.
Mr. Lankford. It is just trying to get that done.
Dr. Penner. The first step is to do appropriations on time,
I think. I think it really adds to the inefficiency of
government when bureaucrats do not know what they are going to
have to spend until after the fiscal year has already begun.
Mr. Lankford. I would completely agree with that. I yield
back.
Chairman Ryan. Thank you. I, too, was for it before I was
against it, as well. Mr. McClintock?
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
just test out a theory that I have evolved over the last few
years since I arrived here at the Congress, and that is that we
have a parliamentary system that has evolved over centuries.
And it has become very good at distilling many diverse
viewpoints into a common direction for a nation. Each House
reflecting different elements of decision making and
independently arrives at a decision. The differences between
those two Houses are then resolved through a conference
process, which itself has become very good at resolving
differences between the two Houses, when it is used properly,
not to draft new legislation, but simply to identify the
differences. If the House says $5 billion and the Senate says
$10 billion, the only question is where between $5 billion and
$10 billion do we end up? We do not go under $5 billion, we do
not go over $10 billion. When it is used in that way, it seems
to me the system works very well. The problem is it is not
being used. We have not passed a budget in the Senate in nearly
three years. The House failed to fulfill that responsibility
last year. How much of this is failure of process and how much
of it is a failure to follow process?
Dr. Rivlin. Well, I think very much of it is a failure to
follow the process, and there have been times in the history of
the budget process when it worked quite well.
Mr. McClintock. When it was followed.
Dr. Rivlin. When it was followed, yes, absolutely.
Mr. McClintock. Well, the question I come to is are we
running a file of the old maxim, if it is not broke, do not try
and fix it?
Dr. Rivlin. Well, I think that are many elements of the
current process which make it hard to get done on time because
of the complexity and the number of committees and so forth.
Mr. McClintock. I did not say it was not hard; it is really
hard work. But, when it is followed, it seems to produce
reasonably good work products. But what I am watching is the
system has completely disintegrated. I mean, the super
committee, this constitutional abomination, which sidelines 523
representatives of the people in favor of a closed process that
short circuits all of the independent mechanisms that were
built into a bicameral, legislative process.
Dr. Rivlin. I could not agree more. It is the failure of
the Congress to follow its own rules to get the job done that
has lead us to this point.
Mr. McClintock. So, all of this discussion about changing
the process is simply averting the responsibility that we all
have to follow that process.
Dr. Penner. Well, I think you are right on that the major
problem is not following the rules that we have, but that does
not mean that we should not work on the rules some. I think one
of the problems with the budget process, as Alice implied, is
that to try to close various loopholes in the rules, we have
added more and more rules and the whole process has become as
complicated as our tax system, almost. And it is beyond the
understanding of 99.9 percent of all Americans, at this point.
Mr. McClintock. But all of the accretions we built onto
that, but the basic system, which works well, is known to every
reasonably well-educated school child.
Dr. Penner. Well, I am not so sure of that.
Mr. McClintock. The problem is we are not following it. Let
me go on because my time is brief. The balanced budget
amendment: Dr. Rivlin, you say you oppose it because it is a
fool's errand to try to look hundreds of years in the future
and anticipate the conditions that a future Congress might
face. Was that essentially what you were saying with the
comment about it requires us to build algebra into the
Constitution?
Dr. Rivlin. No, it was that you do not always want to
balance the budget. And there are certainly times when you are
falling into a recession, when a requirement to balance the
budget would require you, at that moment, to cut spending and
raise taxes, and that is exactly the wrong thing to do. For
that reason, the balanced budget amendments that make sense
write all these exceptions in.
Mr. McClintock. Why not just say no more borrowing, except
by extraordinary majority vote of the Congress, say three-
fourths of the Congress, for a single object or work? Future
Congress by three quarters vote is going to be able to
recognize a real emergency, as opposed to the simple urge just
to keep spending. And a single object or work means that you
have to identify what it is that you are borrowing for by that
extraordinary majority.
Dr. Rivlin. Well, maybe, I just think there are better ways
of getting fiscal responsibility than writing it into the
Constitution. And super majorities give an awful lot of
bargaining power to people who are on the margin of being part
of the super majority.
Mr. McClintock. Well, they require a certainty of action
the higher that super majority has expended.
Dr. Rivlin. Well yes, but you also see people bargaining,
``I will join the super majority if you will build a bridge in
my district.'' That is not what you want to encourage.
Chairman Ryan. Thank you, let me just follow with one final
questions. Dr. Penner, I understand your views of biennial, and
it is a fairly common criticism to the idea. Both of you talked
about the need to pre-fund emergencies on sort of a rolling
average basis. If Congress could come up with a suitable system
to define and more or less pre-fund emergencies so that the
supplemental process is as airtight as it can get, would that
alleviate your concerns on going towards a biennial system? If
that is fixed are you in the Alice Rivlin camp, where then it
has virtues to it?
Dr. Penner. Well, that would help a lot to somehow figure
out a way of disciplining supplementals, but I think there are
all kinds of other things that change. It is not only a matter
of national emergencies. Your revenue estimates are, frankly,
very bad; they can change radically from year to year, even in
the absence of recession. There are all sorts of spending
issues, or spending programs, that can go off in surprising
directions. So, I think I would still not favor biennial
budgeting.
Chairman Ryan. All right, thank you very much. Thank you
for your indulgence and your time. This is something we have to
wade into, because I think all of us agree the system is not
working to the extent that it needs to. Congress has to have
discipline first for any system to work, but if we could get a
system that makes it as easy as possible for us to exercise
discipline, that is what we want to achieve. Thank you very
much for your wisdom. Hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:31 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]


