- FINDING WAYS TO ENCOURAGE AND INCREASE PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FINDING WAYS TO ENCOURAGE AND
INCREASE PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION
IN PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE

=======================================================================

(112-15)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
RAILROADS, PIPELINES, AND
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 11, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-396 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
TOM REED, New York                   MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      LAURA RICHARDSON, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California           CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JERROLD NADLER, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RICK LARSEN, Washington
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
TOM REED, New York, Vice Chair       GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               LAURA RICHARDSON, California
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana           (Ex Officio)
JEFF DENHAM, California
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Broadley, John H., John H. Broadley & Associates, P.C............    11
Feinsod, Stan, Secretary and Treasurer, Association of
Independent Passenger Rail Operators...........................    11
Gardner, Stephen J., Vice President of Policy and Development,
Amtrak.........................................................    11
Simmons, Patrick B., Rail Division Director, North Carolina
Department of Transportation...................................    11
Szabo, Hon. Joseph C., Administrator, Federal Railroad
Administration.................................................    11
Wytkind, Edward, President, Transportation Trades Department,
AFL-CIO........................................................    11

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Mica, Hon. John L., of Florida...................................    37
Reed, Hon. Tom, of New York......................................    39
Shuster, Hon. Bill, of Pennsylvania..............................    40

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Broadley, John H.................................................    44
Feinsod, Stan....................................................    55
Gardner, Stephen J...............................................    70
Simmons, Patrick B...............................................    89
Szabo, Hon. Joseph C.............................................    95
Wytkind, Edward..................................................   106

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Bracy, Steven F., Director of Structured Finance, Ross, Sinclaire
& Associates, LLC, statement...................................     2
Broadley, John H., John H. Broadley & Associates, P.C., responses
to questions from Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Pennsylvania........................    51
Feinsod, Stan, Secretary and Treasurer, Association of
Independent Passenger Rail Operators:

Responses to questions from Hon. Corrine Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........    63
Responses to questions from Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania...................    68
Gardner, Stephen J., Vice President of Policy and Development,
Amtrak:

Responses to questions from Hon. Corrine Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........    80
Responses to questions from Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania...................    85
Szabo, Hon. Joseph C., Administrator, Federal Railroad
Administration:

Responses to questions from Hon. Corrine Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........   101
Responses to questions from Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania...................   104
Wytkind, Edward, President, Transportation Trades Department,
AFL-CIO:

Responses to questions from Hon. Corrine Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........   113
Responses to questions from Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania...................   115

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Capon, Ross B., President & CEO, National Association of Railroad
Passengers, statement..........................................   116
Hannig, Gary, Secretary, Illinois Department of Transportation,
letter to Hon. Daniel Lipinski, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Illinois.....................................   119

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FINDING WAYS TO ENCOURAGE
AND INCREASE PRIVATE SECTOR
PARTICIPATION IN PASSENGER
RAIL SERVICE

----------

FRIDAY, MARCH 11, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines
and Hazardous Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Shuster
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Shuster. The hearing will come to order. I would like
to welcome everybody here this morning. Unfortunately, at some
point I am going to have to step out. I am going to turn it
over to the vice chair, Mr. Reed. And since I'm going to do
that before I do my opening statement, I would like to
introduce my distinguished panel here this morning, and again
welcome you all. Thank you very much for coming and spending
the morning with us.
First, the Honorable Joseph Szabo, the administrator of the
FRA. I am sure he will be here shortly. Stephen Gardner, vice
president of policy and development for Amtrak, welcome. Pat
Simmons, rail division director for the North Carolina
Department of Transportation. John Broadley, John H. Broadley
and Associates, P.C., thank you for being here. Stan Feinsod,
who is the secretary/treasurer of the Association of
Independent Passenger Rail Operators, and Ed Wytkind, who is
president of the Transportation Trades Department of the AFL-
CIO. Again, welcome, all of you, for being here.
Also, I would like to ask unanimous consent to put a
statement into the record from Steven F. Bracy, who is the
director of structured finance of Ross, Sinclaire and
Associates. It's entitled, ``Finding Ways to Encourage and
Increase Private Sector Participation in Passenger Rail
Service.''
So those are the types of things we like to enter into the
record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Shuster. And welcome to the administrator, Mr. Szabo.
You have already been introduced, and thanks for coming this
morning, we appreciate it.
Two and a half years ago, President Bush signed the
Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act, which was the
first rail reauthorization bill in 11 years. And that bill,
which I helped author, included important reforms in the
operation of Amtrak, America's intercity passenger railroad.
The act also opened the door for the private sector to
participate in providing passenger rail service in a number of
important new ways. For the first time, rail capital investment
programs were established that gave States primary control to
improve and expand intercity passenger rail service, and I am
proud to say that the State of Pennsylvania has been doing that
on the Keystone line, and it has been very successful.
A pilot program was authorized to allow private-sector
entities to operate current Amtrak intercity routes in much the
same way that private-sector companies now compete with Amtrak
to provide commuter rail service.
The so-called Section 502 Program that I wrote, established
a public-private partnership opportunity for high-speed rail
development. Under this program, FRA solicited proposals to
finance, design, construct, operate, and maintain high-speed
intercity passenger rail systems within one of the 11 specific
corridors, including the Northeast Corridor.
Over 100 expressions of interest were submitted. And from
these, FRA received eight credible proposals for development of
high-speed rail corridor projects. The FRA process was kept
completely separate from the Department of Transportation's
high-speed and intercity rail passenger grants, funds that came
through the 2009 stimulus bill. In my view, that was a mistake.
Private sector participation can leverage Federal funds and
make projects less expensive, get them built faster, and help
keep operating costs down.
I look forward to ways to encourage the private sector to
participate in rail projects--design, build, operate, and
maintaining this through financing.
I would like to quote the chairman, who has, as we have,
traveled the country talking about the next transportation
bill, which will include a robust rail title, and it's that we
need to do more with less. And as we traveled the country to
several States and many cities talking about this, I think that
departments of transportation around the country understand
this, and we need to look at innovative ways to get capital
leverage for public funds and get those public funds into the
transportation field. And of course rail, passenger rail, is
certainly critical to that.
So, I look forward today to hearing our panelists discuss
this, and of course, questions from our Members. And with that,
I would like to yield to the distinguished ranking member for
her opening remarks.
Ms. Brown. Good morning, and thank you for this hearing. I
am pleased to be here with this subcommittee meeting today to
receive testimony on finding ways to encourage and increase
private sector participation in passenger rail service.
This hearing is very timely. Just last week, we saw an
example of a great passenger rail project with massive private
sector participation die in Florida. In fact, private companies
from all over the world was interested in Florida's high-speed
rail project. Yet, because our governor put politics before
Floridians, we will no longer be the pioneers in high-speed
rail in America.
But we are not going to let him stop us. We will have high-
speed rail for the people of Florida. This is truly a set-back.
Florida was awarded $2.4 billion in Federal funds to develop
high-speed rail, including 84 new miles of track and 240
planned miles. The first phase of this project would have
connected two major tourist destinations, Orlando and Tampa.
Florida's plan was going to give the United States high-speed
rail that will finally compare with our European and Asian
neighbors. Trains were going to reach up to 160 miles per hour
on new tracks dedicated solely to high-speed rail. Trains will
have reduced trip time from Tampa and Orlando from 90 miles by
car to less than 1 hour.
And I want to extend the remarks, because it's not just the
time, but it's the number of people that we would have taken
out of cars, and the pollution, and on and on and on.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that just last year the
Florida legislature and the governor approved appropriation
money for this project, Florida's new governor, who won by 48
percent of the vote, rejected the money, claiming it is a waste
of Federal taxpayers' dollars, even though it is gasoline tax
and not foreign sources.
On the contrary, this is an example of Florida taxpayers'
money coming home to them. Florida's governor is much more
interested in politics than in creating jobs or improving the
transportation system for Florida residents. This decision
would do nothing to help reduce Florida's 12 percent
unemployment rate. The high-speed rail plan for Florida serves
as a perfect example of a successful public-private partnership
that would have created tens of thousands of jobs--by Florida
DOT estimate, 48,000. The high-speed rail line between Tampa
and Orlando was going to produce public-private partnerships.
And, in fact we had 55 creditable countries and companies
competing for that transportation public-private partnership.
Today's hearing will also focus on section 214 of the
Passenger Rail Investment Improvement Act of 2008, which
requires the Federal Railroad Administration to develop a
program to contract out or privatize two Amtrak routes to
freight or commuter railroads that own infrastructure over
which Amtrak operates. I did not support this program, I did
not vote for it. But I am looking forward to the FRA discussing
it.
However, I want to make it clear that North Carolina and
Florida don't have to use Amtrak. They choose to use Amtrak. So
I am interested in the input. And I want to be clear that the
freight rail, if they wanted to, could offer a passenger rail
as we speak, but the reason why they decided not to participate
in the program was why we started Amtrak in the first place,
because we do have the number one freight rail in the world.
But passenger rail is something that we have to work to make
sure that we have the support of the public and high-speed rail
is what--where we're headed for. We have got to be able to move
people, goods, and services.
And so, with that, I am looking forward to the hearing.
Mr Shuster. I thank the gentlelady for her statement. And I
certainly understand your disappointment on what happened in
Florida. I happened to be with Chairman Mica that day, and he
is equally disappointed.
But that being said, if Florida isn't able to use that
money, I certainly would encourage the Administration to look
to the Northeast Corridor. My friends, I don't actually live in
that rail corridor, I live 90 miles west of Harrisburg, so it's
not going to directly benefit me, but I believe it will benefit
the entire country if we turn the Northeast Corridor into high-
speed rail. But----
Ms. Brown. Would the chairman yield?
Mr. Shuster. Yes.
Ms. Brown. I am not disagreeing that the Northeast Corridor
shouldn't get a part of it, but we just had a hearing in
California, and the mayor of California, LA, was there. And the
senator from there. So I don't know that we should be picking
winners and losers, but there is a lot of States that would be
interested in participating.
And you mentioned the study. So what is the best way to do
it is to put the money back out and let the States compete for
it, in my opinion.
Mr. Shuster. I----
Ms. Brown. The one that come together with the best
proposals and ready to hit the ground running, and put people
to work.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate the gentlelady's comments, but we
do pick winners and losers, that's what we have been doing with
this money. And I believe that the money going to the Northeast
Corridor, specifically to three projects that have to be done
or there will never be high-speed rail in the Northeast, and
that's the tunnel to Baltimore, the bridge--I believe it's the
portal bridge from New Jersey to New York, and the catenaries.
And $2.4 billion would go a long way to alleviate those choke
points and those significant problems.
So, again, Mr. Szabo, I guess I'm asking, when you go back
to the Administration, that at least one Member of Congress
here thinks that there can be a huge winner in this high-speed
rail, which would grow to the rest of the country organically.
High-speed rail, when we see it succeed in one place, people
will clamor for it.
So, anyway, sorry about that----
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman, I do want you to know that I agree
that we need to improve the Northeast Corridor. I am just not
in the business of sitting up here and deciding that California
should be left out.
Mr. Shuster. I understand completely. And the record notes
that, your position on that.
We will proceed with our witnesses. I am going to--and I am
going to encourage the vice chairman, when he is at the chair,
to enforce the 5-minute rule with brutality. So at about 4
minutes and 45 seconds, I will start to tap the gavel a little
bit and ask you to summarize.
But before we do that, I would like to yield for an opening
statement, if he has one, the chairman of the committee, Mr.
Mica.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you so much for yielding. And I will
just take a minute to make a couple of comments.
Two and a half years ago President Bush signed Passenger
Rail Investment and Improvement Act, commonly referred to as
PRIIA. And it was our first rail reauthorization in 11 years.
Worked with Ms. Brown, Mr. Oberstar, at the time, and of
course, Mr. Shuster to try to put some important reforms that
were missing in Amtrak, and try to improve the terms and
conditions and opportunities for passenger rail service across
the United States.
We currently--no offense to Amtrak, but basically we run
what I term as Soviet-style passenger train system. Amtrak
controls all of the franchises, all of the routing and service
for passenger rail in the United States. It is done so at a
high subsidization by the taxpayers. Last year, every single
ticket on Amtrak was underwritten, $54.48. That's every single
ticket. We only had about 28 million passengers. Half of those
were in the Northeast Corridor.
Mr. Shuster and I attempted in the legislation that was
written to request Amtrak to look at some of the money-losing
routes--and there are some routes that are documented, where we
underwrite $200, $300 a ticket. Now, I know there is
subsidization of some air service. I know there is
subsidization of highways, et cetera.
But there is no reason why some of the money-losing routes
cannot be put up for private sector competition. We have seen
models where that has been done, and there is no reason why the
existing provisions of the law cannot be complied with. We are
not talking about, for our labor friends, any difference in
terms for labor. We are actually talking about, for labor, for
employment, and for passenger service, an increase in all of
the above. We would have more employees, we would have more
service if we ran better routes.
There are plenty of examples. There is German
regionalization privatization. I met recently with one of the
leading Japanese entrepreneurs in passenger rail service
willing to put up huge amounts of investment, transfer
technology to the United States, only to have an opportunity to
provide some service.
And our thoughts and prayers go with the Japanese people
today, just an incredible natural disaster that they
experienced in the last number of hours.
But you can look to the East, to Asia, you can look to
Europe. And you see rail passenger service, you see private
sector innovation. I also use as an example--and don't tell me
that you cannot make money moving passengers by rail--Richard
Branson took two lines and when they privatized operations for
rail service in England. He has paid a dividend the last 5
years, and almost totally eliminated Federal subsidization of
that activity.
Not that I am unwilling to have the Federal Government
underwrite some of the construction costs of the infrastructure
and also maintain the infrastructure in the title of the
American people, which we should do to protect their interests
in all of this. But from an operational standpoint, I know that
we can again attract private-sector capital if they have the
opportunity not only to help develop, help finance, help
construct, and also help to operate. Because they're not in it
for the time of day, they're in it to return--to gain a return
on their investment, which is a great motivator.
So, I look forward to hearing ideas on how we can do a
better job. I intend, if we don't do another rail
reauthorization, to have one in the major transportation
legislation, which we extended to September 30th last week with
the help of Members on this panel and Members in the House, and
we will have a robust provision. We will make certain some of
the opportunities that were missed in the PRIIA legislation are
addressed in a robust rail section. And if we can't get
cooperation, in fact, we will very specifically direct actions
to be taken, both to allow private competition and also to
expand private sector investment opportunities in passenger
rail service.
We will drag the Congress and whoever else kicking and
screaming into the 21st century of passenger rail service with
private sector participation, one way or the other. With those
remarks, Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to yield back.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, we will
proceed with the testimony. And again, I am going to be brutal
with the 5-minute clock. So I would ask you to sum up when you
see the yellow, or when you start to hear this, all right?
So, with that, Mr. Szabo, please proceed.

TESTIMONY OF HON. JOSEPH C. SZABO, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL
RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION; STEPHEN J. GARDNER, VICE PRESIDENT OF
POLICY AND DEVELOPMENT, AMTRAK; PATRICK B. SIMMONS, RAIL
DIVISION DIRECTOR, NORTH CAROLINA DOT; STAN FEINSOD, SECRETARY
AND TREASURER, ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT PASSENGER RAIL
OPERATORS; JOHN H. BROADLEY, JOHN H. BROADLEY & ASSOCIATES,
P.C.; AND EDWARD WYTKIND, PRESIDENT, TRANSPORTATION TRADES
DEPARTMENT, AFL-CIO

Mr. Szabo. Thank you, Chairman Mica, Chairman Shuster,
Ranking Member Brown, and members of the committee. As always,
it's an honor to have the chance to come and appear before you
today to talk about the Passenger Rail Investment and
Improvement Act, otherwise known as PRIIA.
In 2008, Congress passed the most sweeping piece of
legislation aimed at FRA since the Agency was created. For the
first time, in one piece of legislation, both parts of FRA's
mission, safety and infrastructure investment, were addressed
in a comprehensive manner.
PRIIA specifically addressed three issues critical to the
future of intercity passenger rail service. First, it addressed
the mission of Amtrak. Second, PRIIA created a new vision of
the investment relationship needed to deliver intercity
passenger rail service. And finally, PRIIA addressed high-speed
intercity passenger rail service from both the public and
private investment perspective.
Before PRIIA, most States had no established passenger rail
programs, and those that did were primarily focused on existing
State-supported Amtrak service. States had a more limited
vision of a more robust role for intercity passenger rail and,
many States had limited rail staff expertise.
The good news is, because of PRIIA, parties have been
rapidly expanding their capabilities. The public sector and the
private railroads have come to understand the roles,
responsibilities, and obligations that flow from public
investments in private assets. Indeed, the States and railroads
have reached agreements on the development of most of all of
the major intercity passenger rail corridors where high-speed
rail passenger service will use freight rail infrastructure.
We are also seeing States develop projects with private-
sector investment in mind. The California high-speed rail
program anticipates that a third of the project's cost will
come from the private sector. And in Florida, before rejecting
high-speed rail funding, the State was prepared to seek an
expression of interest from private-sector consortiums on a
design, build, operate, maintain, and finance arrangement that
would have the private sector bear the construction and
operating risks of developing high-speed rail service in the
State.
And, of course, we continue to work with DesertXpress, a
private sector-driven project for high-speed rail in Nevada.
So, the Secretary and I look forward to working with Congress
to better define these structures for private investment.
One of the specific issues that you asked to be addressed
at this hearing is the potential for competition in providing
intercity passenger rail service, particularly under section
214 of PRIIA. This section would allow for a pilot project
involving competition on up to two Amtrak routes.
Mr. Chairman, I want to assure you that we will
expeditiously move forward on this rulemaking. And, assuming
that we do have the adequate resources in this budget year,
look forward to having a notice of proposed rulemaking underway
this year.
Key considerations in this rule will include a commitment
to safety, efficient service, accountability for liability, and
a level playing field, whereby all providers of intercity
passenger rail service are railroads, as covered by the full
spectrum of railroad laws. We want to work with you to ensure
that the private sector is a partner in the success of our
high-speed rail program.
In the State of the Union address, President Obama added to
his bold vision for intercity passenger rail transportation. To
realize this vision, we will need to continue to build upon the
success of PRIIA.
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget proposes that
funding be made available for intercity passenger rail, and
should be done so with the same degree of predictability and
multi-year commitment that helps define our successful highway
and transit programs.
Secretary LaHood and I look forward to working with
Congress to ensure that America can fully realize the benefits
of rail transportation. And I will be happy to address any
questions the committee may have.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Szabo. I appreciate that
greatly. And I look forward to seeing a schedule on that
schedule 14, the implementation of it, because it's a change in
policy. And we appreciate that gratefully.
Next, Mr. Gardner, before I turn it over to you, I am going
to step away from the dais and the vice chair, Mr. Reed, is
going to take over. But I will be back.
So, Mr. Gardner, please proceed.
Mr. Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown and members of the subcommittee. I am Stephen Gardner,
vice president for policy and development at Amtrak. And it is
a pleasure to appear before the subcommittee today to talk
about increasing private sector participation in intercity
passenger rail.
On a personal note, this is also a homecoming for me. I
began my congressional staff career on the Hill as an intern
for this subcommittee in 2001. So it's a real pleasure to be
here, and thank you for your leadership on rail issues for all
these years.
The two and a half years since the enactment of PRIIA have
been an extraordinary time for Amtrak and intercity passenger
rail service. I would like to share with you what Amtrak has
accomplished during this time.
First, Amtrak's ridership and revenue have both increased
to record levels. This year's ridership is running 6 percent
above last year's record ridership, and has recently been
trending higher still. Our $2.5 billion in revenue in fiscal
year 2010 set another record, and ticket revenue in the first 5
months of fiscal year 2011 are running 11.3 percent higher than
last year. This continues a growth trend which has made 7 of
our last 8 years record years for revenue and ridership, giving
us the highest passenger rail cost recovery ratio in all of the
United States.
Meanwhile, Amtrak's on-time performance has increased from
71 percent in fiscal year 2008 to 82 percent last year. And our
Acela high-speed rail service, North America's only high-speed
rail trains operating at 150 miles an hour, celebrated its 10th
year of success this year. Together with our State partners and
the FRA, we have improved nearly every aspect of our system,
and we are very proud of the progress we have been making on
behalf of the American people.
We have worked diligently to also fulfill all of our PRIIA
requirements, meeting or beating all of our deadlines. And more
about that can be found in my written testimony.
And focusing on the topic of this hearing, I believe it's
helpful to consider the historical backdrop regarding the
private sector's role in intercity passenger rail service
before and since the creation of Amtrak. The reason Congress
created Amtrak in 1970 was that the operation of intercity
passenger trains was no longer viable by the private sector.
Responding to requests from the private railroad, Congress,
in the Nixon administration, considered a number of
alternatives for preserving intercity passenger service, but
ultimately decided to create predominantly a publicly owned
company, Amtrak, to operate an inter-connected network of
routes benefitting from nationwide marketing, support services,
and equipment.
Amtrak initially contracted with private railroads,
actually, to operate these trains. But Congress quickly decided
this approach was too costly, and did not provide sufficient
control to ensure acceptable levels of service. So the law was
changed to require that Amtrak operate and directly control its
operations, but still allowed Amtrak to use the private sector
when appropriate.
Today, Amtrak purchases nearly $1.5 billion in goods and
services from the private sector, from cleaning and mechanical
services to commissary management and part supply. Further,
with our State partner routes, States can and do contract with
private companies to provide services other than train
operations, as you will hear from Mr. Simmons today.
Amtrak has also been pursuing partnerships with the private
sector. We formed a consortium with SNCF, the French national
railroad, and Bechtel, an international engineering company, to
pursue the now-halted Florida high-speed rail project, in fact.
We have also been reaching out to the leading high-speed
railroads of the world to give us feedback on our vision for
high-speed rail development in the Northeast Corridor.
As the committee knows, PRIIA contains several provisions
to facilitate increased private sector participation in
passenger rail. Utilizing the private sector for intercity
passenger rail is not a new idea. And while Amtrak is the
country's national passenger railroad, Amtrak does not have an
exclusive right to operate intercity passenger trains. Since
Amtrak's inception, private companies have initiated operation
of more than a dozen intercity passenger rail services. Most
have ceased operations after a short period, due to financial
problems. Most noteworthy is the original Auto Train
Corporation, begun in 1973, but entering bankruptcy in 1981,
after which Amtrak took over the operation in 1983.
Amtrak generally supports these efforts to augment today's
current network, and is presently working with several private
companies that wish Amtrak to help them in operating additional
services, including the proposed Greenbrier Express, serving
West Virginia.
One of the important issues to consider here is access
rights, and Amtrak's access to the national system. These
rights ensure Amtrak's ability to operate over freight rail
lines and regional transportation authorities, and they were
given in exchange for a relief of the private rail--to operate
their own passenger trains.
Those that would seek to transfer these rights now, 40
years after that original deal, face, I think, steep opposition
from the Association of American Railroads and other private
railroads that agree that this deal was created to create
access for the public, not for private sector access to their
assets.
Future efforts to encourage private sector involvement in
investment in intercity passenger rail should take into
consideration this point and two others. First, private-sector
investment is not a silver bullet that ensures success.
Competition can reduce costs, but it can also lead to
fragmentation of service, and elimination of network
efficiencies. Most of the world's passenger systems are
operated by State-owned railways.
In conclusion, renewed private-sector interest in passenger
rail is a welcome development. We are not afraid to compete in
this market. But competition requires a level playing field.
And if other companies wish to operate in this service, they
must be subject to the same laws and follow the same rules that
Amtrak does. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Gardner.
Mr. Simmons, we will move on to you.
Mr. Simmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown,
and members of the committee, for the opportunity testify
today. My name is Patrick Simmons, I am director of the rail
division with the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
I also serve as a member of the PRIIA section 209 State working
group, and the section 305 next generation equipment committee.
Today I speak on behalf of other States through the
American Association of Highway and Transportation Officials.
AASHTO represents all 50 State departments of transportation,
as well as the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
My boss, Secretary Eugene Conti, serves as chairman of
SCORT. State-supported services not only have the most robust
growth in ridership and passenger revenues across the country,
they are also the Nation's laboratory for innovation. And
States take the lead in implementing the newly created high-
speed and intercity passenger rail program. It is through
States that opportunities for public-private partnerships will
grow. States strongly support the need to fund Amtrak and to
provide for a national intercity passenger rail network.
States also want to provide efficient, high-quality
mobility for our citizens. And we recognize that to accomplish
this goal will require many public and private partners.
Section 209 of the PRIIA is the requirement that Amtrak
work with States to develop a transparent cost-accounting
model. It places Amtrak in an usual position of transparency
similar to what a government agency would have, but in a
private sector competitive arena, it also means that they
reveal proprietary information. That's a point of opportunity.
It also means that, of--the 36 trains that have
historically been operated and paid for by Amtrak will now
become State-supported. States do need a consistent budget
planning process, so that we can provide for the appropriate
cost of operation, no matter what the components are.
Some examples of innovation in North Carolina are our
municipalities own our stations. We contract with Amtrak for
operation. On one of our trains we provide equipment. That
equipment is maintained through a third-party operator. For
stations that do not have the ridership to support full-time
Amtrak staffing, we also contract for a third party operator to
man those stations.
In Maine, the northern New England passenger rail authority
contracts out in food and beverage service and turn-around
maintenancing. In California, through the Capital Corridors,
they have opted out of the Amtrak call reservation system, and
CalTran not only owns their own equipment, but they jointly own
a mechanical facility, as well. There are other examples around
the country of partnerships that include third-party
operations.
Stephen spoke earlier about one of the areas where Amtrak
does have a birthright, an advantage, and that is, of course,
the right of access. In addition to that is the pooled
liability insurance. Those are issues that any operator that
wants to get into the business will have challenges with.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to responding to any questions
this committee may have.
Mr. Reed. [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Simmons. Move on.
Mr. Broadley, please.
Mr. Broadley. Mr. Chairman, Madam Ranking Member, I would
like to thank you for inviting me to participate in this
hearing. I am John Broadley, and I have been working in the
vineyards of rail reorganization since 1975. My resume
basically shows that I have worked through the Conrail, the
Amtrak, I have litigated train cases for Amtrak back in the
1980s.
But I am here this morning to outline for the committee
some of the approaches to the privatization of rail passenger
service that have been adopted in Europe, specifically in
Britain and Germany. I think international experience can shed
some light on alternatives that are available to us in the
United States.
First, we need to establish comparability of conditions.
U.S. passenger rail operations fall into two groups. The first
is a group of low-frequency and relatively slow passenger
trains that operate predominantly on freight-owned lines. Most
of Amtrak's long-distance trains fall into this category. For
example, the Washington-to-Chicago service. The second is a
group of high-frequency train, and relatively fast trains that
operate primarily on the Northeast Corridor. Operating economic
characteristics for these two groups of trains are very
different.
And I want to focus on the Northeast Corridor passenger
services, because they present economic and operating
characteristics that are similar to those in several western
European countries. The attachments to my written testimony
summarize these similarities.
First, the Northeast Corridor has a relatively high
population density. They have major cities spread out along the
corridor. Second, most of the population centers along the
Northeast Corridor have good public transportation systems
serving their city-center rail stations. Again, that is
comparable to the European situation. Third, the Northeast
Corridor is heavily used for both intercity and commuter
operations. Many European lines are under the same
circumstances.
Again, attachments two and three to my written testimony
show the passenger density on the Northeast Corridor, and
compare it to passenger density on European lines. And you will
see that the Northeast Corridor ranks very high. That's both in
terms of passenger route kilometer and in terms of passenger
kilometers per route kilometer.
Fourth, the NEC is publicly owned or controlled, and is
predominantly a passenger facility. This is another point of
commonality with the European system. And finally, long-
distance passenger services on the Northeast Corridor, the
Acela and the Northeast Regional Service, are within striking
distance of financial viability on what we call an above-the-
rail basis. Again, this is comparable to the European
situation.
The--in--prior to 1974, British Rail was owned and operated
and integrated--vertically integrated railroad. British Rail
owned the infrastructure, operated the infrastructure, ran the
trains. The same situation prevailed in Germany.
In the early 1990s, the British Government undertook a
root-and-branch restructuring of the rail system, in which they
transferred the infrastructure to an outfit called Rail Track.
They transferred the equipment to a group of leasing companies,
which generally are referred to as ROSCOs, and they put out
each of the major routes, passenger routes, to competitive
bidding by passenger operating companies. The freight business
was split into a number of separate companies.
The basic structure established in 1994 continues to exist.
There have been some changes in the players. The Rail Track,
which received the infrastructure in 1994 morphed into what
they call Network Rail now, which is a semi-private/semi-public
entity that operates on a non-dividend-paying basis.
The franchising responsibility is now lodged with the
department for transport. And the franchising is done on a
leased subsidy basis. All of the lines require subsidy. And the
decision is made--other things being equal--on the basis of the
required subsidy. Further details are included in my written
testimony, and I would be very pleased to respond to questions.
Mr. Reed. Thank you very much.
Mr. Feinsod?
Mr. Feinsod. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown. I am here to represent the Association of Independent
Passenger Rail Operators. This association represents
companies, U.S. and international, rail operators in the
private sector who have the qualifications, interest,
experience, and commitment to operate and maintain passenger
railroad operations in the United States. This group is already
doing that for that segment of the railroad industry that we
call commuter rail, which has been opened and is subject to
competition.
AIPRO supports the innovations introduced in the PRIIA, and
was formed in recognition of the fact that PRIIA states that
the States themselves should have the freedom to choose the
passenger rail operators. This law created a first-ever program
to support the States, to revitalize high-speed and intercity
passenger rail, and to expand competition, giving States a
greater role in passenger rail decisionmaking.
In line with the President's ideas put forward in the State
of the Union, we believe that America should seek a passenger
railroad network that meets evolving world standards. Our
member companies focus on service delivery, efficient use of
resources, and sustainable business models. We are prepared to
engage in a new era of passenger rail public-private
partnerships, and to expand competition.
We support the right of freight railroads for a fair return
on their private investment under models similar to the public-
private partnership arrangement, to improve assets on the
capital corridor. We believe the surface transportation act
should contain a rail title, and it should maintain the robust
investment in our freight network, and stimulate cost-effective
passenger rail expansion.
We emphasize the rights of labor, and those that are
stipulated in PRIIA should be fully honored.
The public benefits of adding improved rail capacity are
many. We must establish a vibrant passenger rail system. We
propose that in all elements of this reform, access to track
and fees for that access should be on a negotiated basis. We
believe the new rail title should be deficit-neutral and
success-oriented, a program that cuts red tape, streamlines
project delivery, and increases private investment, encouraging
open and fair competition.
As a direct outgrowth of PRIIA, we propose to reorganize
the current approach to regional service with a new intercity
State corridor program. This will lead to tangible improvements
in services in the most productive corridors, and will prove
that passengers will be attracted in large volumes to a high
level of service that begins to meet international standards.
Competition involving private-sector companies offers the
advantages of bringing innovation, capital investment,
efficiency, energy, and enthusiasm to the expansion of our
passenger railroad services. We know that expansion will result
from competition, and we will create new and expanded numbers
of middle-class, private-sector railroad and related industry
jobs, helping to reverse a decades-old reduction in railroad
employment. We have seen this happen in markets overseas.
So, we recommend the following reforms. Revise PRIIA to
create an intercity State corridor program, which encourages
competition and private sector involvement. The new program
should be based on the German model, and provide the States
with the option of managing their intercity corridor service.
We would also recommend a special initiative for the NEC.
The capital grants that are available from PRIIA follow the
principle in highway and aviation programs that the Federal
Government should provide infrastructure support and
guidelines. This was a good first step. Now we should authorize
an intercity State corridor program.
We would propose a Federal commission on intercity rail
public-private partnering, and then a transfer of corridor
service to a budget-neutral program that permits the States to
secure the funds that are now being used in those corridors
that are going elsewhere. We would define a new method of
establishing and allocating the costs, and invigorate the
system with competition, as we have seen in Europe and Asia.
Thank you. My written statement says more things.
Mr. Reed. Well, thank you very much. I know the time gets
you at times. We will move on.
Mr. Wytkind, please?
Mr. Wytkind. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown, for inviting me and having the labor movement appear
before the subcommittee.
Our 32 member unions have a long history of supporting
infrastructure investments in this country, and making our
transportation system the best it can be in the world. Today,
we believe--and we want to spend some time on this--there is a
great story to tell about Amtrak and its employees, a story
that can't be ignored as the committee considers ways to
propose new advancements in passenger rail policy in this
country.
Amtrak and its employees are performing better than at any
time in the history of the company. As we heard from Mr.
Gardner, the company is growing monthly. It's operating in the
black on the Northeast Corridor. It's expanding and
modernizing, and is already the premier provider in this
country, in fact, in North America, with the most qualified
workforce to handle the growing demand for high-speed rail
across the country.
We believe those who seek to slash Amtrak's budget, as we
have already seen in this Congress, or privatize services, are
setting the company up to fail at the very time it is on course
to finally find stability and increase ridership. It is up to
Congress, together with the Obama administration, to foster and
not derail the continued transformation of Amtrak.
We now have a President who has made it a priority to build
and expand passenger rail in this country. His recent budget
calls for billions of new funding for Amtrak, as part of a
broader vision for passenger rail.
Regarding the private sector's role, its role in building,
maintaining, and operating the Nation's passenger rail and
freight transportation system has always been significant. Out
of our 32 member unions, we represent many private-sector
unions. We are not just a public-sector union organization. And
we believe that private sector plays a crucial role, one that
we are working to enhance in manufacturing, as well, the goods
and equipment needed to operate and maintain the system.
Without a strong well-capitalized private sector in our
transportation industry, America will not remain the world's
strongest economy.
We are not opposed to private sector participation. In
fact, there is plenty of it today. But we are opposed to
breaking up Amtrak. It is not the answer, if we plan to
maintain a national passenger rail network. Those who believe
that privatization is a panacea are ignoring the fact that,
under this model, service would only be provided where it is
profitable to do so for private investors.
None of the world's finest passenger rail systems operate
with this model. In fact, no transportation system in any mode
of transport anywhere in the world operates free of subsidy.
The idea that rail systems around the world are profitable and
operate independent of government assistance is pure fiction.
Look at the UK. I was actually stunned to hear the UK model
as a citation for progress in the future. It did not increase
efficiency when that privatization experiment was tried in the
early 1990s. In fact, it unleashed a torrent of problems:
higher fares, massive layoffs, maintenance and safety problems
that culminated in the Stafford Rail crash in 1996; 31 lives
were lost. And only a decade later, British Rail privatization
was scrapped.
Back home, Amtrak has been forced to limp along from one
budget crisis to the next. The fact is that no public or
private corporation can operate when it doesn't understand what
its next year's budget is going to be.
Let me also state that if entities other than Amtrak are
going to provide passenger rail service, it must be ensured
that the employee protections and statutes, such as Railroad
Retirement or the Railway Labor Act, are applied to all the
workers in the rail industry and their operators. It is wrong
to allow private-sector competition, and then leave behind an
unlevel playing field.
In addition, we would argue that Davis-Bacon prevailing
wage laws, as they have for decades, should continue to apply
to all construction work that is funded with Federal
assistance.
And I have got a question of those who are talking about
privatizing Amtrak. Have you asked the freight railroads what
they think? We are aware of significant misgivings that the
freight rails have that would allow other companies access to
their private rail tracks, and they have publicly stated that
they embrace their relationship with Amtrak as the main
provider of passenger rail in this country on their private
network.
Lastly, investing in passenger rail can also boost our
manufacturing industry. With strong Buy America requirements,
Federal intercity passenger and high-speed rail funding can
boost this important middle-class sector. These investments
will create jobs here in the U.S. and not abroad. And this
funding stream will provide the stability for private
manufacturers to set up operations because they see a long-term
market capability.
I would just finish with the following proposition. Too
often in Washington time is wasted creating new programs,
rather than perfecting the ones we already have. This committee
has a long history of making sure the transportation system has
the capital and the operating support that it needs to succeed.
And we believe, without a Federal vision, with long-term
funding commitments that ensure a stable fully capitalized
Amtrak operation, the goal of boosting private-sector
participation will never be fully realized.
We thank you for the opportunity to testify, and look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Reed. Thank you, Mr. Wytkind. I believe at this point
in time we will move into some questioning of the witnesses.
Ms. Brown, I will yield to you first.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mr.
Administrator, for being here. And I want to thank you for your
leadership, working with Florida and with the Secretary, Mr.
Ray LaHood, which is really--he is a bright spot in the
administration, and really has worked with Florida. And I know
we have learned some lessons from that.
And as we move forward, I guess I am concerned that as we
develop high-speed rail, I mean, when you have communities like
Orlando, Tampa, Miami, we need to have a model that they can
come together and work with us in a way--I mean this is a
lesson that we can take to the rest of the country, because
let's say if the State doesn't want to participate, how can we
have a program that the communities come together, and we can
work with them in order to get commuter rail, or to get high-
speed rail?
I know that you can't do it without some participation from
the State. But the way the proposal is written, it requires a
great participation from the State. So, as we go forward, we
need to think about how we can work private-publicly, and
move--because when you get 100 percent of the funding, and you
got 90 percent Federal funding, gasoline tax, and you got 10
percent guaranteed--and, in fact, I want to have submitted in
the record the study that we paid for, as soon as we can get it
from the State of Florida, indicating how, even in the first
year it would have made a profit.
Can you respond to that?
And then I have some other questions about Amtrak. And I
really get, you know, challenged constantly about the
discussion about privatizing Amtrak when clearly we know that
for 8 years we zeroed out the funding for Amtrak, and it was
all we could do to just hold on while we got the opportunity
now to move forward with passenger rail.
And, in fact, I went to Salt Lake City, Utah 2 weeks ago.
And, I mean, they are moving 40,000 people a day in commuter
rail. And so we've got to figure out how to move people. You
know, when people say, ``Well, we just need another lane on I-
4,'' we got 8. One more won't help us. So help me.
Mr. Szabo. Well, thank you, Congresswoman. And, if you
would, please make sure that everybody knows I was late getting
in here because we were discussing some other business. So you
were taking advantage of the opportunity.
To your first point about trying to find a mechanism for
local communities to come together, the biggest challenge here
is that PRIIA, by law, actually states that it has to be a
State or an entity established by the State. So that becomes a
little bit of the challenge that we have to work with, in
finding a legitimate legal means for communities to come
together to actually make application or execute delivery of a
project.
Ms. Brown. Would Amtrak meet that criteria, in that they
already have certain criteria that they can move within the
State? Or could some of these private rail companies, you
know--if they were interested in--let's say FEC says they're
interested in doing passenger rail from Jacksonville to Miami,
would they be eligible for----
Mr. Szabo. Obviously, it always depends on the legal
structure of the body. There certainly is a chance that an
agency might be eligible, assuming that they were established
under State statute. I mean, you know, counsel would have to
review that. But it would sound like the door could be opened
there. Clearly, there could be ways for Amtrak to be that body
under PRIIA.
But I would come back to a point that you also made in your
comment, that it is close to impossible to do without a level
of engagement by the State DOT. You know, while there is a way
for the State DOT to hand it off, there is no way to entirely
erase the involvement of the State DOT.
Ms. Brown. My time is almost up, but there is a chart. Put
the chart up, please. Can they put it up? There is a chart that
shows, over the past 60 years, that the U.S. has invested $1.3
trillion in highways and $84 billion in aviation, but only $37
billion in passenger rail. Meanwhile, countries like Germany
invested $104 billion in passenger rail.
Over 10 years--and I have got to tell you I was recently
talking to the Chinese, and I indicated that they were going to
put about $300 billion in rail, and they said, ``No,
Congresswoman, it's 3-5-0.'' And they plan on tripling the size
of their system beyond the rest of the world by 2012. Now, I
know we can't compete with the Chinese, but the point of the
matter is we have started investment, and hopefully in the
next, you know, 5 years, when we do the reauthorization, we
will look at putting at least $50 billion, so that we can
really have a system that will compete and move our people,
goods, and services.
And thank you again for your leadership. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Reed. Thank you very much. At this point, the chair
will recognize the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Mica.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. And thank you again for
conducting this hearing, and for trying to look at how we can
do a better job in getting private sector contributions and
activity.
You know, Mr. Szabo and Mr. Gardner, I don't think there is
any way we could possibly mess up a launch of expanded high-
speed--well, creation of high-speed and expanded passenger rail
service in the United States than we have done with the manner
in which the 78--whatever the number--of grants that were
given, and now have them coming back.
I am so dismayed. I consider myself one of the stronger
supporters of bringing true high-speed rail to the United
States and also expanding passenger rail service where it makes
sense for the taxpayers. But the launch has been an absolute
disaster. And now, with Wisconsin, Ohio, Florida rejecting the
money, it's made--we're going to have to almost restart our
efforts to gain some credibility.
And I hate to tell you this. I was out in California, in
Fresno, and that one is not looking rosy, either. The ridership
is very marginal. The farmers are up in arms, and the community
of Fresno and Bakersfield doesn't have the population base to
support this. So it's going to be a dramatically subsidized
route.
So, how do we recover? I pleaded and begged to look at the
Northeast Corridor. They have come up with a--I'm trying to be
polite. If I say ``half-baked,'' that's not a good term.
They've come up with a plan that's not going to cut it. And
$117 billion gets us to, what, 2030, 2040?
Voice. 2040.
Mr. Mica. 2040, with little, tiny, incremental
improvements. So my question is, how do we recover credibility
after so much damage has been done? And, two, how can we find a
better opportunity in the Northeast Corridor, rather than
what's being proposed?
I think your proposal could be cut down, with a little help
from Congress in getting the private sector, to 10, 12 years to
put the service in, if we would allow, again, those to
participate.
So, credibility, restore credibility, and then having one
success in the only corridor which we own that would fit the
model. Mr. Szabo and then Mr. Gardner.
Mr. Szabo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First off, I believe
that we continue to have credibility. And the fact that three
States haven't chose to continue to move forward doesn't change
the fact that a majority of the States in this country do plan
to continue to move forward.
Mr. Mica. But none of those are really high-speed service.
Mr. Szabo. California is, in fact, high-speed service.
Mr. Mica. Well, I guess--and again, it does have the
private sector component.
Mr. Szabo. Right.
Mr. Mica. But the problem is the route that was chosen.
There are many bumpy ties in the track along the way on that
one. I don't consider Chicago to St. Louis high-speed.
Mr. Szabo. All right. If I can continue on then, sir, first
off, let me say we agree with your vision that the Northeast
Corridor needs to be a priority. We have existing
infrastructure there that can be substantially upgraded and
improved to actually continue the positive operating ratio that
Amtrak is achieving there, continue to reduce the trip times,
improve reliability, which are the crucial elements to success.
And with California, it's really important that you put
into perspective that what is being constructed there is a
very, very first step that is no different from how the
interstate highway system was constructed some 50 years ago.
The very first segment was just a few miles in rural Missouri.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Szabo, I am giving that same spiel. I mean
your last sentence is in paragraphs of what I'm doing to
respond to people.
Mr. Szabo. Great.
Mr. Mica. But----
Mr. Szabo. Great.
Mr. Mica. But again, I think we have to restore some
credibility. We have got to find some successes. That is going
to be a tough----
Ms. Brown. Will the chairman yield? Will the chairman
yield? Will the chairman yield?
Mr. Mica. Only if it doesn't count against my time.
Ms. Brown. Yes, well----
Mr. Mica. The clock is rolling.
Ms. Brown. I just want to say--30 seconds--because I hope
you are not blaming the Administration for the ill-fated
governor that we have that won 48 percent of the vote and has
come in here, and the credibility of the studies showed that
the ridership would have made money. You know, yourself, that
all of the communities support it. So let's don't blame--it's
not that it's a lack of credibility with the program. It's a
lack of leadership in the State of Florida on one person.
Mr. Mica. Yes. Now----
Ms. Brown. One person. The legislature had voted for it.
The House and Senate had voted for it. All of the communities
had voted for it. So, clearly, we got a vote. But let's don't
put it on the Administration. I know we try to put everything
on the Administration. But the Administration has nothing to do
with--the fact is that we have a governor that has killed this
program. So let's don't say that it's a lack of credibility
with the program. It's a lack of leadership in the State of
Florida.
Mr. Mica. Well, if it was just the State of Florida, that
might be the case. But of course we have multiple States now
who have rejected significant----
Ms. Brown. We got multi-governors.
Mr. Mica. I yield and reclaim my time back. But again,
regardless, the money is coming back. The credibility moving
forward has been damaged. I mean, again, the public views these
now as failed attempts, whoever the parties are.
So, I was concerned about the manner in which the projects
were chosen, and that's a matter for our investigative
activities to proceed, so that we can avoid this in the future.
We have got to restore credibility, because we need to be
having systems like they take for granted in other countries.
We need to bring the private sector in. That's the purpose of
this hearing. And we need to look at what failed in that
process. If projects didn't make sense to the governors or to
whoever, so be that. I have always wanted to have successes,
not a series of failures, whoever's account, whoever's watch.
But that being said, again--now, one question. Gardner, we
didn't get a response from you, but I could probably give it.
And I don't want to take away from anything you would add to
the conversation, but that being said, now the money is coming
back. Are you all being consulted by the Secretary on where
that money goes, Mr. Szabo?
Mr. Szabo. There continues to be a discussion, and making
sure----
Mr. Mica. And Mr. Gardner?
Mr. Szabo [continuing]. That we again have a open and
transparent process.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Gardner?
Mr. Gardner. Mr. Chairman, we await for the FRA to decide
how they will allocate that--funds, whether they will be made
re-available for competition----
Mr. Mica. Have you provided any memo direction or anything
to where the money should go, either to the FRA or the
Secretary?
Mr. Gardner. Not directly. We do, of course, have a wide
knowledge of the projects.
Mr. Mica. Is it a phone mark, or is there an email trail
somewhere?
Mr. Gardner. Yes, we have absolutely our eyes on the
opportunity here.
Mr. Mica. I'm not trying to be too smart, but the money is
going to be spent, because the Secretary and the Administration
have the authority to spend it.
Congress is not in a position because of our CRs and all of
that, probably, to take it back and put it in the treasury,
because many people out there want to reduce the debt. I agree
with them. But if it's going to be spent, I'm concerned about
how we spend even the Florida $2.4 billion.
And while I'm not a big fan of the Northeast Corridor plan
that you have, there is certainly some improvements there. But
there are some improvements that, for national security
purposes, for transportation purposes, that we could best
utilize going out, instead of having another half-baked attempt
of a project that might again come back on us.
So, I am just throwing that out there, as you make those
decisions and have discussions. I am willing to sit down and
work with you, to look at how we could attract private
investment, and with your plan of 30 years, I would like to cut
it down to 10 or 12. We have talked about this.
If we need to speed up any of the approval process, we can
set the framework for that. If there is something in PRIIA that
needs to be adjusted--and I think we do need to go back and
readjust this--the money sort of got ahead of the projects. But
I am open to working with you. And I know you're just excited
about working with me.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mica. Is that right, Mr. Szabo and Mr. Gardner?
Mr. Szabo. Mr. Chairman, we always like working with those
who hold the rank of chair.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
Mr. Szabo. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Yield back.
Mr. Reed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At this point in time
the chair will recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Richardson,
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
With all due respect to our chairmen, Mr. Szabo, I would
actually like to weigh in somewhat differently, in the fact
that I do come from California, and I am the co-chair of the
high-speed rail caucus. So, for the record, I think it's
important to note that the chairman had a listening tour in
Fresno. And although he might have had 20 farmers who were
upset, there were over 150 people who were supportive of it.
So I think, in all fairness--and what I would recommend is
maybe what would be helpful is to have a staff briefing of all
the status of the projects throughout the country, so we're not
using kind of bits of information that--we might be reading one
article that's in--up in arms that may not necessarily be
reflective of the actual picture of what's happening on the
ground.
I can say, from being in California, that there is actually
several routes that are being considered. And whoever happens
to complete their permit process in a better fashion, I think,
would get the lead. The reason why I think the Center Valley
was being more highly considered was because it was less in the
urban area, and some of the other issues.
But I do not agree--and I will say for the record I don't
agree--with what the chairman said, in terms of the current
State of California. And what I don't want you to walk out of
here, in terms of being in the Administration, of thinking
that's the only way. I realize he is chair, but we actually
have one vote for every seat here. And I hope that you would
make sure that all of the information is collected before the
Administration makes any final decisions. Is that fair, sir?
Mr. Szabo. That is absolutely fair, Congresswoman, and the
way that we plan to proceed.
Ms. Richardson. OK. I appreciate it. Mr. Szabo, also I
wanted to build upon--clearly, the President has made a
commitment to high-speed rail. I would even say so much as he
might see it as a part of his legacy. What, however, can you
help us to do to make sure that also a part of the legacy of
this administration is taking care of what we have already
built?
As Ms. Brown said, we all support high-speed rail. It's
where we need to go. But we need to make sure that Amtrak is
properly funded. And clearly, I don't think it has gotten its
fair shake. So how can you help us with that?
Mr. Szabo. Well, Congresswoman, there is no question that
there has been a history of under-funding for Amtrak, which has
always hindered its ability to achieve its best potential. But
the President's fiscal year 2012 budget request really changes
that.
For the first time, there is a talk of taking a
comprehensive look at the backlog of state of good repair that
needs to be made, replacing the aged equipment, ensuring that
there is appropriate transparency in the budgeting and a clear
division in the business lines, and that there is the
appropriate funding to see it excel.
Amtrak has just now gone through 16 consecutive months of
ridership growth. Last year they set an all-time record. In
California, the ridership growth alone has been tremendous.
Statewide in the past decade, it's up by 66 percent. On the
capital corridors, it's up 100 percent. Just month after month,
they are setting ridership growth records. And there is clearly
this desire out there from the traveling public to see
passenger rail as part of a balanced transportation network.
Ms. Richardson. Yes, sir. And my last question, which will
lead to a comment--and then I'm going to turn to Mr. Wytkind--
is I come from the private sector, I worked in the private
sector. And what I will tell you is, when you have the
resources needed to do the job you can often times do it more
efficiently. But if Amtrak hasn't been given the resources it
needed to make the improvements and the enhancements that it
could have, it could very well perform just as well as any
alternative other financing mechanism, which--I would like to
turn to Mr. Wytkind in my remaining 1 minute.
We--many of the gains that we have had, in terms of workers
and standards and so on, translating those within the private
sector is not always an assumption. All you have to do is look
at Wisconsin and see that's the case. Mr. Wytkind, would you
like an opportunity just to express further, other than your
testimony, what guarantees or things you would be looking for
if so--we went down this route?
Mr. Wytkind. Well, thank you. I appreciate the question.
And I appreciate your leadership on passenger rail issues in
the caucus.
I, by the way, spent 4 or 5 days in California. I share
your view that there is a lot of enthusiasm in California for
its initiative. I spent days meeting with the Members of the
State legislature and other people out there.
But we are very clear in our views. The private sector has
always had a robust role in our transportation system. But to
simply break up Amtrak, the only national passenger railroad
that can operate high-speed service in North America, and
subject it to open competition, is just a really bad idea. This
country is filled with stories of broken privatization models
that haven't worked very well. And who usually loses out in
those equations is the employees and the people that rely on
the service.
And lastly, I think there--can't be lost here. There is a
lot of blaming going on of the Obama administration's views and
programs on passenger rail. The truth is that Governor Walker
of Wisconsin, Governor Kasich of Ohio, and now Governor Scott
in Florida have literally thrown tens of thousands of people
out of work with decisions to throw passenger rail money back
to Washington. And that was probably the very first decision
that Governor Walker made, as the governor-elect, was to tell a
bunch of Wisconsin people that they're not going to be
gainfully employed--because of very, very vibrant investments
in our passenger rail system.
And so, I think that can't be lost in the debate. This is
not whether the Obama administration's plan is perfect. But the
plan can't work if you have elected governors who throw the
money back and do not want to invest in passenger rail in their
States for the benefit of the country. And I think that that's
a huge loss for the country and for the people of those good
States.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Reed. Thank you. Mr. Bucshon from Indiana.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you. I thank the panel for being here. I
am a supporter of developing our high-speed rail system, and I
have a question for Mr. Szabo. What do you see, in your view,
is the biggest impediment to high-speed rail development in the
United States?
Mr. Szabo. I think, quickly, developing the intellectual
capacity of all the players, the resources. Not intellectual
capacity so much as the resources. You know, PRIIA, for the
first time, put a significant responsibility on the States,
gave them significant power, the right to choose their own
operators, the requirement to do their own planning. It also
put significant new challenges on my agency. And so there is a
kind of a new paradigm created.
State DOTs and the Federal Government are very, very good
at constructing highways because they have been doing it now
for 50 years. We need to develop the same kind of standardized
procedures and the same ability to almost systematically crank
the projects out.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you. We did a field hearing, as you
probably know, in Grand Central Station on talking about high-
speed rail in the Northeast Corridor. And it was very
fascinating. And a couple of things that I learned--and I am
going to ask a couple of different panelists their view on
that--is that, in my view, you know, most people believe that
high-speed rail in the Northeast Corridor will be successful.
However, the many, many years it takes to get environmental
clearance because of the multiple environmental groups that
have issues with any type of development that is new that--
becomes a significant impediment. And that includes getting
permitting through the government and others.
But--and the other thing is right of way issues, even--you
know, for example, in the State of Indiana, Interstate 69,
which we're now building from Evansville to Indianapolis, has
literally taken about 30 years to develop, primarily based on
those 2 issues.
And I was glad to see Mr. Wytkind talk about public-private
development. But the gentlemen from labor, at least in New York
City's view, was that they would not accept any type of public
involvement in this type of development in the Northeast
Corridor, because of concerns about safety and workers
conditions, which--my dad was a United Mine Worker, so I
understand those things.
So, I guess I would like to--I mean I think there is an
800-pound gorilla in the room. There are many, many impediments
to developing these things in our country. But I think also, on
both sides of the aisle, we need to recognize that on both
sides we have groups that are significantly slowing down
progress in our country when it comes to these.
And I would like someone to address the environmental
issues, the civil liberty issues with right of way, and some of
the labor--potential labor impediments to development of high-
speed rail. Mr. Szabo?
Mr. Szabo. Well, I think I can touch on that real quickly.
Certainly the environmental process is important. You do have
to make sure that the citizens that are going to be potentially
negatively affected by new service have a voice in the process.
I mean that's just kind of fundamental to the principles our
Nation stands upon.
But having said that, it really does tie in directly to the
first comments I made about having the structural capacity of
the DOTs and the Federal Government to work through these
processes in the most expeditious manner. Doing what they call
the preliminary engineering/NEPA work for the high-speed rail
projects is something that is new to many of the States, and
also to my staff, where, again, for highways it's been well
established for many years.
Dr. Bucshon. Mr. Wytkind, can you comment on that?
Mr. Wytkind. Yes, I would be happy to. A couple of points.
First of all, I'm not really sure--maybe you can expand a
little bit for me--what the labor impediments you're referring
to are.
Dr. Bucshon. Well, I'm not saying they are actual
impediments, I'm just saying----
Mr. Wytkind. No, I'm just curious what--if there is a
specific issue I can address.
Dr. Bucshon. The comment that was made, the person that
testified, literally, his opening line was that, ``We will
never accept private investment in the Northeast Corridor
because we feel like it will lead to lower wages and less
worker safety.'' I mean that was the opening comment on the----
Mr. Wytkind. Well, I would----
Dr. Bucshon [continuing]. Panel. So I'm not----
Mr. Wytkind. Yes.
Dr. Bucshon. I'm not agreeing or disagreeing.
Mr. Wytkind. I understand.
Dr. Bucshon. I just was curious. I think we all need to
recognize there are many, many things slowing down this type of
development, and it's not always money from Washington.
Mr. Wytkind. Well, there are two points I would make. I
would have to see the statement and understand the context in
which it was provided. But I would say that the position we
have expressed today is that we are for finding ways to ensure
that the private sector has its role in participating in our
transportation industry.
The truth is that, whether we like it or not, the
transportation industry has a robust private sector. Just in
the construction industry, most of those building trade workers
out there across America are working for contractors, private
contractors, who are contractors under the Department of
Transportation's infrastructure programs.
But on the issue of streamlining, we supported and worked
with the committee to find a way to have some of these
processes be more concurrent. One of the problems that I
understood in the debates in the last Congress, when you were
writing the surface transportation bill in this committee, was
that a lot of the processes were layered in order, as opposed
to occurring simultaneously. And, as a result, you had some
natural delays, because you had to wait for this approval to
begin deliberation on the next approval.
The last thing is if streamlining means evading employee
protections and the important railroad statutes, we would very
strongly oppose that.
Dr. Bucshon. As I would.
Mr. Wytkind. If it's simply trying to find a way to find
efficiencies, I think there is a way to do that, and I think
there is a way for the labor movement to work with the
committee to accomplish that.
Mr. Shuster. [presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
I recognize Ms. Napolitano. Questions for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. We have a vote that's going to come on here
very shortly, so I would like to get through the questioning--
and I think we're going to be on the floor for a while, so if
we could finish up here, that would be great.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will keep
my comments as brief as possible.
I would like to maybe make a--not comparison, but state
that in my area Metrolink has four routes and five stations.
It's operated by the private sector. But when the board found
that the private operator continuously failed to comply with
Federal and State regulations, they fired and then hired Amtrak
to run them. So, you understand that there is issues.
And then, there is issues with the high-speed rail
authority in my area. And I was just talking to the
Congresswoman Richardson, because the high-speed rail authority
had not consulted with the cities in my district, because
Amtrak does, if the route is proposed to go through my
district. And it is high-speed rail that people in my community
will not be able to afford to get on. I need passenger rail
movement, I don't need high-speed rail movement in my area. And
that's for the record.
Mr. Feinsod, you recommend making the pilot program for
contracting out Amtrak routes permanent. As part of your
legislative recommendations, do you support or oppose requiring
private operators to abide by all applicable labor laws?
The Railway Labor Act, the railroad retirement and
unemployment compensation, the hiring rights, the Davis-Bacon,
would you support or oppose preventing operators from
contracting out services to foreign entities and workers?
How about liability insurance? Would you support or oppose
having to purchase minimum liability insurance, like Amtrak is
required to have, of $200 million?
Now, I know you can't answer all of those at once. I would
like to have it in writing, if you would, please. But as much
as you can in a short time, I would like to have that in
answer.
Mr. Feinsod. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the opportunity
to respond to you. I should point to the commuter rail industry
in the United States, which has grown considerably in the last
15 years. Many new commuter railroads have opened. Many of them
were created through public agency investment, in part through
the Federal Government. And many of them are----
Mrs. Napolitano. Would you answer my questions, please,
about supporting or opposing?
Mr. Feinsod. Yes. The answer is that we would support the
continued application of Federal railway law, because it is a
requirement now, in the commuter railroad networks that are
contracted out. It's not anything unusual.
Mrs. Napolitano. How about the retirement and unemployment
compensation, the hiring rights?
Mr. Feinsod. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Napolitano. Davis-Bacon?
Mr. Feinsod. Yes, Congresswoman. These are framework
requirements that would be part of any contractual basis and
competition.
Mrs. Napolitano. Would you support or oppose the
prevention--preventing operators from contracting out to
foreign entities?
Mr. Feinsod. Well, I don' know what you mean by that, but--
--
Mrs. Napolitano. Having a foreign company come in and take
over running some of those areas.
Mr. Feinsod. I think that in the United States we have open
access to private companies that work within----
Mrs. Napolitano. I realize that, and I understand that,
except we are losing a lot of contracting services to foreign
companies, because they underbid, because sometimes the
governments do subsidize their contracting.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield the
remaining time to the Ranking Member Brown. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Mr. Gardner, Mr. Mica constantly
talks about high-speed rail plans in the Northeast Corridor
making small improvements. Can you talk about that? Because it
seems as if he thinks the Northeast Corridor is just one State,
or one county, and it's a whole group of entities working
together.
Mr. Gardner. Yes. Thank you very much, Ranking Member
Brown. It is a very complex and amazing system of both
intercity service, freight service, and commuter service
spanning eight States and the District. And we do have a plan
for vast improvements in the corridor that will take some time.
And to answer the earlier questions, the main issue here
for expanding high-speed rail in the Northeast Corridor is
stable, dedicated funding. And that is also the main issue of
bringing private investment into this network. Until there is a
dedicated, consistent source of funding for rail investment at
the Federal level, you're simply not going to attract the
private-sector interest in this business. It's true in all of
our other modes in the United States, and it's true
internationally. The international experiments here all rely on
very robust investments in this--in their rail networks. And
off that base of public investment, you have been able to
leverage private-sector involvement in certain portions of the
network.
And we, of course, see that opportunity in the Northeast
Corridor. What it is going to take is that dedicated commitment
of funding. Amtrak was not able to directly apply for funds in
this initial round of funding for the Northeast Corridor. The
States were needed to apply for those funds, and would have had
to come up with the matching funds, in some cases, for those
investments.
So, we look forward to finding opportunities to invest more
funds in the Northeast Corridor. We have immediate projects of
more--something between $6 billion and $7 billion backlog of
capital projects that need to be overcome. We have got
opportunities to make real improvements.
But I do want to say that the corridor has developed in
amazing ways since Amtrak has taken over ownership in 1976 from
a private-sector entity. And right now, above the rail, Amtrak
is operating profitable services. Our regional services just
covered 101 percent of their cost, and the sales service most
recently, I think, were covering 186 percent of their cost.
So, we are making money above the rail operations in the
Northeast Corridor today, with the opportunity to expand that
going forward with the right level support, and bringing in
private-sector involvement, as appropriate.
Mr. Shuster. The gentlelady's time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Barletta is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gardner, the
Northeast Corridor is a critical area for our Nation's rail
system. Obviously, the large cities are connected along the
East Coast. However, what is Amtrak's vision for connecting
those in smaller cities where trade service has been
discontinued over the years, yet the demand remains?
In my district, in northeastern Pennsylvania, over 30,000
people commute from the Poconos in Monroe County to New York
City every week. And there is much interest in rail service
from Scranton through the Poconos into New York. What would
Amtrak's vision be for that?
Mr. Gardner. Well, thank you, Congressman. And I am aware
of the desire for the service there, and certainly the New
Jersey Transit's efforts to extend farther west in New Jersey,
and conversations about bringing service to the Scranton area.
Our vision for extending and expanding corridor service is
to work in partnership with our States. We have 15 State
partners today, including Mr. Simmons in North Carolina. And as
he mentioned, we have a new process for being able to fairly
and consistently allocate operating costs, and build services
together.
So, what we do is look for partnerships with States. We
engage early with States to find opportunities for passenger
rail, and then build with them a service model that will
deliver service to their communities. So we remain open. We
have been involved and had discussions with the commonwealth
about this service. There is interest in service to Binghamton,
a little bit to the north of you in New York. And we remain
interested in looking at these options. What we need is a State
partner. And together we look to expand the network every way
we can that brings value to the service and to the taxpayer.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. Mr. Szabo, I'm concerned that
we're not taking a greater look at the private sector
participation in other countries. As Mr. Broadley points out in
his testimony, there are several similarities to our rail
system, specifically in the Northeast Corridor.
What steps have we taken to look at those models and see
how we can implement them into our country?
Mr. Szabo. Well, I would say that, actually, we have. We
have taken a considerable look at the international experience
in both Europe and Asia. Quite a bit of this was used in the
formation of PRIIA. And, of course, then we have taken the next
step with the President's proposal in his fiscal year 2012
budget request.
Under PRIIA, the States have the right to select the
operator of their choice, whomever it is that they choose. In
fact, since 1997, under Amtrak law, the States have had the
right to select whatever operator they chose. So, privatization
has always been an opportunity that is there. But so far,
States have just not found it in their best interest at this
point to move in that direction.
There was the section 502 provisions that asked us to take
in these offers to look at privatization of the Northeast
Corridor or some of the others, but surprisingly, there wasn't
a single international applicant or private company that made a
submission on the Northeast Corridor. There were a few others,
but in every one of them, none of them did contain the private
funding that would have gone with it.
And so, at this point the States do have a high element of
flexibility.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman. And I am not going to
have a follow-up question now, but what Mr. Szabo said, not one
person applied, not one entity applied for the Northeast
Corridor, and, I think a lot of people followed the money. And
there wasn't much that went to the Northeast Corridor on those
grants.
With that, Mr. Sires, I recognize you for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, as one that
rides the Acela every week, back and forth--I represent the
northern part of New Jersey--and I am thrilled that we have
Amtrak running, because it's really--going through the airport,
going through the whole hassle, it's just impossible.
But last year I took a trip--it was the year before--I took
a trip to Spain, because Spain has the AVE. And I wanted to
compare it with Amtrak. And I talked to a lot of people, you
know. We even met with the port authority people in Barcelona,
because we took the train from Madrid to Barcelona. There is a
substantial amount of money coming in from the government to
that train. So, when we say ``privatization,'' you know, when
we talk about Europe, you know, there are huge investments by
the government.
And when I worry, Mr. Feinsod, about privatization, it's
that, to me, it means as you get your expenses--your expenses
go up--and you privatize, it's expensive--you go to the workers
to give in, to get back. And as expenses go up, the workers
suffer.
I think there has to be a balance. I'm not saying that
everything should be coming directly from the government, but
there has got to be a balance where the worker is protected and
there is some sort of subsidy, so these entities can run
properly.
You know, and it is difficult, I think, in the--on the
east, to have anything similar to some of these European lines,
because I know that the line from Madrid to Barcelona did not
go through as many States as we do, or some of the tracks that
I use for other things. So, you know, it's pretty much a
dedicated line. And we just don't have the room in some of
these places to do something similar to that. So when people
say, you know, ``Let's do the European experiment,'' all well
and good, but we have to see where, you know, where we're going
to do this.
And I hope that the service continues to improve in the
Acela, because it really is a pleasant ride from Newark to
Washington.
And I just have time--you know, can you answer some of
those concerns that you have--that I have, Mr. Feinsod, when
you talk about labor? Because to me, now, everything privatized
just means, well, we go off to the unions, we get it from the
unions, and, in many cases, let's get rid of the union.
Mr. Feinsod. Well, I think that the only answer I can give
you is that this is not what we see as a competitive
environment, that the competitive environment is a creation of
a higher energy level to provide for improvements to the
corridors that might be competitively created.
I don't think we are talking about a Madrid Barcelona line
which required significant government investment to create the
line. It is being run by and operated by the Spanish State
railroad, and has been extraordinarily successful, and is
profitable, very profitable.
But when we look at the regional, State-supported systems
in the United States, we have an opportunity to open up the
market to competition. And that competition would create the
opportunity for innovation and improvement. And I don't believe
it is a natural result to hurt labor. In fact, we believe that
if we have a more robust----
Mr. Sires. Well, where are you going to get the money to
offset it?
Mr. Feinsod. If we have a more robust market, we're going
to have higher ridership, and we are going to have more jobs.
And the whole idea is to----
Mr. Sires. Would you answer that, Mr.----
Mr. Feinsod [continuing]. Increase the number of jobs.
Mr. Wytkind. Yes, I would. I don't have--thank you for that
question.
Look, I think there is a--there are--there is a litany of
examples across the country in the transportation industry and
elsewhere in the economy where private contracting does result
exactly as you have described, whether it's to completely
eliminate collective bargaining, which seems to be a popular
theme these days with some Members in the political class, but
more importantly, we have a lot of examples where private
contracting resulted in people having to be the people that pay
for the cost of either poorly managed contracts or, as you
said, they run out of money and it's got to come out of
somebody.
And so, I could submit to the committee a number of
examples. A lot of them are in the mass transportation
industry, where a lot of this privatization has occurred, where
the workers have been absolutely the victim of those
privatizations.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman. We have got 10 minutes
left in the vote. I am going to try to finish my questions,
because then we're going to have to probably be over there for
a while.
I have a few questions, and then we're going to leave the
record open for 2 weeks. We probably are going to submit some
questions to most of you, if not all of you, to get them back
in writing. But first question, Mr. Simmons, can you talk to me
a little bit about the obstacles that you face for private rail
operators coming in to running operations in your State?
Mr. Simmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my testimony I
outline several opportunities where we already work with
private companies.
In terms of private railroads operating our existing
service, the issue of access, the issue of maintaining the
freight capacity, those kinds of things, are challenges that
are in front of us and the companies.
We open the door to the opportunity as we look to absorb
and manage the growth opportunity that is in front of our
State, adjoining States, and America to provide jobs both in
the traditional industry, but there are other places,
particularly in design, construction, and components of our
operation where the private sector can and do play a role.
Mr. Shuster. And I think that level playing field--which I
think Mr. Szabo, Mr. Wytkind, and Mr. Gardner all sort of
touched on when it comes to labor--and that--labor level
playing field is in the law now that we passed. But what you're
talking about are some of the other issues: access, cheaper
incremental costs that you have to--if you bring a private
operator in, you have to negotiate with the freight rails. Is
that----
Mr. Simmons. Yes. Yes, we would. But I want to say--speak
to the issue of the labor, the existing agreements. In the law
that is protected. Any operator that was not Amtrak would have
to look at lot like Amtrak. So we're not threatening that.
We are--what we are faced with, and the largest challenge I
have overall, is how to absorb and manage the growth. The
tremendous opportunity that States have, that America has, to
grow this business, not just from the business perspective, but
to provide service and mobility for our communities and for our
citizens, that's the challenge that we have, that we face every
day.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate that. And also, I guess my final
question is to Mr. Szabo concerning the DesertXpress. I know
that that's come out before. It was supposed to be a $2 billion
and now it's, I think, a $6 billion project. It was supposed to
be all private money, now they're looking to the RRIF program.
Can you talk a little bit about what your view is on that
project? Is that something that you think is viable? I have
concerns, you know, going from Las Vegas to Victorville--I
didn't know where Victorville is, but I know it's not Los
Angeles.
Mr. Szabo. Well, ultimately, their plan is to connect with
the California high-speed rail project. It's just a matter of
that final step through the mountains. So, again, a little bit
like the interstate analogy we're talking about, where legs get
built in phases.
You know, they continue to adjust their costs. That's not
unusual for a project of this magnitude.
Mr. Shuster. Triple the cost, though? I mean is that
reasonable?
Mr. Szabo. You know, it's a matter of refinement, and
making sure they have accurate costs before they choose to move
forward.
Mr. Shuster. When you refine something, I thought it got
better.
Mr. Szabo. I'm sorry?
Mr. Shuster. I said when you refined something, I thought
it got better, not worse, in the cost.
Mr. Szabo. The most important thing is to be accurate.
Obviously, you have to know what the facts are, making sure
it's accurate, before a decision is made to move forward, and
so they can do their appropriate analysis to see if the right
return on investment is there.
But clearly, we do believe that it's a project that has
some very good potential.
Mr. Shuster. Well, again, we have a vote. I appreciate
you----
Ms. Brown. I do have a final----
Mr. Shuster. Sure, I yield you 2 minutes.
Ms. Brown. OK. Well, I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
A couple of things. Mr. Simmons, in the current law, do the
States have the right to choose their passenger rail operators,
or do they have to choose Amtrak?
Mr. Simmons. Under the current law, we have the right to
choose operators. But the environment that we work in can
constrain that.
Ms. Brown. Absolutely. We have that same impairment in
Florida, where we have one person making a decision. And I want
to make sure that we put the study in the record that showed
that the high-speed rail project would have made money the
first year, based on the facts.
Mr. Gardner, I have one other question for you. In doing my
research, I found out that Amtrak subcontracts over 66,000
business annually. And I would ask unanimous consent to insert
a list of the 70 businesses into the hearing, but also make
available those other 66,000, so people know that Amtrak has a
lot of partners, private partners.
Mr. Gardner. Absolutely, Madam Chair. We have, again, $1.5
billion in services that we purchase, goods and services every
year, from private entities that manage our part supply to
cleaning and servicing and mechanical servicing and turnaround
locations in some of our outlying points.
Of course, through our procuring of equipment, we just
place orders for 70 new electric locomotives with Siemens that
will be built here in the United States, meeting Buy America
requirements. So we are engaged in, every day, partnership with
the private sector to deliver the services that we need to, to
make this network work.
So, it's--and as Mr. Wytkind said, most of the big capital
projects we do, of course, use contractors who are private
sector entities to build big bridges and tunnels and so forth.
So we rely on this, and we aim to grow it. And we will need the
private sector, undoubtedly, to take this network to the next
step and grow.
Ms. Brown. And, Mr. Szabo, you have my last minute.
Mr. Shuster. The gentlelady doesn't have a last minute, so
Mr. Szabo, we will give you 30 seconds to answer succinctly----
Ms. Brown. Oh, no, you----
Mr. Szabo. Very good, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. We've got 4 minutes left in the vote, and
since I'm the chairman I do get the final word, fortunately.
Ms. Brown. OK, all right.
Mr. Shuster. Go ahead, Mr. Szabo, 30 seconds.
Mr. Szabo. Well, I'm sorry. Did you have another question?
Ms. Brown. I don't have a question, I just want you to have
the last word.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Szabo. Well, the final word? Thank you for the hearing.
This Administration is working very, very hard to make sure
that high-speed passenger rail is a reality in this country. We
believe we have a strong program. We are continuing to move
forward. It is something that's in its infancy, so you have
those challenges that go along with something that is brand
new. But the village is solid, and the partnerships are being
developed, and we are moving forward.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Szabo. I thank all of you for
being here today. I appreciate it.
And passenger rail in this country, I believe, is needed. I
think we ought to look at the places where that investment
needs to be focused. There are places that we can, I think,
have it.
But I hope that the Administration comes together, along
with labor, along with the freight rails, along with Congress,
to focus on the Northeast Corridor, because I think that is our
best chance for the first successful operation of high-speed
rail in this country. And I believe it will create economic
opportunity for those in labor, those in business, and those
communities along that corridor. And it will help all
Americans, if they see its being successful.
So, again, thank all of you very much, and this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

