- THE MISSOURI RIVER FLOOD: AN ASSESSMENT OF THE RIVER MANAGEMENT IN 2011 AND OPERATIONAL PLANS FOR THE FUTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE MISSOURI RIVER FLOOD: AN ASSESSMENT
OF THE RIVER MANAGEMENT IN 2011 AND
OPERATIONAL PLANS FOR THE FUTURE

=======================================================================

(112-62)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 30, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-415 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         Columbia
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            BOB FILNER, California
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington,   GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
Vice Chair                           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               LAURA RICHARDSON, California
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFF DENHAM, California              NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma               (Ex Officio)
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY
Panel One

Hon. Tom Latham, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Iowa...........................................................    29
Hon. Rick Berg, a Representative in Congress from the State of
North Dakota...................................................    29
Hon. Steve King, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Iowa...........................................................    29
Hon. Lynn Jenkins, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kansas.........................................................    29
Hon. Vicky Hartzler, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Missouri....................................................    29
Hon. Kristi L. Noem, a Representative in Congress from the State
of South Dakota................................................    29
Hon. Emanuel Cleaver, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Missouri....................................................    29
Hon. Blaine Luetkemeyer, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Missouri..............................................    29
Hon. Jeff Fortenberry, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Nebraska..............................................    29
Hon. Lee Terry, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Nebraska.......................................................    29

Panel Two

Brigadier General John R. McMahon, Commander, Northwestern
Division, United States Army Corps of Engineers................    83
Kathy J. Kunkel, County Clerk, Holt County, Missouri.............    83
Tom Waters, Chairman, Missouri Levee and Drainage District
Association....................................................    83
Brad Lawrence, Director of Public Works, City of Fort Pierre,
South Dakota...................................................    83
Richard Oswald, Fifth-generation Missouri Family Farmer, and
President, Missouri Farmers Union..............................    83

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. W. Todd Akin, of Missouri...................................   117
Hon. Leonard L. Boswell, of Iowa.................................   118
Hon. Russ Carnahan, of Missouri..................................   120
Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson, of Texas.............................   125

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES
Panel One

Hon. Tom Latham..................................................   126
Hon. Rick Berg...................................................   130
Hon. Steve King..................................................   133
Hon. Lynn Jenkins \1\............................................
Hon. Vicky Hartzler \1\..........................................
Hon. Kristi L. Noem..............................................   137
Hon. Emanuel Cleaver.............................................   141
Hon. Blaine Luetkemeyer..........................................   145
Hon. Jeff Fortenberry \1\........................................
Hon. Lee Terry...................................................   148

Panel Two

Brigadier General John R. McMahon................................   150
Kathy J. Kunkel..................................................   162
Tom Waters.......................................................   168
Brad Lawrence....................................................   178
Richard Oswald...................................................   182

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Bob Gibbs, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Ohio, request to submit the following for the record:

Blake Hurst, President, Missouri Farm Bureau Federation,
letter to Hon. Bob Gibbs, November 29, 2011............     4
American Society of Civil Engineers, written statement...     5
Andrew Fahlund, Senior Vice President for Conservation,
American Rivers, letter to Hon. Bob Gibbs and Hon.
Timothy H. Bishop, November 29, 2011...................    10
Hon. Russ Carnahan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Missouri, request to submit the following for the record:

Dr. Andrea A. Hunter, Director of the Osage Nation
Historic Preservation Office, written statement........    16
Daniel Overbey, Executive Director, Southeast Missouri
Regional Port Authority, ``Flood Damage to the Ports
Located on the Mississippi River,'' written statement..    23
Rowan W. Gould, Deputy Director, United States Department
of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, letter to
Hon. Timothy H. Bishop, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York, November 29, 2011..........    75
Melissa Samet, Senior Water Resources Counsel, National
Wildlife Federation, written statement.................    77
Hon. Tom Latham, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Iowa, request to submit ``State of Iowa Input: Missouri River
Management and Flood Recovery Efforts,'' sent to the Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure from Brigadier General J.
Derek Hill, Chair, Iowa Missouri River Recovery Coordination
Task Force.....................................................    30
Hon. Rick Berg, a Representative in Congress from the State of
North Dakota, request to submit the following for the record:

``BNSF Fights the Rising Tide, Begins to Restore Network
Momentum,'' Railway, The Employee Magazine of Team
BNSF, Summer 2011......................................    42
Hon. Jack Dalrymple, Governor of North Dakota, written
testimony for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers public
scoping meeting on the Missouri River Annual Operating
Plan, November 1, 2011.................................    46
Hon. Kristi L. Noem, a Representative in Congress from the State
of South Dakota, request to submit the following for the
record:

Hon. Laurie R. Gill, Mayor of Pierre, South Dakota,
written testimony......................................    56
Jeff Dooley, Manager, Dakota Dunes Community Improvement
District, South Dakota, written testimony..............    64
Kim Blaeser, Homeowner and Treasurer, Riv-r-Land
Homeowners Association, South Dakota, written testimony    66
Hon. Emanuel Cleaver, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Missouri, photographs of the KCP&L plant before and after
the Missouri River flood.......................................   191
Brad Lawrence, Director of Public Works, City of Fort Pierre,
South Dakota, ``The Missouri River Flood of 2011,'' narrative..   193

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Hon. Jim Suttle, Mayor of Omaha, Nebraska, written statement.....   211

----------
\1\ Representatives Jenkins, Hartzler, and Fortenberry did not
submit written statements.

THE MISSOURI RIVER FLOOD: AN
ASSESSMENT OF THE RIVER MANAGEMENT
IN 2011 AND OPERATIONAL PLANS
FOR THE FUTURE

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:06 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The subcommittee hearing of Water Resources and
Environment will come to order. Thank you for being here today.
I will start with my opening statement, and we will move on to
the ranking majority's opening statement.
This hearing is for the Missouri River flood. It is an
assessment of river management in 2011 and operational plans
for the future. I would like to welcome everyone today in
hearing the Missouri River flood and assessment, as I just
said, and the operational plans for the future.
At the dedication ceremony of the Oahe Dam in South Dakota
in 1962, President Kennedy made the following statement: ``We
take for granted these miracles of engineering. And too often
we see no connection between this dam right here and our
Nation's security and our leadership all around the world. The
facts of the matter are that this dam and many more like it are
essential to the expansion and growth of the American economy
as a measure that Congress is now considering. And this dam and
others like it are essential to our national strength and
security, as any military alliance or missile complex.''
I believe President Kennedy and his generation understood
that public infrastructure is important to our economy, and a
strong economy is vital to our national security. As we go
through these difficult economic times, we must not forget that
some Federal investments are valuable.
I would like to remind members of the subcommittee and
those in the audience that in November 2011 we marked the 25th
anniversary of the 1986 Water Resources Development Act. This
landmark law has provided the Nation with a new paradigm for
the development of water resource projects. WRDA 86 required
that most projects be planned and constructed with a non-
Federal partner that would share in the cost. With local public
entities taking a bigger role in projects, we have been able to
leverage the Federal dollars and build projects that better fit
the local needs.
In spite of the fact that non-Federal partners now are
paying a significant portion of the project cost, we have not
taken steps to recapitalize the water resources infrastructure
that previous generations have entrusted to us. Investing some
of our limited Federal dollars in flood protection and
navigation infrastructure not only provides jobs during the
construction period, but also provides economic benefits that
save more jobs once the project is completed.
One needs only to look at the national, regional, and local
economic benefits that have flowed from the water resources
project on the Missouri River to appreciate the value of the
Corps projects. Given the significant economic benefits that
come from investing in flood protection and navigation
infrastructure, I believe the Federal Government should focus
its Corps of Engineers dollars on those activities and halt,
for a while, investing in environmental restoration projects
that do not provide the long-term jobs we so desperately need
right now.
This concern has been made even acute by the fact that the
damages to levees and other flood protection infrastructure
caused by the Missouri River flood, Hurricane Irene, and other
disasters this year must be quickly repaired to prevent damages
next year. And currently, the Corps has to pay for these
repairs by taking money from other projects. The Corps should
not have to be deciding which projects to rob to pay for levee
repairs. We in Congress and the President have to do a better
job of getting the Corps the money they need for these
important life and property-saving projects.
The Missouri River Basin is the world's third largest
watershed, and drains 41 percent of the United States. There
are six main stem reservoirs, many miles of levees, and other
control structures that the Corps of Engineers uses to manage
the river for eight separate--and many times competing--
purposes. In managing the Missouri River system, the Corps has
to balance its operations to address the needs of flood
protection, navigation, municipal water supply, irrigation,
fish and wildlife, recreation, and hydropower. The Corps has a
master manual to guide its decisions, and they develop annual
operational plans that reflect expected runoff for the season.
Since records were kept beginning in 1887, the estimated
2011 runoff of 61 million acre feet into the system easily
exceeded the previous record of approximately 49 million acre
feet set in 1997. Unprecedented runoff occurred in the basin in
the months of May, June, and July of this year. The combined
runoff from these 3 months of 34.3 million acre feet is higher
than the total annual runoff in 102 of 113 years in the period
of record.
The floods of 2011 damaged critical transportation
infrastructure like roads, highways, bridges, airports, and
rail lines. For instance, logistical problems caused by 2011
floods caused a Class I railroad, Burlington Northern Southern
Santa Fe, to re-route up to 460 trains per day for the duration
of the floods. Worse still, thousands of Americans were
flooded, some of them who lost their homes. Millions have been
impacted by these floods and, sadly, some have lost their
lives.
The system that was authorized in 1944 and completed in the
early 1960s has provided flood control and other important
benefits for many in the Missouri River Basin. Still, the
system has not created a flood-free zone along the Missouri
River. We have seen in the Gulf region what can happen when
hurricane and flood protection infrastructure is inadequate or
fails to perform. And now we have seen this type of event in
the Missouri River, the Mississippi River, and the Ohio River.
I believe the answers to these issues will come from a
partnership between Federal and non-Federal public entities. I
believe we should recapitalize the Nation's flood damage
reduction infrastructure, and believe we need to make policy
changes to be sure that we are making the best investment of
taxpayer dollars.
At the same time, I believe local governments have got to
make wise land use decisions in their communities that will
keep homes and businesses out of harm's way.
I would like to thank the panel members for being here
today and we examine the flood of 2011 and how the Corps is
preparing for the future.
At this time, I would also ask unanimous consent that the
documents are put in the record from the Missouri Farm Bureau
Federation, the American Society of Civil Engineers, American
Rivers, the Honorable Lee Terry.
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Hearing no objection, that will be so ordered.
[Hon. Lee Terry's statement is featured with the other
witnesses' statements--please refer to the ``Prepared
Statements Submitted by Witnesses'' section of the table of
contents. The other information follows:]

Mr. Gibbs. Also, I would like unanimous consent that
committee members Sam Graves, Bill Long, and Leonard Boswell,
who are not on the subcommittee but are on the T&I Committee,
be allowed to sit and ask questions during this hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Hearing no objections, so ordered.
At this time I welcome Mr. Carnahan as the ranking member
for this hearing.
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
acknowledge our ranking member, Mr. Bishop--sitting in for him
briefly today--for holding this hearing. This is an issue that
has been of critical importance to my constituents in the St.
Louis region that live and work along the Mississippi River. I
originally sent a letter to the committee requesting this
hearing on May 5th. I am very thankful that the committee is
convened here today to further investigate this issue.
We also organized a briefing for colleagues on this very
issue back in July. But it is important that the committee is
here today, taking this formal action to investigate the
flooding and to help plan for future events.
I also want to thank you for inviting Richard Oswald, who
will testify here today. He is from Atchison County, Missouri,
in northwest Missouri. He will be able to give his personal
account of the devastation brought on by these floods. And Mr.
Oswald's home, the one built by his parents, has flooded for
the third time in his life because of the failure of our levee
and reservoir system. This year Mr. Oswald could not return to
his farm for months. His crop was ruined. The economy of his
1,200-person town, devastated. And his story is repeated
countless times across the State.
I also want to acknowledge some other Missourians that will
be with us here on the later panel: Kathy Kunkel, the county
clerk of Holt County, Missouri; and Tom Waters, chairman of the
Missouri Levee and Drainage District Association. And it is
great to have three of our colleagues from Missouri:
Congresswoman Hartzler, Congressmen Luetkemeyer and Cleaver.
This issue is bipartisan, it covers many States and
regions, and it is very important, I think, we are here today
doing this.
I also want to ask unanimous consent to submit two other
testimonies for the record for witnesses that could not be with
us today. The first is the testimony of the Osage Nation. Levee
breaches destroyed their sacred sites and spread human Native
American remains over huge areas. And the tribulations
experienced by the tribe help to remind us of the myriad
effects of these floods, and the many factors that must be
weighed when we deal with this in the future.
I also want to submit the testimony of the Southeast
Missouri Regional Port Authority, detailing the issues they
faced covering these floods.
Mr. Gibbs. And that is so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Cravaack--oh, sorry.
Mr. Carnahan. And just--if I may continue, Mr. Chairman--
the Mississippi and Missouri River floods in April and May this
year were among the deadliest and most damaging recorded along
the waterway in the past century. Two major storm systems
deposited record levels of rainfall on the Mississippi River
and its tributaries, was contributed with springtime snow melt,
causing water levels to rise to unprecedented levels.
During the past half of May, the upper Missouri River Basin
received nearly a year's worth of rainfall. The flooding caused
evacuations of thousands of people, swamping river towns and as
many as 3 million acres of farmland in Mississippi, Tennessee,
and Arkansas, alone. In May the Army Corps of Engineers blew up
a section of the Birds Point Levee in Missouri, submerging
about 130,000 acres of farmland to ease the flood threat to
Kentucky and Illinois river towns. Damages from these floods
are estimated to be at $2 billion, thus far. And many of these
areas are still in the process of drying out.
In St. Genevieve County, the oldest continuously operated
ferry based on the Mississippi River established in 1798,
essential to the lives of many, has been out of operation.
Southern Jefferson County construction projects delayed. From
Joplin to Tuscaloosa, our Nation has experienced its share of
natural disasters in these past months.
While we can't predict a tornado, we can predict floods. We
need to reach out to local officials to offer help where we
can, both in relief efforts but also future preventative
measures.
Because of time, I am going to submit the rest of my
testimony for the record. I look forward to hearing the panel
and the experts that have assembled here today to be sure we
are prepared, that we plan properly, and that we revisit our
planning, based on these recent events, to be sure that we can
minimize this kind of devastation again. I yield back my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Cravaack, you have an opening statement?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Chairman, but I will pass and look
forward to the testimony of my colleagues and the visitors
today.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Mr. Boswell?
Mr. Boswell. Well, thank you very much. And I would like to
make a statement for the record, if I could.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
Mr. Boswell. Thank you so much. Well, first I want to thank
you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member Bishop, and today Mr.
Carnahan, for holding this important hearing. As a Member of
Congress representing a State bordering the Missouri River, I
can attest to the validity of this hearing.
Mr. Chairman, from time to time I believe circumstances
require us all to re-evaluate plans and concepts that we
thought were sufficient to deal with certain events. I believe
sometimes circumstances require us to re-evaluate priorities to
deal with changing realities. There is nothing wrong with
acknowledging this; in fact, I believe it should be encouraged.
However, it does seem that, on occasion, Government gets in
the way of this acknowledgment. And when it does, the machinery
of Government often times does not have the flexibility to
change and adapt in a timely manner. This does not always
happen. Yet, when it does, it can bring long-lasting impacts on
affected communities.
The size and scope of the Missouri River flooding that we
witnessed this year, I believe, is an event that requires us to
re-evaluate our priorities and adapt and alter programs and
responses to deal with the changing realities. The length of
time that we witnessed historic flood waters was something I
think no one was really prepared to deal with.
For example, temporary levees were constructed to protect
farmland and communities. According to conversations I have had
with people in the southwestern part of Iowa, local officials
are being told to deconstruct those temporary levees. Why?
Well, a little investigation. They were required to agree to
dismantle as soon as the water receded, or they wouldn't get
the temporary levee. And flood water was on the way.
According to that, we do not yet know--again, we do not yet
know--what type of winter we are going to witness now, and what
type of runoff we are going to have in the spring, as a result.
So why must we spend money to deconstruct something that is
doing nothing but protecting communities when we do not know
yet whether or not we are going to have to spend money on
rebuilding it in a few months? Or next spring?
Is the answer because it is not in a master plan, that
recent events are proven to be outdated? That simply makes no
sense to me. But it is those types of actions that drive up
costs and, frankly, drives up the blood pressure of local
citizens who have to deal with these changing realities.
Furthermore, the scope of flooding events across the
country should call into question spending priorities on how we
can better focus national resources when it comes to flood
protection, conservation, recreation, and so on. Personally, I
do believe in conservation. However, we must not sacrifice
flood protection and the protection of lives and property for
the sake of conservation. If we do, there will simply be
nothing left to conserve, as the flood waters wash away natural
habitats and communities in their path.
If there should be tough budgetary decision--and at this
time I believe we all agree that there must be--then we must
prioritize flood protection and mitigation above others.
However, over the last decade or so funding levels of flood
protection in the Missouri River States have steadily declined,
where funding levels for environmental works have steadily
increased. This is not to say that there is not a time and
place for environmental work, for there are. But we, our
leaders, simply--we, as leaders, simply cannot sacrifice entire
communities by continually short-changing flood protection.
So it is my sincere hope that this hearing will provide the
committee with the information needed to make an informed
decision on how best to move forward. And once again, I thank
the chairman and ranking member for calling this hearing to
order. Appreciate your effort. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. We have two more opening statements. Mr.
Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This
is a very important hearing. The river covers 2,600 miles.
Certainly it is not--I am not as directly affected as most of
the Members here, but I am concerned about this.
I am particularly concerned about the testimony of two
later witnesses, Tom Waters of the Missouri Levee and Drainage
District Association, who has a section of his testimony
entitled, ``The Corps is Not Listening,'' and the testimony--a
similar testimony from another witness, Brad Lawrence, the
public works director of Fort Pierre, South Dakota, in which
they basically describe either an arrogant or a don't-care
attitude by the Army Corps that they are going to do whatever
they want to do, regardless of how the people feel.
And then I also noted the testimony of Kathy Kunkel, the
county clerk of Holt County, Missouri, and she talks about the
fish and wildlife service dictatorially demanding that 160,000
acres in her county be purchased. This--of course we have
already heard they were talking about maybe millions of acres
that needed to be purchased throughout these different States.
The Federal Government already owns far too much land
already, about 30 percent of the land of this country. And
State and local governments own another 20 percent. And at the
same time that the police and fire and teachers and everybody
keeps coming to local and State governments and the Federal
Government wanting more money, Government at all levels keeps
taking more and more land off the tax rolls. Those things just
are in conflict. And the sooner we realize that private
property is not only a very important part of our freedom, but
a vital part of our prosperity, the better off this country is
going to be.
And then we get into the endangered species part about the
sturgeon. And some of this flooding may have been caused by the
Federal Government in the first place, trying to protect the
sturgeon.
And I remember years ago in my home area of east Tennessee,
we got into a battle for years over the snail darter. And the
experts all told us that the snail darter--that that was the
only place where you could find snail darters. And then, after
we go through hundreds of millions of dollars and cases going
all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, and then the Congress
overruling the fish and wildlife service and the Federal
bureaucrats, they then--surprise, surprise--find that there are
snail darters all over the place, Oregon and everyplace else.
So, this is a very important hearing. I am sorry that I
won't be able to stay for a lot of it. But I appreciate your
calling this hearing, and thank you for letting me say a few
words at this time.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member,
for holding this obviously very important hearing.
Flooding on the Missouri River has become such a regular
occurrence, it is really kind of hard to keep up with. But this
year, 2011, was actually one for the record books. You know, we
don't know what the full cost of this is going to end up being,
but it is probably going to be several billion dollars. And
that includes agriculture losses, it includes business
interruption, infrastructure damage, individual and public
assistance. And, tragically, we did have the loss of life as a
result of this.
In northwest Missouri, there are thousands of acres of
farmland that are utterly devastated. And many of those acres
are never going to see a crop again. Road closures have cost
businesses revenue. That includes gas stations, restaurants,
and retailers. And ultimately, it cost local jurisdictions a
lot of revenue. States, counties, cities, and a lot of other
local entities are going to continue to have to spend money
they simply don't have for critical infrastructure repairs.
The BNSF Railroad, which is a major economic generator in
the Midwest and nationwide has spent literally hundreds of
millions of dollars as a result of this year's flood. And when
you include re-routing trains, delays, increased fuel and
labor, the dollar amount continues to go up. The domino effect
on small businesses that depend on the timely delivery of goods
is enormous, and yet another headache they have to deal with
during this time of economic uncertainty.
It is very important that we hear from our witnesses today
about what the devastation of this flood has caused. But it is
just as important to hear what we think the future needs to be
when it comes to managing the river. And I believe, personally,
that we are asking the Corps of Engineers to juggle too many
priorities. And I think we have to make clear, once and for
all, that prevention of flooding has to be the number one
priority. And we also need to strip away a lot of other less
important priorities.
I have introduced legislation that would make flood control
the priority of the Corps in managing the river, and remove
fish and wildlife as an authorized purpose. We have to get our
spending in order. From Gavins Point Dam to the mouth of the
Missouri River, we are slated to spend $73 million on wildlife
reclamation and habitat creation, and we are only slated to
spend $6 million on levee maintenance in that same stretch of
river. I pointed this out on the floor of the House earlier
this year. That is 12 times more money on birds and fish than
it is on levee maintenance.
My colleague from Iowa, Congressman Steve King, has also
introduced legislation that will require the Corps to take into
consideration the new data points established by this year's
flood. And I doubt anyone contends these actions alone would
obviously entirely mitigate the possibility of future flooding,
but I strongly believe it is a huge step in the right
direction.
And the fact of the matter is when you have years like we
have had this year, with record snow melt, there should be some
adjustments made for the consideration of people's lives.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the
opportunity to be here, and I look forward to hearing from all
of our witnesses on their testimony.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Today we have two panels. Our first panel is
Members of Congress, and our second panel is the Corps and some
other stakeholder people involved in this policy of how we
regulate the Missouri River.
But first of all, our first panelists, we are doing this by
the order you came in, so we are trying to be fair. And the
plan is not to ask Members of Congress questions, so we can get
on to the second panel. So this will be just making your
testimony.
And, as the first Member, I welcome Mr. Latham.

TESTIMONY OF HON. TOM LATHAM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF IOWA; HON. RICK BERG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA; HON. STEVE KING, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF IOWA; HON. LYNN
JENKINS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF KANSAS;
HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF MISSOURI; HON. KRISTI L. NOEM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA; HON. EMANUEL CLEAVER,
A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI; HON.
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE
OF MISSOURI; HON. JEFF FORTENBERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA; AND HON. LEE TERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEBRASKA

Mr. Latham. I thank the chairman and the ranking member of
the subcommittee for having this hearing. I'd like to ask
unanimous consent to have placed in record comments of General
Derek Hill, the chairman of Governor Branstad's Iowa Missouri
River Recovery Coordination Task Force.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Latham. Thank you. Just a couple points. I have got an
appropriations meeting going on right now, for which--I am
going to have to leave, but I think it is important to note
that, even with all the devastation brought by this flood, to
the citizens, the towns, the communities, farms and businesses,
and all the attendant economic costs, we still don't know the
full extent of damage, because there are areas we still can't
get in to evaluate.
As is the case with other States, the two major priorities
in Iowa are the restoration of flood control facilities and
increased prioritization of flood control and the management of
the Missouri River. In short, the residents must be protected,
which means we have to focus on repairing the flood control
infrastructure like levees, and getting those levees back to
pre-disaster conditions.
The levee damage is not just from the breaches. The entire
levee infrastructure is weakened and eroded. And the state of
affairs--this must be addressed now, before spring.
As to the river management, the Corps has made some
encouraging comments about flexibility. But I think we need
more than promising comments about the management of the river
flow. We need to take active steps ahead of the next flood
season.
Just one more point on the Iowa transportation roadways.
Close to 250 miles of roads were impacted. In my State, the
Iowa DOT staff has done an absolutely great job. There is still
an awful lot more work to be done. But I think it is important
for this committee, Transportation and Infrastructure, to look
at the highway emergency repair funding regime, as our
experience in Iowa suggests that some changes really need to be
made to the statute.
With that, I appreciate being here very much. I will have a
more extensive statement for the record. But thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Berg from North Dakota.
Mr. Berg. Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member Carnahan and
the rest of the subcommittee, I want to thank you for allowing
us to speak today regarding the management of the Missouri
River, and also the operational plans for the future.
Today's hearing is focused on the 2011 flood events along
the Missouri River. As you know, North Dakota was devastated by
this year's unprecedented flooding throughout the State. The
damage is significant, with thousands of homes damaged, tens of
thousands of North Dakotans displaced, hundreds of thousands of
acres of farmland flooded, and severe damage to infrastructure.
I firmly believe that flooding along the Missouri River was
both natural and manmade. North Dakotans are frustrated with
the experience they had this past year, and rightly concerned
about the potential for 2012 flooding. Many questions still
need to be answered regarding what went wrong and what actions
should be taken to prevent a similar flood in the future.
Specifically, questions have been raised about the
management of the reservoir system by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. We need to know more about the information that the
Corps used in its decisionmaking process. It has been noted by
the subcommittee inundation maps used by the Corps and other
Federal agencies were inadequate and non-existent. In some
cases, the only tools available were 100-year flood plain maps.
Many were inaccurate.
Further, the Corps needs to better explain the timing of
the decisions, and why they were made when they were made.
Those decisions led to tremendous devastation. And the
residents of all our States deserve answers.
I look forward to hearing from those responsible, and what
the plan is to ensure that similar flooding does not occur in
the future.
Regardless, we can't look ahead to a long-term management
solution while we are still fighting flooding next year. I have
and will continue to urge the Corps to first focus on the
immediate planning for the 2012 flood season before
implementing a long-term strategy. Specifically, the Corps
needs to address what actions are prudent for them to take next
year to prevent a repeat of the disaster for 2012.
I fear the Corps has been operating under an assumption
that this year's flood was a singular historic event. I think
this is naive and short-sighted. Currently the National Weather
Service is forecasting a La Nina climate pattern for this
winter, with long-term outlooks predicting a fourth consecutive
year with in-flows above normal into the Missouri River system.
The Corps must take into account both current wet conditions in
the upper basin and forecasts in their operating plan and
management decisions.
Recently, Governor Dalrymple and the North Dakota State
Water Commission asked the Corps to lower Lake Sakakawea, our
major reservoir, by 2\1/2\ feet to provide more storage
capacity and additional flood protection for this upcoming
spring. The Corps dismissed this request, a decision I strongly
opposed. I am cautiously optimistic about the Corps' recent
announcement that they will take a more flexible approach to
managing the river system, and will be more aggressive in
managing water releases during the winter and spring. And I
appreciate the Corps' stated commitment to provide more
frequent communications with the State, local, and county
officials.
But as we await this final version of the Corps' annual
operating plan this December, I believe it is in the best
interest of the Corps to support a cautionary approach to the
management of the Missouri River system. Going forward, the
Corps must consider flood protection above all else in managing
the Missouri River system. We are aware of the congressionally
authorized purposes associated with the Missouri River system,
purposes such as recreation, hydropower, irrigation, fishing,
wildlife, water supply, and water quality. All remain
important. However, all of those purposes are secondary to the
need for dependable flood control.
The clear consensus from seven out of eight States that
were affected by the 2011 flooding event is that flood control
must be the highest priority. I will continue to pressure the
Corps to make flood protection the top priority in managing the
river system. I will demand greater transparency in
forecasting, and more meaningful public meetings regarding its
management.
I would ask to submit my entire statement for the record,
and I would like to submit a more detailed article about the
infrastructure damage experienced by the BNSF Railway. And
also, I would ask that testimony by our Governor, Jack
Dalrymple, on November 1st also be submitted for the record.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[Hon. Rick Berg's statement is featured with the other
witnesses' statements--please refer to the ``Prepared
Statements Submitted by Witnesses'' section of the table of
contents. The other information follows:]

Mr. Berg. Again, I thank the chairman and ranking member
and committee for granting our request for this hearing, and
assisting our bipartisan effort to gain answers from the Corps
and work towards long-term flood protection.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, that is so ordered, the record, your
testimony written and the Governor's testimony.
Mr. Berg. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. King from Iowa. Welcome.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Carnahan. I appreciate this hearing today, and I appreciate the
testimony of the other Members so far. And I completely agree
with what I heard the gentleman from North Dakota testify just
ahead of us, and along with the rest of the testimony that I
have heard.
I certainly support Congressman Graves's bill that sets
some priorities. And I have introduced a piece of legislation,
H.R. 2942, that does not change the order of those priorities
but does require the Corps of Engineers to recalculate the
storage space to protect us from serious downstream flooding.
And I will just touch some of the bases along the way on
the scope of this damage. Your opening statement covered most
of it, Mr. Chairman. And it is this, that the greatest amount
of runoff we had ever experienced, in nearly 61 million acre
feet, the discharge at Gavins Point Dam is a key component of
this. That is the last valve going into the Missouri River out
of the six dams.
The highest discharge we had ever experienced in the past
was 70,000 cubic feet per second. We found by midsummer--or I
will say by June, about June 14th or 15th--it was kicked up to
160,000, more than twice as much discharge as we had ever seen.
That brought about water in the Missouri River bottom that, by
the time you get to Sioux City, it is--they had--they saw
flooding in Sioux City, just downstream from Sioux City--the
river was typically about 1\1/2\ miles wide, and that is
narrow. A few miles south of there, at Blencoe, 8 miles wide.
By the time you got to I-680 north of Omaha, where I cut across
the river to go to the airport from the Iowa side, the water
was 11 miles wide.
And it came back together through the levees and through
Omaha and Council Bluffs, where we had 30,000 people in Council
Bluffs living below the water line in the river for 3\1/2\ or 4
months, while the water table was at the level it was. And only
the levee protected them from becoming another New Orleans, and
it had some leaks and some seepages. But downstream from there
in Glenwood and south, then the river became 4, 5, and 6 miles
wide on down into Missouri, on through Sam Graves's district.
That water wasn't just standing there, as people envision,
a normal flood. This water was running 10 to 11 miles an hour
in the channel and where it was spread out 11 miles wide it was
still 4 to 5 miles an hour, out against the base of the hills.
And so what you saw was hundreds of thousands of acres covered
by sand that now today, when the water has gone down, it looks
like Iraq.
And the loss in crop damage that--just a back of the
envelope calculation--that we lost in Iowa and Missouri, not
counting Nebraska and Kansas and the Dakotas, but just Iowa and
Missouri, the equivalent feed value lost is more than half of
the wheat crop in Montana, for example. I use Montana, because
we would like to have them join all the other States affected
in wanting to control this discharge to prevent serious
downstream flooding.
The Corps of Engineers, in response to much of our pressure
that has come, has said initially, ``Well, this is--we are not
going to change the management of the river. We think this is a
500-year event.'' I want to emphasize that we have a 150 years
of records, and they are declaring a 500-year event. If you had
10,000 years of records and it happened a couple of times a
millennia, you might be able to say this is a 500-year event.
No mortal can tell you it is a 500-year event. Lord knows why I
have had to live through so many 500-year weather events in my
short time here on this earth.
And so that is, I think, an arrogant position on the part
of the Corps. And to declare that they are going to manage this
river--the first slide that they put up is ``Congressionally
Authorized.'' And then they decide that they are going to
manage the river without the direction of Congress.
I think we have to tell them--even though they have changed
their position now to a third position--first one was, ``We are
not going to change the management because it is a 500-year
event;'' second one is, ``Well, we might because we have heard
enough from you that we want to at least pacify those objectors
that are there;'' third one is, ``Now we think we will lower
the levels a little more next year,'' but they don't want to do
something permanent. We have to tell them. If we don't tell
them, they will slide back to being run by the environmental
interests, as opposed to the first priority, which I have heard
stated multiple times here: Protect us from the flooding from
serious downstream.
And additionally to that--and my bill, H.R. 2942 has the
support of most of the Members--it is bipartisan--most of the
Members affected by this. And I would think the others may want
to take a good look at it again. But it is a very simple bill
that does two things. It tells the Corps of Engineers that,
``You shall recalculate your storage space to protect us from
the greatest runoff ever.'' That is now 2011 instead of 1881.
I would pose that if we had the runoff in 1881 that we had
in 2011, they would have built a Pick-Sloan program to protect
us, and we wouldn't have had this event here in this year,
because it would have been--the storage would have protected us
from it.
So, that is the first thing it tells it to do. And then it
says, ``You shall reach those targets by March 1st,'' which is
something that is part of their language.
So, then, one more closing point here--and I know that my
time has run out--we also have levees that they are not
reconstructing back to pre-flood elevations. And that means
that in my district--in Sam Graves's district, in particular--
they are repairing some of these blown-out levees with sand to
the 25-year event, which means that for the last 5 years it
would flood anyway. Our people in the river bottom then have to
pay triple crop insurance, they can't rebuild, they can't plant
anything, and the budgets that they could do interdepartmental
transfers on, looking at 2002 by Corps' numbers, 13 percent of
their budget was flood control, 13 percent was environmental.
2012 they have 0 percent flood control, 52 percent for
environmental. I suggest that no environmental money gets spent
until the levees are repaired to pre-flood elevations.
I would conclude that testimony, and thank you for your
attention, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Ms. Jenkins from Kansas.
Ms. Jenkins. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member
Carnahan for giving us this opportunity to testify on this very
important matter today. Due to incredibly heavy snow runoff and
spring rainfall, the reservoirs on the upper Missouri River
Basin were filled beyond specified capacity this spring. As a
result, on June 23rd, the United States Army Corps of Engineers
directed the release of water at a record level of 160,000
cubic feet per second from the Gavins Point Dam on the upper
Missouri River. This decision by the Corps more than doubled
the previous record release of water from Gavins Point and put
communities, homeowners, farmers, and critical road and rail
transportation routes in Atchison, Doniphan, and Leavenworth
Counties in my congressional district in the path of the raging
Missouri River.
After touring affected communities, I am convinced that the
Corps' management plan can and must be improved to ensure that
everything possible is done to prevent flooding of this
magnitude in the future. For this reason, Senator Roberts and I
have introduced bills in the House and the Senate that will
require the Secretary of the Army, acting through the chief of
engineers, to take into account all hydrologic data from the
events leading up to this year's flooding in conducting
Missouri River Basin operations in the future.
Such data would include rainfall, as well as snowpack from
the mountains and the plains, and must be included in all plans
involving the management of the Missouri River. This data
should help limit the risk of future record flood events, and
will allow the Corps to ensure that flood mitigation on the
Missouri River is the top priority, without directly
jeopardizing the river's other functions, such as navigation,
recreation, or water and energy supply.
In addition, it will ensure that vital lines of commerce
along the river, including railroads which sustained hundreds
of millions of dollars of damage during this flood season will
not be interrupted by a similar disaster.
I am hopeful that this hearing will help convince the Army
Corps of Engineers to consider the lessons of this summer and
take the necessary measures to prevent these types of floods
from happening in the future.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having us. And I would
ask that my testimony be included in the record.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler from Missouri, welcome.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
having this hearing. Thank you, Ranking Member Carnahan, my
other Missouri colleagues, for your leadership on this issue,
as well.
There is about 180 miles of the Missouri River that flows
through the Fourth District of Missouri, which I represent.
This stretch of river is lined by about 35 levees designed to
protect some of the best farmland this country has to offer
from being ruined by raging floods. This spring and summer
every one of these levees was under constant assault by
hundreds of millions of gallons of flood water. Farmers
scratched out schedules with their neighbors so that they could
hold constant vigil 24 hours a day for months on end.
Now, think about that. During the watches of the night they
were on their cell phones, stationed at different places along
the levee for months. They gave time away from their families
and their businesses to hold vigil over these levees. They were
watching for breaks, seepage, sand boils, acting quickly to
shore them up, if needed.
Even though almost every one of our levees became saturated
and sustained significant damage, they performed remarkably
well, as a whole, with only enough overtoppings or failures to
count on one hand. But our farmers lost crops due to backed up
rainwater that could not flow out to the river. The Food and
Agriculture Policy Research Institute at the University of
Missouri, also known as FAPRI, estimates that at least 28,000
acres of farmland was flooded in my district due to that
backwater, destroying over $23.8 million worth of crops in my
district.
Now our levees are in desperate need of repairs before next
spring's flood season. Time is of the essence. The months of
complete saturation of the levees and high waters have left
their toll. The levees are weakened and in need of repair now.
Red tape needs to be cut and contracts for repair need to be
let now. It is 3 months as of tomorrow before the beginning of
March and the rain season again. We need to have these levees
repaired.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency stated earlier
this month that there is a high probability of flooding in the
Missouri River Basin in 2012. Congress and the Corps of
Engineers must make the repair a priority to avoid a similar
situation occurring next year, or we could be here again.
Many residents feel that these floods could have been
reduced, if not completely avoided, by earlier action and
better prioritization of uses by the Army Corps of Engineers.
I look forward to hearing the other testimony today and
receiving the Corps' reports on its actions. And my fellow
Members and I will continue to press them to make flood control
the number one priority of the river system at all times.
I want to echo the comments of my fellow colleagues here
and urge them to take into account: one, last year's runoff;
two, increased capacity of the reservoir for flood control; and
three, act sooner in the event of significant snowfall/rainfall
this winter.
Mr. Chairman, I also appreciate your invitation to
introduce one of my constituents who will be testifying before
you here on today's panel.
Tom Waters is a seventh generation Missouri farmer who
lives near Orrick, Missouri, in the Missouri River flood plain,
where he produces corn, soybeans, wheat, and alfalfa. Tom
serves as chairman of the Missouri Levee and Drainage District
Association, where he represents not only the levee and
drainage districts, but also the businesses and others
interested in the activities surrounding the Missouri River and
its tributaries. In addition to holding several other public
offices, he serves as president on three local levee and
drainage district boards, which, combined, represent over
21,000 acres of Missouri River bottom land.
He is an articulate spokesperson for the farmers of the
Heartland. So please consider what he has to say. Ask him
questions. Because he truly is an expert on this issue.
So thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for your courtesy and for
your interest in this vitally important topic. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mrs. Noem from South Dakota, welcome.
Mrs. Noem. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing today. And thank you, Representative Carnahan, as
well, for being here and bringing attention to the Missouri
River system, which experienced devastating flooding this year.
Hundreds of homes in South Dakota were damaged and destroyed.
Businesses were disrupted. Many were displaced for months.
This was not like most natural disasters. This flood lasted
for over 90 days. It began in late May and it ended in late
September. The situation began in February as runoff levels
into the system from snowpack in the mountains and northern
plains began to far exceed normal amounts. As flood storage
within the system depleted throughout the spring, releases
across the system were not increased to adequately compensate
for the risk of future runoffs and rains.
Then came May. With flood storage depleted, torrential
rains fell in Montana. On May 23rd, the Corps announced that it
was increasing releases to 70,000 cubic feet per second from
the Oahe Dam near Pierre, South Dakota. This was 11,000 cfs
over the previous record. Residents and communities along the
river began to sandbag, constructing berms. Yet 5 days later it
was announced that the five lower dams would reach 150,000 cfs,
nearly double what the Corps had announced just days earlier.
Releases finally peaked at around 160 cfs for the four dams in
South Dakota. The result was a slow-moving disaster of epic
proportions.
I believe, as others have stated, that this flood was part
natural disaster and part manmade disaster. Certainly we cannot
discount that some amount of human error did occur. The Corps
has repeatedly reiterated that it operated in accordance with
the master manual, and that rain in May was a significant
contributing factor in the flooding. However, this reasoning
does not account for the runoff that occurred from February to
April.
While it is likely that some amount of flooding could not
have been avoided, given the runoff and the rain flowing into
the system, surely something could have been done differently
that would have avoided releases that were double and nearly
triple previous records.
From all the information that I have seen, I believe the
Corps of Engineers carries some responsibility for this
disaster. That level of responsibility should be explored
during this hearing.
Another area where I disagree with the Corps is on timely
notification of residents about the possibility of flooding.
This is what I hear the most from people back in South Dakota.
Many of those along the river can prepare for higher than
normal releases, if given reasonable advanced notice and
adequate information. In fact, that happened in 1997, when we
faced historic levels. This year they were afforded neither.
I hope the Corps is committed to more effective
notification about runoff, releases, and the risk of flooding
in the future. And as we try to rebuild and put this behind us,
there are many lingering questions. The biggest one is: Could
this ever happen again? And this is of particular concern
because the National Weather Service forecasts indicate that we
are continuing in a wet cycle with significant precipitation
and snowpack predicted for 2012.
We should have learned something from this year's
experience to better plan for future wet cycles. The Corps
needs flexible management of the river to account for these
trends, and still allow for the proper balance between the
authorized purposes of the system, with the number one priority
being flood control.
Witnessing this disaster and reviewing the management plan
going forward have left me with a lot of questions. The first
one is: On November 4th the Corps indicated it would change its
approach to the 2012 annual operating plan as a result of
public forums. What does it intend to change? And how is it
going to take a ``more aggressive stance,'' as it said?
What is the Corps doing to promote a more dynamic, real-
time decisionmaking in the future, including modifying their
forecasting and hydrologic models, and incorporating all of the
available data?
Number three, the Corps has both internal and external
review panels going on right now. They should be completed by
the end of the year. What is the process for modifying their
management practices, based on the finding of these panels?
Number four, does the Corps have the flexibility within the
manual to more adequately deal with future wet cycles and the
type of conditions we experienced this year? The Corps has cost
estimates for repairs to the system--finally--caused by the
damage this year. But do they have estimates for the total
economic cost of the flooding this year?
This flood event and future management questions regarding
the Missouri River system are why this hearing is so critically
important. I look forward to the testimony of the other
witnesses.
And I have my own written statement, Mr. Chairman, I would
like to submit for the record. And I also would like to ask
that statements provided by Laurie Gill, the mayor of Pierre,
Jeff Dooley, manager of the Dakota Dunes Community Improvement
District, and Kim Blaeser, a home owner and treasurer of the
Riv-r-Land Homeowners Association, also be included into the
record.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[Hon. Kristi L. Noem's statement is featured with the other
witnesses' statements--please refer to the ``Prepared
Statements Submitted by Witnesses'' section of the table of
contents. The other information follows:]

Mrs. Noem. I would like to take an opportunity to quickly
introduce one of the witnesses that is going to be on the
second panel, if that would be fine with you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Proceed.
Mrs. Noem. Brad Lawrence is the director of public works
for the city of Fort Pierre, one of the communities that was
devastated by the flooding this year. He has extensive
knowledge and experience with the river system. He was one of
the very first people to sound the alarm that flooding was
going to happen back in February, long before the record rains
ever came.
I am pleased he is here today. I would ask that his full
written testimony and statement be included in the record, as
well.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify
before the committee today, and for holding this hearing. And I
certainly yield back any balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Cleaver from Missouri, welcome.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman Gibbs,
Mr. Carnahan sitting in for Ranking Member Bishop, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for allowing me to provide
testimony on the tragedy that occurred in my home State and
throughout the Midwest this past summer.
We need to examine the events and actions that led to this
flood and ensure that resources are available to assist Federal
agencies, States, and communities with recovery efforts and
preparations for 2012. We also must re-examine the way we
predict and prepare for floods. Flood control must be the
primary purpose of the Missouri River reservoir system.
Kansas City was extremely fortunate to escape, for the most
part, the massive devastation that nearby communities upstream
endured. But it certainly has not escaped in the past, and may
not in the future. Kansas City is particularly vulnerable to
flooding, sitting at the convergence of the Kaw, Missouri, and
Blue Rivers. As mayor of Kansas City in the 1990s, I had to
deal with the devastation and aftermath of the great flood of
1993. That year the Missouri River crested at a record 48.87
feet. Damage to the city's utilities and public infrastructure
reached over $17 million.
Currently, eight Federal levees in the metro area--and
because they are now rickety and worn through the decades--span
60 miles and protect $15 billion worth of assets. We have been
trying to fund and complete projects to improve and repair
these levees and other flood control projects since I was
mayor.
I would like to highlight a few impacts of this year's
flooding of the Missouri River, commonly known as The Big
Muddy. By midsummer, all non-Federal levees in Missouri north
of Kansas City were breached or overtopped, as well as several
others downstream. North of the river, the suburbs of Parkville
experienced flooding, including the English Landing Park. Even,
Mr. Chairman, areas where levees held, fields experienced
damage from seepage and sand boils.
I visited several farms east of Kansas City this summer
that had private levee seepage in their fields. The Miami Levee
District Number One in Saline County experienced flooded fields
from seep water, causing fields to remain unplanted and
drowning their plants. One private levee in the multi-bin
bottoms of Saline County was breached in early July. Bottom
land farmers in Saline County recorded 128 consecutive days
with the river above flood level, and the river in that area
did not go below flood stage until September 29th. Clay,
Jackson, Ray, Lafayette, and Saline Counties experienced a
total of over 31,300 crop land acres flooded, and over $26.6
million in lost market revenue. Fields may take between 3 and 5
years to come back to full production. And perhaps 10 to 15
percent of flooded land will never return to production.
Kansas City is not, as the Nation knows, a professional
football powerhouse. However, it is a major warehouse and
distribution hub, and a leading agro-business center. The metro
area has the second busiest rail yards in the Nation. And it is
first in the Nation, in terms of tonnage.
Interstate 29 is a major travel and shipping corridor
northward from the city. The prolonged closure of I-29 and
resulting damage to the city's commerce was particularly
injurious for a city founded by traders in the late 1700s.
Great Plains Energy, the parent company of our local
utility, KCP&L, reported a 4-percent drop in third-quarter
earnings, particularly and partially due to expenses from the
flooding. The placement of several power plants near the river
required KCP&L to sandbag, build concrete walls, and other
physical preparations to protect the plant, purchase additional
power in case the facilities had to shut down, and conserve
coal while the railroad service to plants was closed.
As you can see, Mr. Chairman, this photograph is of the
plant in June, the end of June. And the next photograph is a
few days later, July 8th. Almost everything around it under
water. BNSF Railroad had about one-third of their 1,500 trains
on the network rerouted daily during the height of the flood.
Congress and the Corps must learn from this tragedy and
modify flood control policies to decrease the likelihood of
such an event happening again. We also need to understand why
increased releases from upstream reservoirs were not occurring
earlier in the spring. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration can predict patterns such as La Nina seasons,
and provide monthly precipitation forecasts.
Mr. Chairman, we have a very serious problem. It is not
going to go away without congressional involvement. It is my
hope that, with the Missouri delegation across political lines
are coming together saying we need to act, I think most of us
support our colleague, Mr. Graves's, legislation, and it is my
hope that we can move quickly to get this completed.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer from Missouri, welcome.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank Ranking
Member Carnahan as well, for holding what I believe is an
extremely important hearing.
There are thousands of people living and working along the
140 miles of the Missouri River that run through my district.
It is essential that they have the support needed to protect
their lives, businesses, and property from flooding. These
people, along with millions living throughout the lower
Mississippi River Basin, depend on the steady flow of the
Missouri for their power generation, navigation needs, and
ability to move goods to both domestic and international market
places.
This summer a high Missouri River and full reservoirs
served as a prescription for disaster, resulting in a
devastating flood that impacted hundreds of families and
businesses that call the banks of the river home.
In January, snowpack in the upper basin was 141 percent of
normal, and forecasts of the NOAA predicted that runoff this
spring would be historically high, and it wound up being even
higher than the forecasts. Releases from Gavins Point Dam were
pushed to 160,000 cubic feet per second, more than double all
previous releases, as has been detailed here already this
morning.
Ultimately, hundreds of thousands of acres of farmland were
flooded. Some farms were under water for more than 15 weeks,
resulting in complete loss of crops for many.
According to a recent study conducted by the University of
Missouri, more than 207,000 acres of crop land were destroyed
in 24 Missouri counties alone, resulting in nearly $176 million
in lost revenue. This translates into a total economic loss in
the region of more than $326 million.
To address this levee damage the Corps says they won't have
the funding necessary to rebuild the levees to pre-flood
levels. However, one can't help but take notice of the
significant disparity of funding for habitat restoration and
land acquisition, and then the funding dedicated to operations
and maintenance. Mr. Graves has a bill that points this out and
addresses this issue.
There is a tremendous emphasis right now that has been
placed on habitat restoration and compliance with the
Endangered Species Act instead of the protection of life and
property. We think this needs to be re-prioritized. It is
obvious the Corps is juggling too many competing interests. And
again, Mr. King has a bill also that addresses this issue.
While the upper and lower basins have historically had
different management philosophies, I believe it is time to work
together to ensure that the best policies affecting the
Missouri River are put in place. After this year's event, it is
obvious that planning must change, and management must change,
to ensure this event is not allowed to happen again.
Flood control must be the Corps' primary objective in
managing the river. And levee repair and reconstruction must be
a priority. I urge the committee's consideration of these and
all the other Members that are here today, their comments, and
to take action.
Mr. Chairman, with that I yield back. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here this morning.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Fortenberry from Nebraska, welcome.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing to examine the impacts of this
Missouri flood, and the strategies for potential management
reforms that will help mitigate the consequences of such
flooding in the future. We really appreciate your time.
This summer, as Congressman King so vividly articulated, I
saw for myself the devastation caused by the flooding along the
Missouri. In Nebraska, communities from Blair to Brownville, I
witnessed the hardships imposed upon families, individuals,
communities, farmers.
I saw the efforts of volunteers and city crews armed with
sand bags, working day and night to protect home, businesses,
parks, and city infrastructure. I saw the successful measures
taken at our two nuclear energy power facilities in Brownville
and Fort Calhoun, to ensure the flood waters posed no further
threat to public safety. Frankly, Mr. Chairman, it was a bit
surreal to see a boat tied to a nuclear power plant.
Nebraska, like other States along the Missouri River Basin,
was hit very hard. Families' lives were turned upside down.
Some Nebraskans lost their homes. Others lost farms and
businesses. A recent analysis commissioned by the Nebraska Farm
Bureau estimated the total impacts of the flood related to
Nebraska agriculture is set at about $190 million. According to
the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency, public assistance
estimates for damage from the flooding are in excess of $150
million. Individual assistance has exceeded $3.7 million, and
small business assistance is more than $3.6 million. Overall
projection of damages along the Missouri River totaled more
than $2 billion, as we have heard.
I know that many employees of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers worked very hard during the period of the flooding to
keep citizens informed of water levels and threats to public
safety, while providing direct and technical assistance. They
also remained accessible through various avenues of contact
with the public and through Government agencies.
During and after the flooding events, though, many of my
constituents questioned river management decisions made by the
Corps, and these decisions' impacts on the severity of the
flooding. While it is clear that certain areas affecting the
Missouri River experienced record amounts of snowmelt and
precipitation this year, creating record levels of runoff, it
is necessary that we thoroughly examine how existing river
management policies have played a role in the flooding and its
dramatic impacts.
We must also take this opportunity to consider new
strategies for flood control, moving forward. The 2011 flood
and its extraordinary consequences necessitate a re-evaluation
of river management.
To this end I have joined several of my colleagues here,
the Missouri River Basin Members of Congress, in supporting
legislative efforts to compel a reassessment of upstream
management for the purpose of preventing catastrophic flooding
events that negatively impact all Missouri River users.
One of these proposals by Mr. King, H.R. 2942, would direct
the chief of the Army Corps of Engineers to revise the Missouri
River mainstream reservoir system master water control manual
to ensure greater storage capacity to prevent serious
downstream flooding. Upstream reservoirs would be required to
remain low enough to accommodate high levels of runoff and
prevent devastating downstream flooding.
On a related matter, earlier this month I introduced H.R.
3347 to exempt any road, highway, or bridge damaged by a
natural disaster, including a flood, from duplicative
environmental document reviews if the road, highway, or bridge
is reconstructed in the same location.
We must do all that is possible to help prevent another
tragedy. For the sake of public safety, a reassessment of the
Corps' Missouri River policies is in order.
It is my hope that today's hearing will be a constructive
first step in this regard.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Terry from Nebraska, welcome.
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate your
flexibility in allowing me to come in at the last moment.
Mr. Gibbs. You made it just in time.
Mr. Terry. We have a markup on farm dust bill occurring and
we just broke, so I was able to come over here. But I think it
is interesting that while we are dealing with protecting
farmers from EPA and dust, any potential dust protection
regulations, that many of our farmers were under water this
entire summer. And now, since the river has receded to almost
normal level, what is left is sand and debris, making farmland
unusable for years to come. So, the water has receded, but the
issues affecting our farmland and bottom lands have not.
My constituents, as Jeff Fortenberry's constituents, are
worried already about next year. And that is why a bill like
Steve King's bill is important to discuss, and the role of the
Corps of Engineers, going forward. My constituents and I--and
discussions with many of our political leaders throughout the
State--firmly believe that the Corps of Engineers must return
to their basic principles and purpose of the dam system along
the Missouri River, which is flood control.
In my discussions with the Corps of Engineers, they have
informed me that they have six, seven, eight different criteria
that are their priorities. I am sorry, but you can't have eight
different items, many of which are in conflict with each other,
as your priorities. Pick one, and then try to work the others
in where they may. But having pallid sturgeon and piping
plovers as the priority one year, and flooding the next,
doesn't work.
So, therefore, I would encourage this committee to look
forward at creating a priority for the Corps of Engineers, and
making that priority flood control--which, again, the whole
purpose of the dam system was flood control. Let's get back to
the Corps' roots and initial purposes here, and control the
floods. Let's make sure what happened this year, will not
happen next year.
And I have submitted--and I think it is already in the
record--my full statement. So I will yield back the rest of my
time. And thank you for this opportunity.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Thank you. That concludes our first
panelists' hearing, the Members. And thank you for your input.
This is very valuable, and you are representing your
constituents very well.
We will give a minute or two here for our second panel to
come up to the front daises. While the next panel is getting
situated, Mr. Boswell would like to make another comment. The
floor is yours.
Mr. Boswell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I would like
to just speak from the heart, just for a second, to the
committee, to you, sir, and the ranking member, and whoever
else wants to listen.
You know, I soldiered for a long time, as many others did.
I don't believe for a minute that the Corps of Engineers would
deliberately do anything to harm anybody. I don't believe that.
I think we go through a process, the 14-year plan, which gets
vetted through everything we can think of. And then finally,
after everybody has massaged it, it gets approved. Sometimes
referred to as ``The Bible,'' they go out and they try to put
it into action. And I have learned in my life it is pretty hard
to please everybody.
But I just want to say, from my point, as I look at those
at the table, and as I meet with people out across the country,
I doubt if they asked for this job to start with, and we gave
it to them, and they bring a lot of expertise to the table.
They are dedicated men and women. And I think it is OK for us
to--I want to say this--I heard somebody say, ``Investigate,
investigate.'' That is not a good word. I think we need to
review.
When I think about all the concrete that has been put down
across the country and the increased runoff, tiling, and the
things we do, it changes things. But one thing that the Corps
or you or I or none of us can do is to predict with great
accuracy what Mother Nature is going to do. And the 10-inch
rain or the heavy snow or the late temperature change and the
late runoff and all these prior things that have been talked
about by the previous panel was very good, very real. That is
what people are faced with.
But I think what a proper term is, you know, if we have had
two 500-year floods in the last 10 years, or one, or whatever,
it is OK to review. And I think that is what you are doing. And
I want to compliment you for having this hearing and going
through this discussion. And if I can participate in any way
down the way, I would be happy to do that.
Thank you for what you are doing. This is good. I
appreciate it.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Boswell. The panelists are getting ready to appear.
Thank you for your service to all these things and our country.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Representative. I will just quickly
comment on your comments there.
I think the intent here is to have discussion, open
dialogue. And hopefully everybody will learn something, and we
can make better policy. And my guess is one of the Corps'
challenges might be there is conflicts in law that is causing
problems, because the changes happen back in the demographics
and dynamics. So that is--I think we all got the same goal. We
will find that out in a few minutes.
But before we get to the second panel, Mr. Carnahan has a
procedural issue.
Mr. Carnahan. Yes, just a--Mr. Chairman, thank you. And
just wanted to ask unanimous consent to submit a statement for
the record on behalf of our colleague, Eddie Bernice Johnson.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson's statement is featured with
the other statements from Members of Congress--please refer to
the ``Prepared Statements Submitted by Members of Congress''
section in the table of contents.]
Mr. Carnahan. And also had a letter from the U.S.
Department of Interior Fish and Wildlife Service, which I would
just point out makes the point in the letter that the--they did
not take the Endangered Species Act into account, did not have
an affect on operations in--with regard to this flood in 2011.
I want to submit that for the record and then two others
from the National Wildlife Federation and the American Society
of Civil Engineers. We would just ask unanimous consent to
submit those for the record.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. So ordered.
[The written statement of the American Society of Civil
Engineers is featured with Hon. Bob Gibbs's submissions for the
record. Please refer to the table of contents for Hon. Gibbs's
submissions for the record. The other information follows:]

Mr. Carnahan. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. At this time I want to welcome our second
panelists. And I will just review quickly.
We have Brigadier General John McMahon. He is the commander
and division engineer of the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, Northwestern Division.
We have Ms. Kathy Kunkel, who is the county clerk at Holt
County, Missouri. I can't see you. That must be you, OK.
Mr. Tom Waters, chairman of the Missouri Levee and Drainage
District Association; and Brad Lawrence, director of public
works, city of Fort Pierre, South Dakota; and Richard Oswald of
Langdon, Missouri.
Welcome. And we will start with the general.

TESTIMONY OF BRIGADIER GENERAL JOHN R. MCMAHON, COMMANDER,
NORTHWESTERN DIVISION, UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS;
KATHY J. KUNKEL, COUNTY CLERK, HOLT COUNTY, MISSOURI; TOM
WATERS, CHAIRMAN, MISSOURI LEVEE AND DRAINAGE DISTRICT
ASSOCIATION; BRAD LAWRENCE, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS, CITY OF
FORT PIERRE, SOUTH DAKOTA; AND RICHARD OSWALD, FIFTH-GENERATION
MISSOURI FAMILY FARMER, AND PRESIDENT, MISSOURI FARMERS UNION

General McMahon. Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to discuss the
Missouri River flooding of 2011, as well as the ongoing and
future activities of the Northwestern Division of the Army
Corps of Engineers to respond to the flood. I am John McMahon,
commander of the Northwestern Division, and I want to
acknowledge upfront that the Corps is fully cognizant of the
physical, economic, social, emotional impacts of the many
people in the basin due to the flooding this year.
Actions by our Omaha and Kansas City districts during the
Missouri River flooding this summer were extremely effective in
reducing flood damages. The Corps expended approximately $83
million on fortifying existing levees, building temporary
levees, monitoring dam and levee safety and other activities,
such as providing flood fight supplies to state of emergency
offices within Corps authorities under Public Law 84-99.
For example, in South Dakota the Corps constructed
approximately 4 miles of temporary levees in Pierre and Fort
Pierre. Temporary measures were also constructed for the
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe to mitigate risk to the causeway and
the water intake.
The Missouri River main stem reservoir system was operated
in 2011 in accordance with the master manual. The water
conditions in the Missouri Basin have been extraordinary this
year, particularly above Sioux City, Iowa. Compared to the
normal 25 million acre feet of runoff, we expected this year's
runoff to exceed 60 million acre feet, more than double the
average, and the highest on record. Of critical importance is
the understanding that May, June, and July of this year were
the third, first, and fifth highest months of inflow in the
113-year period of record.
Each year the Corps evacuates flood control space before
the spring and summer runoff occurs, and this year was no
different. All of the 2010 flood water had been evacuated by
late January of 2011, and we had the entire required 16.3
million acre feet of space available at the start of this
year's runoff season. Our computer models demonstrated that
since 1898, this storage would have been enough every previous
year to adequately capture spring runoff and manage water flow
throughout the system.
We witnessed a tremendously different and new hydrologic
data point this year. Consequently, we are taking a hard
analytical look at what this information may suggest in terms
of future operation and alternatives and adjustments.
In addition to the Corps internal review of reservoir
operations, we initiated an external review of our operations,
which is currently underway and scheduled to conclude in the
end of December. And we intend to make the results and outcomes
of that available to this committee and the public in early
January.
The Corps followed and continues to follow a carefully
evaluated water evacuation plan over the past several months.
High releases were maintained through mid-August, and then
stepped down at a pace that reduced risk to infrastructure,
levees, and river banks, and allowed the flood plain to drain.
The plan included fall and winter release rates low enough to
allow continued inspection and repair of both Federal and non-
Federal infrastructure.
The Missouri River Flood of 2011 officially concluded on
the 17th of October 2011. The water evacuation plan in place is
allowing homeowners, farmers, and businesses to get back on
their properties to begin their repair and recovery as quickly
as possible. And the objective of our plan is to bring the
entire system back to its full annual flood control capacity by
the 2012 runoff season. In addition, we are committed to
maintaining a flexible posture and aggressive release schedule
throughout the winter and spring, if it appears that 2012 will
be another high runoff year.
Now that the river is receding, we have begun post-flood
actions. These include an assessment to review the water
management operation, a technical review of the flood fight
response, and a concerted effort to assess and repair
infrastructure such as dams, levees, and navigation structures.
Concurrent with these actions, the Corps, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, and the Department of Agriculture
are co-chairing the Missouri River Flood Task Force. The task
force provides a forum for coordination among Federal, tribal,
State, stakeholder, and local government partners within the
States of Nebraska, Montana, Iowa, South and North Dakota,
Wyoming, Kansas, and Missouri on flood recovery and related
flood risk management actions and initiatives. The task force
will streamline governmental processes and decisionmaking,
accelerate necessary assessments, coordinate permitting
requirements, and apply agile and critical thinking to the
problems that we face.
Since May of 2011, our Assistant Secretary of the Army for
Civil Works has exercised her emergency authority provided
under Public Law 84-99 to transfer funds from other
appropriation accounts to the Flood Control and Coastal
Emergency appropriation account to respond to the flooding and
to begin addressing repairs from this year's disasters. To
date, the Corps has completed five transfers, totaling $282
million. The last two transfers, totaling $207 million, allowed
the Corps to begin addressing a portion of the highest priority
life and safety repair requirements, nationwide.
In order to develop the best estimates of repair
requirements nationwide, local Corps districts and divisions,
including my Northwestern Division, working with non-Federal
sponsors, are inspecting damaged projects and preparing
assessment reports. The Corps has set up a rigorous process for
technical experts to examine the requirements and prioritize
those requirements based on risk to life and safety, among
other parameters. The Corps is prioritizing projects to
leverage its resources to complete assessments and proceed
forward with the highest priority repairs. To date, $54.6
million have been used on the Missouri River flood recovery.
We recently concluded eight open house sessions and public
meetings in cities throughout the basin to listen to the
concerns of our citizens as part of the annual operating plan
development for 2012. As part of these meetings, we
communicated that the top priority of the division and the
Corps is to responsibly prepare for the 2012 runoff season.
A primary concern raised in the public meetings was the
Corps strategy to evacuate water from the Missouri reservoir
system back to the designated amount of flood control storage.
That is the design 16.3 million acre feet, which equates to
approximately 22 percent of the storage in the system. Given
record runoff, the Corps has initiated a technical analysis to
determine whether more reservoir space might be needed to be
reserved for flood control purposes in the future.
At this point, the Corps has assumed a more flexible
posture, as water is evacuated through the system for the
remainder of the fall and early winter. The Corps will also
take a more aggressive stance with winter and spring releases.
The Corps will communicate more frequently and more broadly as
the 2012 runoff season unfolds. We will conduct bimonthly
conference calls and during those calls, dialogue will continue
with Federal, State, county, and local officials, tribes,
emergency management officials, and independent experts, and
the press to discuss the conditions on the ground and the
current Corps reservoir release plans and forecasts. Audio
files of these conference calls will be made widely available.
In summary, the 2011 flooding was the result of an extreme
hydrologic event. While much damage occurred in the basin, the
system of dams and levees functioned as intended and prevented
or provided substantial benefit. Without them, the damages and
safety risks would have been much greater. While the system
remains vulnerable until the levee repairs are made, no major
deficiencies have been identified to date that would preclude
normal operation of the dams in the spring of 2012.
This concludes my testimony. Thank you for allowing me to
testify about the flooding and the future operation of the
Missouri system. And I would be happy to answer questions of
the Members here.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
General McMahon. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Waters, welcome.
Mr. Waters. Mr. Chairman, thank you and thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I have submitted written
testimony, and attached to that testimony is a report from the
Food and Agricultural Policy Research Institute, FAPRI, in the
University of Missouri. And I would ask that my testimony and
that report be entered in the record.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
Mr. Waters. Thank you. I am looking forward to answering
questions, so I will try to be brief and just hit the
highlights of that written testimony.
First of all, the 2011 flooding. You know, it is not rocket
science, what happened. We had too much snow and too much rain
in the upper basin. The system of dams and reservoirs could not
handle the runoff. The flood control systems below the dams and
between the dams couldn't handle those record releases that we
saw. So it is not really a question of what happened, but more
of a question of why and, even more importantly, what do we do
about it now.
I believe there is not enough flood control storage in the
reservoirs. We have these six huge reservoirs in the upper
basin, but only 6 percent is dedicated exclusively for flood
control. There is another 16 percent that is for flood control
and all these other uses. And I believe that 16 percent needs
to be used exclusively for flood control also, so we have a
full 22 percent that would be dedicated for flood control.
The other thing I see is there is more water entering the
river faster. In the written comments I give an example of how
the development over the last 20 to 30 years has changed the
way that water enters the river. All the concrete and asphalt
and roofs that have been developed over the last 20 or 30 years
has water coming into the river faster and more of it. And we
haven't increased our levee improvements or flood control
projects on the Missouri River that help compensate for that
development.
That leads me to the Corps budget. The Corps of Engineers
budget is very much out of balance. The 2012 budget for the
Missouri River recovery program--that is the fish and birds and
the endangered species program--was $72.8 million. On the other
hand, Operation Maintenance budget is only $6.2 million. And
the problem I see is the Corps follows the money. They are
seeing that $72.8 million, and they focus on fish and wildlife,
and not flood control.
In fact, since 1992, the Corps has spent $616 million on
fish and birds. That is well over a half-a-billion dollars. And
according to the National Academy of Science, most of that
money was wasted because what they have been doing is not
working.
You know, we can spend $20 million on a levee project, and
it puts people to work, creates jobs, and when we are done we
have a levee sitting there that you can physically see that is
providing protection to homes, property, and lives. When we
spend $20 million on fish and birds, more likely than not we
end up with a 200 or 300-page study and a report that sits on a
shelf. And then we also get a box of hotel receipts and airline
ticket receipts from these bureaucrats and agency employees
traveling all over the country for meetings and conferences and
seminars. This has got to change.
In my experience, I have only seen two things that changed
the Corps' focus. The first one is legal action through the
courts, and that is long and drawn out. The other is
legislation. And I believe this committee can start now to
force the Corps to focus on flood control.
The third point I would like to make has to do with the
levees. Been a lot of talk about the levees and the damage
there. And I just want to remind the committee that it is the
responsibility of Congress through Public Law 84-99 to fund
levee repairs. And it is the responsibility of the Corps of
Engineers and the local sponsors to fix those levees.
With the NOAA forecasts for the coming year showing above
normal precipitation, these folks are going to be at even
greater risk going into next spring. And so the people along
the river aren't interested in task force and working groups
and committees and these seminars. They are interested in
funding the levee repairs, and getting them fixed.
The last point I want to make has to do with alternatives
to levee repairs. There has been a lot of talk about not
repairing levees. And in my written comments, I stress the
importance of the fertile farmland found along our Nation's
rivers. You know, even if we took out all the infrastructure,
all the roads, businesses, homes, and power lines, et cetera,
there is still highly productive farmland left in the river
bottoms that deserves and is warranted protection.
With the growing population that we see now and in the
future, inexpensive and safe food is a matter of national
security. And I think when you take land out of production,
that is a threat to our national security.
I see my time is up, and I will yield the microphone and
just say thank you again for the invitation. I am really
looking forward to answering questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Lawrence, the floor is yours. Welcome.
Mr. Lawrence. Good afternoon, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking
Member Carnahan, distinguished committee members. My name is
Brad Lawrence. I am a mechanical engineer working as the
director of public works for the city of Fort Pierre, South
Dakota.
Fort Pierre is situated just 5 miles downstream of the Oahe
Project, the third dam of a six-dam system. Thank you for
inviting me to testify about the Missouri River Flood of 2011.
I intend to discuss two major topics: the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers' response and the impact to the smaller communities
along the Missouri River.
There are two major sources of water to the reservoirs,
snowpack and rainfall. I have two slides that I will
incorporate into my testimony today.
The first one is the snow water equivalent slide, figure
number one, for the upper Missouri River Basin. This slide is
the basis for my testimony, and covers March 1st through June
30th. The top line in green is the snow water equivalency for
the northern Rockies. The second line, in red, is the snow
water equivalency for the central Rockies. And the bottom line,
in blue, is the snow water equivalency for the plains
snowpacks. The rising lines are increased amounts of water and
snow that hasn't melted that will eventually run into the
basin. The decreasing lines are the melting and running off of
the stored water in the snowpacks. This information comes from
the National Weather Service.
In early 2011 it was apparent that the plains snowpack was
going to contribute a significant amount of runoff. I wrote a
widely disseminated email indicating the risk for flooding was
increased by the plains snowpack. While it looks comparatively
small, the plains snowpack covers a vast area. Even at only 3
inches of snow water equivalency, the runoff from the plains
filled more than 50 percent of the total available flood
storage by May 1. The plains snowpack and the snow water
equivalency was a visible and quantifiable risk. The
accumulation peaked just prior to March 1st, and then melted
off by May 1st.
On Fort Peck, by May 1st, approximately 33 percent of the
storage available on March 1st was filled by the plains
snowpack runoff. On Garrison, the amount was closer to 58
percent of the storage available on March 1st was consumed by
this plains snowpack runoff. And on Lake Oahe, nearly 80
percent of the storage available on March 1st was consumed by
the plains snowpack runoff.
The next graph is for the Garrison reservoir. The key to
take away from this slide is that when the blue line is above
the green line, the reservoir is filling. And when the green
line is above the blue line, the reservoir is draining. The
inflow curves show many aspects of the runoff into the
reservoirs. The sharp spikes are from significant increases in
the runoff over short periods of time, either from rapid snow
melts or rain events, or a combination of the two.
Back on the snow water equivalency chart, you can see that
the mountain snowpacks climbed relatively steadily to their
maximum values near the 20th of April and began melting around
the 1st of May. Please note the sharp drop from May 1st to May
10th. That sharp drop creates a significant amount of water
that runs off into the reservoirs.
The sharp rises in the Garrison reservoir, figure two,
inflow indicates significant events. You can clearly see the
spikes of the inflow from rainfalls and rapid snow melts. While
these spikes are significant, they pale in comparison to the
large hump that starts in early May and continues to the end of
July. That large hump is the overall mountain snowpack runoff.
The notion that the perfect storm rains in Montana caused
this major flood just doesn't hold water. You can see for
yourself that while the volume of water from those events is
significant, it doesn't measure up to the volume contained in
the plains or mountain snowpack runoffs, both of which were
visible and measurable prior to the perfect storm.
It is also interesting to note that the Corps of Engineers
began increasing the flows from Garrison significantly prior to
any rain falling in Montana. In fact, they were at near-record
releases prior to the rain falling.
While no one could have predicted the heavy rains in
Montana in May, everyone could have predicted that the water
stored in the snowpacks was going to run off. The failure to
determine the risk involved in the water stored in the plains
and mountain snowpacks led to a lack of decisive action. The
reality is that with this much water stored in the snow, it was
inevitable that we would flood. The lack of preemptive action
led to much higher stages on the river, and consequently, more
damage.
Nearly 50 percent of the residents of Fort Pierre were
evacuated from their homes, many for as many as 100 days. There
are still nearly 100 homes that are unoccupied. Our little
community is financially devastated after this event. Others
downstream are in a similar or worse situation. The duration of
this event is unprecedented and is the root cause of the
financial hardship.
The most troubling issue for many South Dakotans was a lack
of clear communication from the Corps. An early warning of any
kind was never issued. Even during initial stages of the event,
the communication of anticipated water levels kept changing
daily. That made preparation nearly impossible. Greg Powell,
the city engineer from the city of Chamberlain, says he is
still waiting for a call to warn him that his local reservoir
is going up 4 feet over a June weekend.
In closing, I would like to use the words from Jeff Dooley,
community manager for Dakota Dunes. He writes, ``The summer of
2011 will be ingrained in the memory of everyone who lives,
works, or farms along the Missouri River. This event has
changed people's lives forever. My personal property was not
damaged by the flood, but as the manager of the community I had
to witness the distress caused by this event as my friends and
neighbors were asked to leave their homes behind. This cannot
happen again.
``We need to find out if and why these extreme releases
were necessary, and recognize or admit what we could or should
have done to prevent it. Again, in a controlled river system
there has to be an expected margin of error. But this year's
releases far exceeded any reasonable expectation of those
margins.'' I concur with Jeff's findings.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for inviting me to speak at this
hearing, and I will be available for questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Ms. Kunkel, welcome.
Ms. Kunkel. Chairman Mica and the members of the committee,
I appreciate the opportunity to come before you all and speak
today as an elected official of Holt County, Missouri, and I am
here to represent those people who live in a vast flood plain
who have been devastatingly impacted by this year's floods. I
would like to share with you a bit of their story, as well as
their overall concerns with the Corps of Engineers and their
insistence that they retain the rural way of life that they
have had, lived, and managed for over 170 years in my county.
And I will be brief on my remarks, so that we can move on to
questions.
I do want to reiterate that I most assuredly agree with the
congressmen and women who came and sat at this table before me.
There are many issues to discuss related to this flood.
Certainly there was snow and rain beyond measure that we have
seen in this system before. But certainly there is a shouldered
responsibility by the Corps of Engineers for how they looked at
that, how they managed it, and how they opened the gates and
sent a deluge of water into my county, putting 630 people out
of their homes, covering over 120,000 acres of farm ground in
10-foot-deep water with 3-foot waves. It devastated homes that
had been built to national flood insurance protection
standards. Those homes had been elevated one 1 above the base
flood elevation. But the water came higher than base flood
elevation. And it lasted for 106 days.
My county's western border borders Nebraska and Kansas. I
have a 52-mile western border that is all leveed. Some of it is
non-Federal levee. Some of it is Federal. I have 32 breaches in
my county. One of them is a half-a-mile wide. Some of them are
50 feet.
We don't yet have clear estimates on what the money is
going to be to fix what is there. And that is extremely
frustrating for the people of Holt County, because while the
Corps was telling us, ``We don't have the money to send people
out to take a look at your levees and determine the estimable
damage,'' they were at the courthouse buying land to put into
mitigation projects. And that is the problem for the people in
Holt County. The Corps has been able to buy 8,000 acres in my
county, take it off the tax rolls, take it off the yearly
economic annual production that goes with agriculture, creating
pallid sturgeon chutes and wetland sites within my county.
I also have an 8,000-acre national wildlife refuge that we
hold in high esteem. We very much believe in conservation in
our rural area. They brings hunters to the area. They are a big
part of our economy. But what we are seeing with what the Corps
is doing is creating pallid sturgeon chutes that has put water
right up against the levees. Those are the areas where my levee
district members had immediate problems as this river came
down. The chutes put water into the levees, causing overtopping
and degradation of the substructure of the levees.
So, I am going to ask that the Corps be responsible to
Congress, once again calling that flood control be the primary
purpose of the Corps, and that we take a look at removing some
elements of the Endangered Species Act as part of its
compliance, so that my county can try to get back on its feet
and move forward.
And I will yield my time so that we can move on to
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Oswald, welcome.
Mr. Oswald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, for allowing me to share my experience with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers Missouri River inundation of 2011. I am
a fifth generation Missouri farmer from Atchison County,
Missouri. I have lived my entire life where I was born in the
house built by my parents on our family farm in the Missouri
River valley near Langdon.
Since it was built in 1939, our home has been touched by
the Missouri River three times. First, when after a few days'
advance warning in the spring of 1952, rapid snowmelt caused
unavoidable flooding along newly constructed levee L550. That
flood did little damage to our farmstead. My parents, my
sister, and I returned to our home within 3 weeks. Dad raised a
good crop that year. The second was in the summer of 1993, when
heavy rains fell across the entire Missouri watershed.
Following the late July flood, my wife and I and our daughter
returned in mid-August. Most fields and roads were undamaged.
After several weeks' advance notice, levee L550 breached
for the third time on June 23, 2011. We were told well ahead of
time to expect a flood. The reaction among most of us was that
if flooding could be anticipated so far in advance, why wasn't
something done to prevent it. The managed, uninterrupted flow
of this flood kept us away from our home for more than 100 days
until October.
Unlike most homes in the valley today, ours is still
habitable. FEMA insurance adjustors have placed the insured
damage to our farmstead at over $30,000. That is minor,
compared to my neighbor's heavy losses. But the adjuster did
tell me that he could adjust more losses if I had had more
insurance.
Some of the most productive valued farmland in Missouri is
on the river bottom in Atchison County. According to the
satellite imagery study by Scott--Dr. Scott Brown of the
University of Missouri, at least 47,000 acres of crops were
lost there. Local officials on the ground estimated over 60,000
in earlier estimates, due in part to an inundation map
circulated by the Corps implying an unprecedented bluff-to-
bluff flood from Gavins Point to St. Louis. But really, on our
farm, just as on so many others, final determination has not
been made because crop insurance adjustors have not visited
where much of the area remained inaccessible into November.
About 1,400 acres of contracted seed soybeans and specialty
food corn worth over $1 million were lost on our farm. Close to
half those acres were under irrigation. Crop insurance based on
my 10-year average yield will cover only part of the loss. Dr.
Brown estimated in his study that, for most farmers, combined
insurance and disaster payments are still insufficient. But no
matter what the settlement, as a result of this flood our farm
and many others have not grown the food and energy crops that
American needs now.
Over the last several years, river management has made life
especially difficult for bottom land farmers like me. Damage
done by this flood to many productive fields is irreparable. We
have huge sand dunes and blowouts. Sandstone chunks from a 60-
foot deep crater litter one field. Drainage ditches that should
allow flood water to drain back to the main channel are plugged
with silt and sand from the river. Fertile fields lay stark and
barren.
Repairs to just 4 miles of Highway 136, a major two-lane
river crossing in our county, cost over $3 million to perform.
Jobs and commerce at the intersection with Interstate 29 were
lost for months during the flood, when the highway closed. Many
local residents who work across the river just 10 minutes away
were faced with 2\1/2\-hour one-way commutes. Rural roads like
the 7 miles in Langdon's road district were left impassible by
washouts and debris.
Work to bring them back to normal continues. FEMA is
helping, but only 75 percent of those costs are eligible for
aid. The way things stand now, without levee protection, all
our work and money spent could be for nothing if the water
returns. But the estimated cost to repair levee L550 is $47
million. To date, less than half of that amount is promised.
Land, our most valuable agricultural asset in Missouri,
faces lowered tax valuation in flooded areas, placing a strain
on basic local government services, including local rural
schools. Millions of dollars in farm buildings and homes have
been destroyed.
Besides personal property, Missouri County assessors are
required to reassess ag land values up or down, as situations
change. Our county clerk estimated that, with continued
flooding, assessed values on the river bottom land could drop
from $4.7 million to just a little over $238,000. That is going
to cost local governments thousands in revenue and farmers
millions in productivity each year the flooding continues.
Property owners and farmers feel it first. But eventually, the
entire community takes the hit.
Because of the damaging length and severity of this flood,
and lack of funding for maintenance and repair, flooding again
in 2012 seems almost certain, unless Congress and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers can make flood control their number one
priority.
Thank you, sir. I appreciate you hearing me.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. And good luck in the future. You have
got a lot of challenges there to work with.
I will start the first round of questions. And General
McMahon, my first question is, we know there is at least eight
competing interests, you know, flood control, irrigation,
municipal water supply, and so on. How do you balance those
competing interests? And is any of them more important than the
others?
General McMahon. Thank you for the question, Chairman
Gibbs. The eight authorized purposes are borne out of the 1944
Flood Control Act and subsequent legislation and judicial
rulings that are all now manifest in the master manual, which
is the guideline for how we balance the eight authorized
purposes. And through that legislation and those judicial
rulings, the two predominant purposes are flood control and
navigation. And they are very tightly balanced, such that
adjustment under the current regime of law and judicial rulings
is minimal.
Mr. Gibbs. You just said flood control and navigation
should be the core mission. I would agree with that. But how do
you answer the amount of dollars going for other projects,
environmental stuff and renovation?
And also, we know that the amount of damage out there, the
administration and Secretary Darcy has not come to Congress and
asked for emergency funding. You are actually having to take
funds from other projects to rebuild these levees. I mean how
do you balance that?
General McMahon. Yes, sir. So, you know, the Corps receives
appropriations in different accounts: investigations,
construction, and operations and maintenance. And so the
numbers that you heard today are only one--they only reflect
the Operations and Maintenance account. They don't reflect the
Construction and the Investigations account.
When you look at all appropriations across all the business
lines in 2011, we had: $72.8 million allocated and spent for
flood risk management; $15 million for navigation; $61.4
million for hydropower; $13.3 million for environmental
stewardship; $800,000 for water supply; $21.6 million for
recreation; and $87 million for environmental restoration. So
that was last year's budgeted and spent amount, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. I believe in 2012 the request for ecosystem
restoration is $470 million.
General McMahon. Well, I am just talking about on the
Missouri River.
Mr. Gibbs. Oh, OK, OK.
General McMahon. So I think the figure you are citing is
across the Corps.
Mr. Gibbs. OK.
General McMahon. With respect to the administration's
request, as you say, sir, we are involved, through the
Secretary's office, of making transfers of money that has been
appropriated for other purposes. The wiggle room associated
with those is narrowing as each iteration unfolds. And at some
point we are going to need new money to continue the very
important work that needs to unfold with respect to repair and
restoration of the system to get back to its pre-2011----
Mr. Gibbs. Well, I guess that is where I am a little
surprised, because our capacity for flood control in this basin
is--has not got to a level where--getting ready for next
spring, and to do these repairs, I'm thinking the seasonal
issue is to get repairs done. I think you got major challenges.
My next question. We heard some testimony from some of the
Members. What is your priority in your systems to collect the
data, you know, what is going up in the mountains, the head
waters, the monitoring of that? How nimble is the Corps to make
those adjustments, so they can see that they have got a huge
snowpack and they have got--you know, the rainfall starts up in
the mountains. Do you have the monitoring data to, you know,
make those adjustments in a real-time basis?
General McMahon. Yes, sir. I mean, in short, there is an
extensive network in the plains and in the mountains for
measuring snow. And, of course, we rely on the National Weather
Service to make rain forecasts.
Could the system be more extensive and improved? Probably
so. And we will get some feedback from the independent external
panel that has been chartered to look at how we collect data,
how we use it to forecast, how we integrate with the National
Weather Service and so on, that may lend itself to improve
procedures. So that report, as I said, is due out at the end of
December.
But I think, in general, we have state-of-the-art systems
to collect and integrate information and make the best water
management decisions that are based on the best available
information.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
General McMahon. It is not perfect, though.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. We will probably get back to that. We heard
testimony from some of my colleagues about--can you comment
about this--how much red tape there is doing these restoration
projects, getting the levees rebuilt? Is there anything that we
can do here in Congress to help streamline, make it easier to
expedite those projects?
General McMahon. There are steps associated with anything
the Corps undertakes, as a bureaucratic part of Government. I
won't deny that. They are generally necessary, and generally
following the process keeps you out of court and lets you get
down to business.
And so, there are emergency conditions that allow us to
streamline steps in the process, and we are exercising every
one of those. And I will add that the Missouri River Flood Task
Force is aimed at bringing all the Federal agencies to exercise
their authorities, permitting and what not, so that we are--
left hand and right hand know what each other are doing, and we
are making the best available decisions, and expediting those
decisions to minimize the red tape, as you call it, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. My time is up. Mr. Carnahan?
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you. And I want to thank all the panel
for being here. And again, the folks that traveled all the way
here from Missouri, we appreciate you all being here to share
your stories.
I want to start with Richard Oswald. You have been out here
many times, talking about these issues. And I wanted to
specifically get you to focus on what improvements could have
been made in communicating with you and communities along the
river about the floods and the impacts that they have.
Mr. Oswald. Well, I think that the decisionmaking that goes
into an event like this is opaque to most of us in the country.
We aren't familiar with how these decisions are arrived at. But
I think that when you involve the entire community in the
discussion about decisions that are made, rules that are
followed, goals and objectives, then maybe you have a better
outcome.
I think it is clear that the needs--the importance of rural
America, especially productive areas like northwest Missouri,
who are incredibly productive areas that produce all kinds of
crops and energy crops that we need, and I think that is
ignored a lot of times for other goals. And I think we need to
look at the value that rural America offers and consider that
in any of these discussions.
Mr. Carnahan. And, you know, we heard the general describe
some of the efforts that they have had to--have multiple
community meetings and to get input from the community in terms
of what they are doing. Obviously, we are having this hearing
today to learn from what happened.
But do you feel like those are valuable, and do you think
they need to be done differently, or there need to be other
areas to get that input where it needs to be to decisionmakers?
Mr. Oswald. Well, I think that this points out the
importance of everyone being involved, not just the Corps
making these decisions, but Congress needs to be aware of the
decisions that are made, and why. And, of course, we rely on
our representatives in Congress to look after our best
interests always. And so I believe that, for too long, Congress
has really not been that involved in this decisionmaking. So I
would like to see them do that more.
But I would have to say that, you know, the Corps came to
our community and way before this flood occurred, and visited
the city water plant that is just across the road from some of
the land that we farm, some of our machine storage, some place
where we work quite often. And they placed a mark on the side
of the building of that Rockport City water plant that was far
higher, by at least 8 feet, than either the flood of 1952 or
1993.
And so, a lot of the residents, all of us who had lived
there through those other floods, wondered where that mark came
from. We knew where the water levels were in those floods, knew
them very well. I even have a mark in one of my farm buildings
at home, marked it in 1993. That is where the water level was.
And if the water had gone to the level the Corps said that we
should prepare for, it would have been at least 8 feet deeper
than what we actually experienced in 1952, 1993, and 2011.
And so, a lot of us----
Mr. Carnahan. That seems like a gigantic missing the mark
here.
Mr. Oswald. It is puzzling.
Mr. Carnahan. Right. General, I want to go to you real
quick and I am--with the bit of time I have on this round.
Funding. Obviously, we are in tight budgets here. But you
are aware the waterways users have come together over this last
year, working with the Corps to increase the--you know,
voluntarily say--to raise the diesel fuel taxes that they all
pay in navigating the river, and also talking about reforms
with the Corps. Talk about the impact of that and how that can
help in going forward, in terms of resources.
General McMahon. I am aware of the collaboration that has
occurred with the navigation industry and the Corps and others
to seek a better leveraging of public and private funds,
Congressman. I think, as with any such proposal, there are puts
and takes to it. There are advantages and disadvantages. I
believe that it is working its way through the system. And I
think any such arrangement would be helpful.
And I think we need to look at the other authorized
purposes, recreation being another example of where money that
is brought into the Government can be leveraged with private
money, much like what was done with the residential community
initiative that the Army and the Air Force and the Navy
undertook under special legislation that allowed private money
to build housing for soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines;
quality houses on installations and reap the rent, the basic
allowance for quarters that the soldier, sailor, airman, Marine
would get. So it was win-win-win. It was quality housing, it
was leveraging other people's money, not DOD money, and it paid
a dividend, if you will, to the investor. That kind of
arrangement we need to think outside the box on, and see how
that would apply across all authorized purposes.
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Cravaack.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And first off,
General, thank you for your service to our country. I have read
your bio. You are a highly decorated officer, and thank you
very much for what you are doing. Not only what you are doing
now for the Corps, but also what you have done in the past. So
thank you for your service, sir.
As a military officer myself, we definitely are painfully
aware, from what we are talking about today, of what the
problem is. The question I have now is: How do we move forward?
What do we need to do next? Can you kind of give us a snapshot?
For example, one of the things that actually affected us up
in the Eighth District of Minnesota is that 460 trains per day
had to be rerouted because of flooding. What are we doing to
protect something like that from occurring into the future?
And then I have a follow-on, sir.
General McMahon. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
You know, I think, first and foremost, as you say, and has been
suggested here, we need to work together. Because this problem
is bigger than any of us. And I think there is clear resonance
across the basin for the value and the importance of flood
control.
There is existing flexibility to do smart things in the
near term. But long term, we are probably going to need to
relook at new legislation to authorize and appropriate, for
example, a revision of the master manual, as one example.
There is also the Missouri River Authorized Purposes Study,
which in some camps is viewed as a conspiracy to do away with
the navigation on the Missouri River. In fact, it is designed
to look at all eight authorized purposes and review them in the
context of current contemporary needs and future needs, looking
out 50 years. Well, that wasn't funded.
So, there are things like that in the works that I think we
need to dust off and reconsider how we are looking at them, and
the useful purposes that might spin out of those kinds of
investments. Not that we want to spend too much money and spend
too much time studying.
We need to come up with a set of recommendations against
making those eight authorized purposes relevant to contemporary
and future needs, make a set of recommendations to the
Congress, and then have the Congress authorize adjustments
across those eight authorized purposes as might be recommended,
as an example, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, sir. And one of the things we are
painfully aware of here in Congress is that things take time.
What I am hearing today is that we don't have too much time,
because we are expecting the same--possibly the same--type of
flooding happening next.
For example, in the trains that we were just talking--I
just mentioned, I mean, what immediately can be done to help
ensure that these 460 trains aren't having to be rerouted, and
making sure that we get produce where--you know, materials
where they are supposed to be?
And as a follow-on, if I can, being a military officer,
like I said, myself, we do answer to civilian authorities. And
you kind of alluded to it. Is there anything that would be
precluding your ability to combat this flood now or in the
future that has been mandated down by civilian authorities that
would prevent you from executing your mission?
General McMahon. With respect to the various components of
infrastructure--railroads, roads, bridges, intakes, water
intakes, and so on--there are many examples, a lot of which was
damaged as a result of this event, and some of which has been
funded for repair, either by private money--in the railroad's
case by public money through the Federal Highway Administration
is another example. I know Interstate 680 east of Omaha into
Iowa has been repaired and opened now since the flood occurred
and damaged that very severely.
I know States and localities have undertaken local repairs
to local roads and bridges. All that is unfolding, as we speak,
now that the water is off of the flood plain and we can see--
assess the damage, make estimates, and apply funding to those
repairs.
For that infrastructure that the Corps has responsibility
for, as we said earlier, we have been moving money around,
transferring funds to the tune of about $280 million so far.
But it is a very small downpayment on a much larger bill,
estimated across the United States--due to not just this
flooding event, but Mississippi flooding, hurricanes on the
East Coast, and other events--to the tune of over $2 billion, I
think Ms. Darcy testified a few months ago. So that money needs
to be appropriated for--in my opinion--and the sooner, the
better. And I think that is clearly one of the big messages
that all of us need to have resonance on.
I am not aware, sir, of any authorities that restrict or
constrain what I need to do, with respect to getting the system
repaired and restored, other than getting the appropriations in
hand so we can move out.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, sir. I am over time and I yield
back.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Edwards?
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our ranking
member. I appreciate being here--and also to our witnesses.
I live in Maryland. And so I don't really have any
particular pecuniary interest in what happens along the
Missouri, except the fact that the importance of both
commercial and other activity along the river have a real
impact on people like me, who just want to go to the grocery
store and get good food.
And so, that said, I think it means for us, as taxpayers--
and those of us who are in Maryland who have other kinds of
water interests--that we also share a responsibility for what
happens along that river, and then particularly when there are
catastrophic events that have a deep impact on the agriculture,
commercial viability, you know, enjoyment and recreation and
other uses along the river.
One of my observations in listening to the testimony is
that I am baffled by why there isn't a more kind of
comprehensive management strategy under one authority for the
entire river basin. I know that in Maryland, when it comes to
the Chesapeake Bay and our ability to protect that, the
Nation's largest estuary, and it involves, you know, multiple
States and jurisdictions, that we have had to have a more
comprehensive management approach to that, because no one
individual jurisdiction or interest can possibly meet the
responsibility, and because not one of those interests is more
important than the other.
And so, I am just a little confused as to why, over this
long period of years under which there have been various
strategies employed to manage the events that occur in the
flood plain, there isn't some more comprehensive single point
of authority and coordination for Federal resources and other
resources that need to be put into play.
Earlier there was a fair amount of testimony in the earlier
panel and some on this one about the particular purpose in fish
and wildlife management, including endangered species, and that
impact on--you know, as a contributing factor of this
devastating event. And I do note, just in the reading of the
testimony and some other resources, that in fact, some of the
management strategies that the Corps has used were, in fact,
not employed that would have gone to the regular uses and
purposes for endangered species and for fish and wildlife and
habitat management. And so, I don't really think that has
anything to do with what happened here. And I hope that we
could get actually beyond singling out one particular purpose,
instead of looking at this a little bit more comprehensively.
I also just note--and had to do a little bit of checking--
but the study that, General McMahon, you just mentioned, the
Missouri River Authorized Purposes Study, MRAPS, was authorized
at $25 million. It was appropriated in 2009 and 2010 at $7.3
million. And then it was suspended in 2011.
And as a disinterested party, I am unclear why anyone would
not want to look at all of the authorized purposes, look at the
reasons that they are authorized, figure out strategies to
balance those purposes and impacts, and why we wouldn't fund a
study to do that. It would certainly mean to me, as a taxpayer
in Maryland, that there would be a better expenditure of
funding if I knew how those things could be managed in a more
useful way to meet the various needs that are present in the
river basin. Again, just an observation.
And then, lastly--I will allow General McMahon to answer
this--in a recent op-ed you wrote that, notwithstanding the
legitimate calls for preeminence of flood control purpose,
there are many other means to the same end that ought to be
considered as we go forward. Flood risk can be mitigated beyond
creating more space in the existing system. And then you go on
to describe other kinds of structural and non-structural things
that should be considered.
And I wondered if you could elaborate on that so that we
don't just confine the--our questions about what can happen
only to these very traditional means of levee and reservoir
management. Thank you.
General McMahon. Congresswoman, thank you for your
observations.
With respect to your question, I think we need to take a
comprehensive look at all aspects of this problem and think
broadly and deeply about the future, the long-term future of
the basin, so that we make wise investment of limited Federal
dollars in this very constrained fiscal environment that we are
all in, and do smart things with whatever money is ultimately
appropriated to this end.
And so, the ideas expressed in that op-ed are not
necessarily new ones, but they are ones that came out of the
1994 Galloway Report after the 1993 flood event in the Missouri
River Basin, and others that have evolved since then, to think
deeply and broadly about this opportunity to seek win-win,
synergistic-type solutions that look across all aspects of the
problem and apply--and it has been done successfully in places
like Rapid City, South Dakota, as an example, on a much smaller
scale. But you go there, and you see the benefits of that kind
of thinking applied to a much smaller-scale problem, and yet it
is a wonderful thing to see that kind of thinking applied to
that kind of a problem.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Long?
Mr. Long. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here today.
General, I have a--in part of Mr. Lawrence's testimony he
said the most troubling issue for many South Dakotans was a
lack of clear communication from the Corps. An early warning of
any kind was never issued, even during the initial stages of
the event. Communication of anticipated water levels kept
changing daily. That made preparation nearly impossible.
Greg Powell, city engineer of city of Chamberlain says he
is still waiting for a call to warn him that his local
reservoir was going up 4 feet over the weekend--over a June
weekend.
And my part of Missouri--which is not the Missouri River
part, I am down in the southwest part of the State, Joplin/
Branson/Springfield area--we have Table Rock Lake down there.
Earlier in the spring, before the Missouri River problems, we
had flooding issues down there. And someone from the Corps--you
have Table Rock, of course you have Beaver feeds into Table
Rock, feeds into Taneycomo down the line to Bull Shoals, and I
guess down at Georgetown. And of course water levels concern
everybody through the area.
But the Corps came to the people in Branson, along the
banks of Taneycomo, which is below Table Rock Dam, went house
to house and said--at 2:00 told them--my cousin happens to have
a house there. They told him personally, said, ``At 2:00 we are
going to start releasing 28,000''--would it be cubic feet a
second or a minute? A second? Said, ``At 2:00 today we are
going to release 28,000 cubic feet per second.''
So he did the deciphering, and he said, ``All right. Past
experience, 28,000 cubic feet a second, it will be about 30, 35
feet from my house.'' That was at 10:00 in the morning they
told him they would do that at 2:00. At 11:30 they started
releasing the 72,000--I am doing this from memory, so the
numbers might not be--but you get the gist of the story. It was
over three times what they said they were going to release, and
they released it 2\1/2\ hours before they told him. So, instead
of 33 feet from my house, we now have 4\1/2\ feet of water in
his house.
With communication like Mr. Lawrence experienced in South
Dakota, and the Army Corps in Branson, how can we work on a
better line of communication, when the events like this are
going to be thrust upon us?
General McMahon. Congressman, I will admit that we probably
could have and should have done a better job in communicating
what transpired. During that period of mid-May to the end of
May, there were successive bouts of rain in Wyoming, Montana,
and North and South Dakota that were totally unprecedented, and
as has been testified already earlier today, that really threw
us for a loop.
And so, over a period of 5 days, we bumped up release
announcements from 85,000 cubic feet per second, which is
already a record, to 150,000. And I understand why people would
be upset, and would wonder what the heck is going on. But it
was fundamentally as a result of monitoring actual rain flows,
or rainfall, and then measuring the inflows to our reservoirs
that caused us to make those rapid adjustments in a very short
period of time.
And we worked with local and State networks of
notification. And obviously, it wasn't adequate enough. And
that is one of the things that we have identified that we
should do better and we will do better, as we enter into the
2012 runoff season with a commitment twice a month to have this
big call and bring whoever wants to be in on the call to update
them on release schedules, on forecasts, on what we are seeing
and why we are seeing, what we are planning to do and why, and
to answer questions.
So, we intend to leverage that lesson learned as we go
forward here, and hopefully expand the network of notification
all the way down to individual farmers. But it is a concerted
effort at many levels of Government, sir.
Mr. Long. The Birds Point levee was blown in Missouri by
the Corps. And then the people in that area were told that
they--the Corps would not build it back to its pre-flood or
pre-whatever it was level, before they blew it, because they
didn't have the money to do it.
There is a thinking in our part of the world that if they
would have happened to have found a left-handed bluebird that
had three yellow dots on its right wing, that that money would
have been available.
What--give me your top three things that we--if I said we
are going to go to Redskins stadium and let the first 10,000
people or so in that want to kick the Corps around, we would
fill it up in 10 minutes. For some reason people like to kick
the Corps and pick on the Corps, which--I am not for doing
that. I am for figuring out what--how to make this better for
everyone, Corps included, ourselves included. We can't make
this a perfect world, by any stretch. But to make it a better
world in 2012 and going forward, give me your top three things
that we, as Members of Congress, can do to help you do your
job, which, in essence, helps the American public.
General McMahon. I think, first and foremost, is the
appropriation. It is, without a doubt, the most important
thing. We need the means to achieve the ends of repair and
restoration. And of course, you know----
Mr. Long. Do you have any idea how much money you are
talking? I mean to repair what needs to be done to a better
state than it was before, what are we talking about? Do you
have a number?
General McMahon. I am talking about repairing it to its
pre-2011 flood condition, which is authorized under the Public
Law 84-99. And in the Missouri River Basin alone, it is between
$500 million and $1 billion. That number is being refined, as
we speak, on the basis of being able to access the levees and
get inside the dams and see the damage and make the cost
estimates and the scopes of work. So, that work is ongoing, as
we speak.
The second thing, I think, is to work with us, as Members
of Congress, with the Governors, with local officials, with
private entities such as Tom Waters and the Missouri Levee and
Drainage District Association. This has got to be a team
effort. I mean we are not going to solve this alone.
And there are many different disparate needs here that are
at play. And I will leave it at that. And I am not saying that
one should be better than the other, but we have got to figure
out, based on what we have learned this year, how to make
adjustments to the authorized purposes, to re-balance them and
those kinds of things.
And so, I think many of the pieces of legislation that have
been suggested here today and have been on the books the last
few months are things that we are fundamentally already doing.
They are underway. And, as has been noted, take time to
conclude. We are undertaking a study to understand how much
more flood control space we ought to allocate on the basis of
this new data point, as an example. Well, that will take a few
months. And by the end of this spring, by the end of March, it
should have a good recommendation to put forth for
consideration of additional flood control space and the trade-
offs association with such a new number.
So those things take time, and they are underway. So we
don't necessarily need new legislation to cause us to do that.
We are already doing it. It just takes time, and there----
Mr. Gibbs. OK, I----
General McMahon. There is many things like that that are
happening, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. Thanks. Mrs. Napolitano?
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And hopefully we
will have a second round, because I have a ton of questions.
California, as you know, has a great relationship with the
Army Corps. They do an excellent job in many of the areas. And
as you well know, you talk about--surreal is driving up Highway
5 where there are hundreds of thousands of homes, and looking
up in the levees up there, and there is a ship going by. This
is surreal.
So we deal with those issues in our State. And of course,
Mother Nature has been throwing us many curves, and we think
there are going to be many more to come. So working together,
as you have indicated, General, is--working together as a team
is what is going to help us be able to prepare, and try to help
ourselves.
Now, it is always a matter of funding. Do we have enough
money? What takes priority? And who sets those? So that brings
me to the authorized study that was defunded, if you will,
suspended this year. And who voted to suspend those? Do you
guys know that?
And why did they do that, knowing that you already have
issues--you say in 1983 and 1997 floods, or whatever those
years were--that you may be expecting, and now having this one,
looking back and saying, OK, we have a history, are we going to
get another one this year? What is the next cycle that we are
going to be facing the same situation, and how are we going to
prepare?
And to that, was that an earmark that has been taken down
because of the money factor, not realizing it is going to cost
us more in the long run to be able to put the farms back in
operating, the levees back up, and the safety of all of that
which you deal with on a daily basis? We don't.
So that is just food for thought. But going to the cost of
the study, to me that would certainly be part of maybe a
solution to bring all the partners to be able to be part of
that study, so that everybody feels not left out, but rather,
included so that there is more of a wider network, if you will.
A question to you, General. Did the Corps work with the
tributary reservoir's control by the Bureau of Reclamation to
coordinate the runoff? And can you kind of touch upon what kind
of coordination did take effect? And then, listening to the
issue of getting communication going, how soon will that be
available to coordinate with all the parties that want--not
only want to be on it, but the radio stations and others that
can immediately put the word out?
General McMahon. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
With respect to coordination with the Bureau of Reclamation, we
have a very close relationship with the bureau in the
Northwestern Division, and we coordinated very closely as this
event unfolded. We have what we call section VII authority.
That is space in many of--not all of, but many of--the Bureau
of Reclamation reservoirs that is reserved exclusively for and
controlled by the Corps of Engineers for flood control.
And so, we worked very closely to leverage that space. And
sometimes that space is in the right place. And sometimes,
depending on where the rain and the snow melt, and how fast the
snow melts, it is in the wrong place. And so we worked very
closely with the bureau to optimize the available space under
section VII authorities.
The Missouri River Task Force, ma'am, is the place where
Federal, State, other agencies--you know, we all come
together--the tribes, and we work through this--the four C's, I
call it: collaboration, coordination, cooperation, and
communication. And so we are going to continue to do that. We
had our first meeting back in Denver in October, and we have
our next meeting in Kansas City on the 12th of December.
Every week working groups have been formed, and are meeting
virtually to work specific problems inside specific lanes. And
you know, it is beginning to gain momentum and make a
difference. And that work needs to continue as we go. One of
those working groups is the strategic communications working
group, which will help us disseminate information better as the
2012 season unfolds.
Mrs. Napolitano. The statistics you pointed out earlier,
does everybody have those, have the--you shared them with the
folks that are here, or to the Members of Congress, so they
know specifically the amount of money that went into those
different programs?
General McMahon. I haven't shared everything with them.
They are part of the public record. But I did send a letter to
Senator McCaskill and I copied Senator Blunt with these
specific numbers in them, among other numbers, going back to
fiscal year 2008.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, I would suggest you communicate that
to these folks, so they know----
General McMahon. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Napolitano [continuing]. What you are actually dealing
with.
General McMahon. OK.
Mrs. Napolitano. Then, just to--and I am already over my
time, but I have one more question. The Missouri River study
would have addressed the ranking of priority of the stated
operation's objectives, hopefully. What would it take to get
this program started up again? Funding for the study? Is it the
cooperation of all the folks involved? What would make this
happen, so that you can try to avoid a worse catastrophe in the
future?
General McMahon. Yes, ma'am. You know, looking at the
history of the basin, there has been a tension between the
upper basin and the lower basin, a distrust, for many, many
years. And that is evaporating as--or has evaporated, I would
say, as this 2011 flood event has occurred. Now is the time to
strike, while the iron is hot, while people understand the
value of flood control, and get people together and rethink how
we might leverage the Missouri River Authorized Purposes Study,
as just one example of working together to create a better
future for the basin.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much for your testimony,
and thank you for your service, sir. To the rest of you, thank
you for being here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate all
the witnesses being here. And I appreciate, General McMahon,
you being here. And I have always showed an openness, I guess,
to give the Corps of Engineers the benefit of the doubt in many
cases. But I have to be honest with you. There were three
things that happened through this process that seriously
undermine my confidence in the Corps' decisionmaking process.
The first one was when you all sent that letter out to
start buying land in the shadow of this event. Having said
that, it--you know, I wonder just exactly what the--you know,
the process that goes into that.
The second thing that happened was when your internal
emails were made public, and it appeared to me that the Corps
was more interested in your image and how it was going to be
affected by this event than you were in managing the river.
And, having said that, we will move on to the third one.
The third one was your immediate decision--and that has
been since modified--to not accept the new data and manage the
river based on last year's levels, which, given the fact that--
you know, and the frustrating part is the Corps wants to come
back and say, you know, ``It is not our fault, it is not our
fault, we had record rainfall and record snowfall,'' which is
exactly right. You didn't know how much rain was coming. But
you did know how much snowfall that you had. And, in fact, your
river management office made that statement public, you knew
how much--that you had record amounts of snowfall, and you
thought you were going to be able to handle it.
Now, moving forward with that--and we have to concentrate
on where we are going with this--you know, my first question to
you is are we going to be able to make repairs to all of the
levees to some degree, to any degree, along the river? Because
we have people exposed up there, entire communities that are
exposed. And you know that. I know you know that. And homes,
and everything else. But are we going to be able to make those
repairs before this spring season?
And then I have got follow-ups with that.
General McMahon. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question,
Congressman Graves. We are going to get as much done as the
weather permits and as funding permits. But I can tell you we
are not going to get nearly all of it done before the runoff
season of 2012 begins----
Mr. Graves. Exactly.
General McMahon [continuing]. On the 1st of March.
Mr. Graves. So wouldn't it make sense, then, to immediately
adopt the position if we are going to have lower levee levels
because of the breaks--and in some cases, I don't think any of
those breaks--or in some cases I don't think those breaks are
going to be able to be repaired in any degree, just based on
the ability to get to them--but wouldn't it make sense
immediately to go ahead and lower the levels, or increase the
capacity?
That doesn't take a study to figure that out, because the
flood level now has changed. It is no longer, you know, at the
level it is. It is probably 10 to 20 feet lower than it was
before. So wouldn't it make sense to immediately adopt that and
be open to that, and lower those levels, just based on the fact
that we now have a new flood level, because we have exposure
out there?
General McMahon. Yes, sir. So there are several things to
consider in what you are suggesting here. And we have tried to
do a very thorough risk-based analysis on the proposal. And we
are taking--as we speak, we are evacuating more water than the
16.3 million acre feet. If the weather cooperates in terms of
warmer temperatures, which has been to our benefit so far this
fall, and less than forecasted runoff or precipitation in the
upper basin, if that trend continues, we will have at least
200,000 acre feet additional space of storage created in the
system before the freeze sets in. And that is based on today's
information. That will change as the cold sets in and as
precipitation occurs.
But there are--to evacuate more water would have made the
repairs that are underway not possible, because----
Mr. Graves. I understand that.
General McMahon. Yes, sir. OK.
Mr. Graves. And we have talked about that, and I understand
the ability to get back in there and bring the water level down
too fast. But you can still bring it down more.
And I might suggest too the weather is not going to
cooperate. Don't depend on the weather cooperating, because it
has not going to.
The bottom line is, though, let me ask you this. What is
preventing you--and I would certainly hope there will not be
one single dollar spent this coming year on habitat reclamation
or on anything--and we go back and forth on the figures, and
you are always looking for--you keep saying you need money. But
it would appear to me that if a single dollar is spent on any
habitat reclamation or restoration or anything, that would be a
colossal mismanagement of funds, because we have got serious
priorities out there. And when it comes to getting equipment in
there and doing this work, I don't think that should happen.
Now, but let me ask you this. And I know there is other
issues involved. What is preventing you from using that money
right now on repairs? I know you are trying to work through
that, and you said that you are trying to move some dollars
around. But that ability to navigate is getting less and less
and less. And I will come back to the second round of
questions, but you might be able to answer that real quick.
What is the one thing or two things that are preventing you
from doing that right this minute, and finding dollars?
I think you mentioned $86 million in habitat reclamation,
there was another $13 million in environmental something or
other. But, you know, what is stopping you from doing----
General McMahon. Yes, sir. So----
Mr. Graves [continuing]. It? Right now, internally.
General McMahon. As you know, we are under continuing
resolution authority. We don't have an appropriation. So until
that process unfolds, you know, we are----
Mr. Graves. I understand that. But you will have the money.
We will eventually get the money appropriated.
General McMahon. Yes, sir. And then, of course, as you
know, Congressman, money is appropriated with a specific
purpose in mind. We have to go through a process of
reprogramming or transferring, and notification of Congress,
and those steps. So that is not a constraint for not doing it,
but it is part of the process for doing it.
And so, if and when an appropriation comes, and there are
opportunities to reprogram funds from recovery program to
repairs, I suppose we will take advantage of that opportunity.
Mr. Graves. And you can do that internally. You can do that
if you jump through all the hoops you just mentioned?
General McMahon. Well, there are steps that we have to go
through, ultimately leading to notification of the committees
that appropriate funds, sir.
Mr. Graves. All right. And I will come back--I will go
ahead and yield back at this point.
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Graves. And I will come back for a second round.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. We are going to do another round of
questioning. Hopefully it will go a little quicker.
General, first question. Talking about the master manual
and how that inter-relates with your annual operating, and then
on top of that you talked about the internal and external
review and how that is going to play in with the 2012
operating.
But what I am kind of wondering, you know, how is this--you
said in your one answer to one of the other questions you
talked about you might need to open up and revise the master
manual. Last time that was done it took about 14 years and
about $35 million, so I don't know if that is a good thing or
not. What flexibility do you have in the annual operating--for
example, in Representative King's bill, his proposal is to
force the Corps to recalculate storage capacities.
I mean can you do that now, without opening up the master
manual? I don't know what kind of parameters or restrictions
you have.
General McMahon. Mr. Chairman, we do have discretion to
make short-term--read 1-year--adjustments. And, you know, for
the right reasons, as, again, it is laid out in law in the
master manual, ultimately. So, that discretion exists, and we
are exercising it as we perceive the need to exercise it.
The annual operating plan, as contrasted with the master
manual--as we said, the master manual lays out how we balance
the eight authorized purposes. The annual operating plan is a
predictive tool that envisions five different scenarios--a
normal scenario, two scenarios above, and two scenarios below
normal--that give people who use the river and the water
resource that the river bears to navigate or to recreate or to
irrigate or to generate hydropower, and so forth.
And so, the five scenarios that are presented in the annual
operating plan give people some predictability. If we have a
higher-than-normal year up to, say, the 25th upper decile, then
we can anticipate this level of service for navigation, as an
example, this level of service for hydropower.
So, that is the purpose of the annual operating----
Mr. Gibbs. Now----
General McMahon [continuing]. To give users some
predictability.
Mr. Gibbs. I hate to interrupt you, I just got a quick
question.
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Graves makes, I think, an important point.
Since levees are damaged and not functioning, and obviously you
are not going to get them all repaired for next spring and next
summer, do you have the flexibility, the discretion in the
operating manual, like he talks about, to actually say the
flood level now is at this elevation instead of this elevation,
where it was, because of the damage of the levees? And so you
could recalculate the storage capacity, as Representative King
desires to do? Do you have that discretion?
General McMahon. Yes, sir. We do have that discretion.
Mr. Gibbs. OK.
General McMahon. There is consequences to evacuating
additional water----
Mr. Gibbs. Well, I understand that.
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. But if flood control is the top priority, I know
the other things are good too, you have got to balance, and
that is the challenge----
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs [continuing]. And I think that is the history of
this watershed.
General McMahon. So I would just like to add that space in
the upper reservoir system doesn't guarantee that we will
preclude flooding downstream. And as we saw in 2010 and
previous years, we had lots of rain below the last reservoir
that caused a lot of inflow from the tributaries. Now, we held
water back in the upper reservoir system so that water would
drain out of the tributaries and out through the main stem. But
that is an example of one year and the next year vary.
And so, if we were to create--pick a number--4.6 million
additional acre feet in the upper system, that wouldn't
necessarily preclude the flooding that occurred in 2010, as an
example.
So, we don't want to create false expectations about
creating more space as a panacea that will preclude the
flooding that occurred in 2010, as an example.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, OK.
General McMahon. So there is consequences, and we have got
to think holistically about the whole system.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Ms. Kunkel, I want to ask you a question. In
your testimony you talk about the--stated that Corps of
Engineers operating mitigation lands--erroneously and
negatively impact flood control. Do you believe--who is making
the decisions on these lands you are talking about in your
county? Is it the Corps? Is it the fish and wildlife services?
Who is driving that, those policies?
Ms. Kunkel. Well, the Corps of Engineers owns the ground.
And some of it is under management of Missouri Department of
Conservation for the wetland pieces. There--and that is just a
partnership that the Corps works out through varying States.
DNR has it in Iowa, MDC has it in Missouri. So that is a normal
partnership to manage those areas locally.
But our issue with that is that we have non-Federal levees
in those areas. So the levees are built to roughly a 25-year
standard. They are not as wide at the base. They are not as
tall. They don't have hard anodized roads on top of them that
help protect them from overtopping, and they are not set back
away from the channel, primarily. So in those areas where land
reclamation has been done between the levee and the channel, we
are seeing a wetland and a pallid sturgeon chute right up next
to a substructure levee that just doesn't have the ability to
hold off a high water flow.
So, as much as our local levee district makes attempts to
stay up to speed with what is happening in that levee, it is
not a Pick-Sloan-designed Federal levee. And so it is just set
up to fail when we have a situation where the water is this
high, and it is running directly at the levee.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Waters, did you have any comment on that,
or--OK.
Mr. Waters. Excuse me. I would just add that we have seen
areas this year where these mitigation projects have, we feel,
increased the damage and maybe caused levees to overtop sooner
than they would have. So I think there is a need to look at
these mitigation projects, especially where they are right up
next to the levee, like she is talking about.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Mr. Carnahan?
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you. I want to start with just, for the
record, to point out--and General, I know you are very aware of
this, but from fiscal year 2010 to 2011 to 2012, funding
overall for the Corps has gone down each year. Correct? So I
just wanted to point that out.
And secondly, although we authorized $25 million for the
Missouri River study, only about $7 million of that has been
provided. And you are really at--you are really stuck right
now, in terms of being able to complete that. Is that correct?
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carnahan. And so, it seems to me the correct way to go
about this is to--let's finish the study that--it needs to be
deliberate and thorough. And it needs to consider the best
science and the most recent data. And in order to complete
that--just briefly, that study being completed, how useful a
tool is that going to be, going forward?
General McMahon. Well, I think the work that has been done
to date with the $7 million, we have collected data, we have
engaged with the public to understand, you know, the various
stakes and stakeholders. We have done some modeling. All that
work is on the shelf and still legitimately can be applied to
the successful conclusion of the study.
Having said that, we might want to step back from the way
the study was originally conceived and scoped, and recast it in
the context of the 2011 flooding event, and put an emphasis on
making this study relevant to making, for example, flood
control the number one priority. So there is probably some
adjustment we could and should make to the existing study, the
way it is scoped, to shape it so that it is more relevant to
the questions at hand, and gives us the kind of set of
recommendations that would be useful for consideration by the
Congress to then subsequently appropriate for.
Mr. Carnahan. I appreciate that, and I would ask for your
ideas on ways that that can be better focused and better
inclusive of this current data, so we ultimately can get that
study done in the best way possible. So that would be very
useful.
Finally, to wrap up my time, let's fast forward a few
years. Let's pretend that we are all here. And instead of
having an excess water event, we are here and it is a drought.
We have had historic drought, OK?
And we will start with the general and I want to go down
the line and talk about how we would be having this same
conversation. And if we make flooding the top priority, then
how are we incorporating other priorities in different
situations, which we all know are likely to happen in the
future. So, General, let's start with you and go down the line
and talk about how we incorporate a drought scenario into these
conversations.
General McMahon. Yes, sir. That is an excellent question.
And of course, 2007 is when the last drought--just 4 years
ago--concluded, and we came out of it with successive bountiful
years of rain. And it is very feasible to imagine that we, in
the next 5, 10 years or sooner, would be back in a drought
cycle. So that is exactly the point of going at this with a
very--I won't say slow, but deliberate pace, to make sure that
we are thinking broadly, deeply, long-term about all of this,
and to understand impacts to other seven authorized purposes by
elevating flood control, as an example.
There are consequences. Because, as you know, Congressman,
flood control requires empty space. All the other seven
authorized purposes require water stored in the system to be
flowed on a metered pace to serve those purposes. So that
tension is inherent in this problem set, and needs to be
addressed as we go forth, very deliberately.
Mr. Carnahan. Mr. Waters?
Mr. Waters. Well, I guess my first thought is the
reservoirs were built for flood control. And that is the way--
that is--should be the primary purpose.
The other thought is, you know, I don't know what type of
drought it would take to create the type of damage we have seen
this year from flooding. I don't know if it is possible that a
drought could create the kind of damage that we have seen from
this year's flooding. Certainly the land would be put back into
production the next year much more quickly.
So, droughts are devastating, yes. We are in a drought this
year. We have seen droughts. But they are not as devastating as
a flood is. And so I think that is the reason to keep flood
control foremost in mind.
Mr. Carnahan. Mr. Lawrence?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, Congressman. I think there is--you know,
obviously, there is a lot of different various uses that are
very important to the different States. In South Dakota,
obviously, recreation is one of the more important ones,
because of the amount of tax dollars that are brought in
through tourism to the State, and that is a very large impact
to the State of South Dakota.
There is also another impact, and that is through the
Western Area Power Administration during a drought. The only
rate payer on the whole system is the customers that get the
public power from WAPA. And when we go through droughts, those
customers have to pay additional amounts of money for their
power. And they are the lone rate payer on the system. So there
are impacts to them.
The one thing I would like to recommend is that--obviously,
we have had a very impactful event this last year. It is still
stinging and we are all hurting. I would suggest that we don't
make a knee-jerk reaction and swing too far the other
direction, and that we need to have a measured response, as the
general has recommended, and that we go through some things.
There may be some interim, you know, medium ground, if you
will, that we could go to, as far as additional storage, and
create some additional storage for flooding, but not maybe go--
you know, swing the pendulum completely to the other end, and
drain the reservoirs just for that purpose.
So I think there is a happy balance, there is a happy
medium, and we need to try to approach that cautiously, so that
we don't swing the pendulum too far to the other direction and
have, you know, unintended consequences.
Mr. Carnahan. Great. And Ms. Kunkel?
Ms. Kunkel. Well, I certainly see the benefits of water
quality and the ability to irrigate and to be able to have a
regular control of the reservoir system.
But I would echo Tom Waters's remarks that in 1944, when
this system was envisioned, it was intended to control the
snowmelt and the rain runoff. That was the original purpose of
the reservoir systems above the dams. And I think we need to
continue to see that that original vision has worked very well
until the last change to the master manual. And at the last
induction of the changes of the master manual we began seeing
different operational procedures. And at that time we have
begun seeing successive flooding and problems in the lower
basin.
So, in my particular area, I have a very rural population,
a couple of small towns. The river, even in a drought
situation, runs usually a couple of feet deep. So it is not
something that is terribly of concern for me and the
communities in my county. But I recognize a much larger
regional and national impact of having those reservoirs too
low. But I think this is the time we have got to be having an
open mind and looking at is there ability to have additional
storage in those lakes, as Congressman King is looking for us
to do. Thank you.
Mr. Carnahan. Great. And Mr. Oswald?
Mr. Oswald. Well, when I was young and full of ginger, I
worked for our levee district for about 15 years. I was a
caretaker, and I even took over the responsibility of mowing 75
miles of levee each year. Part of my job was working with the
Corps of Engineers on their annual inspection of Atchison
County Levee District Number One.
I became quite friendly with one of those Corps
representatives. He was an artillery officer in World War II
and he came back home after the war and got his engineering
degree and then went to work with the Corps of Engineers on the
Missouri River, stabilizing the channel, building the levees.
He believed in his mission. And his mission was flood control
and navigation. And he was happy that recreation was going to
be a side benefit of those two things.
So, things have changed. Fewer people live in the country,
more people live in the city. There is different demand for
things. But we have to acknowledge that there is climate
variation, and that variation has to be compensated for in
those reservoirs and on that river.
Mr. Carnahan. Great. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Going back to--you
know, and there is--what we are trying to do is make--I am
trying to make your job easier, General. If we make flood
control the number one priority, then that solves a lot of your
priority issues. And if down the road we have a drought, then
flood control is obviously not going to be an issue, and it
doesn't have to be a priority. We are just trying to make sure
it is the number one priority consideration. And it doesn't
have to be considered if there is a drought.
But I want to go back to the exposure that we have right
now. And I don't expect you to know--you may know what--if the
levees are all intact, let's say Rulo, or at Brownville, you
know. Do you know what the difference between if the levees are
intact--and I imagine Kathy does, she can probably tell me. In
fact, tell me what--Kathy, we will just go to you, because I
know that you know. If the levees are intact, what is the flood
level? And right now what is the flood level with the levees
open?
Ms. Kunkel. The Rulo, Nebraska, gauge flood level is 17-
foot at this point in time. At 19-foot the holes are taking on
water out into my flood plain.
Mr. Graves. OK. So at 19 foot, water starts running out.
Ms. Kunkel. Yes, sir.
Mr. Graves. OK. What were they with the----
Ms. Kunkel. Were 24 foot----
Mr. Graves. Twenty-four foot----
Ms. Kunkel [continuing]. Was the projected level for a 25-
year flood plain----
Mr. Graves. OK. Is that close? I mean, General, is that--do
you agree with that? Whatever--what I am trying to get at is
let's say it is 10 feet or 20 feet. I don't know what it is.
But right now we have exposure out there, and we are not going
to be able to fix that. And we keep talking about going slow,
being deliberate with these decisions, not jumping to
conclusions, not going too far, don't let Congress do something
that is going to hamstring us in the future. But what we are
talking about is this year, right now. We have got people out
there that are exposed. And the flood level is lower than it is
going to be, because we are not going to get those repairs
done.
Is it in your capacity, the Corps' capacity, can you make
that determination to go ahead and lower the level, you know,
in case the weather doesn't cooperate, whatever the case, can
you go ahead and lower that level in expectation that flooding
is going to occur much, much quicker because we don't have
openings? Can you guys do that now, going through--and you talk
about the process, procedure, notifying the committees, all
that kind of stuff--can you do that?
General McMahon. Yes, sir. We have the discretion to do
that. But time is running out on us, because the river is going
to freeze in the northern upper reaches. That is going to limit
the amount of water that can be evacuated from those upper
reservoirs.
So, you know, the clock has been ticking on us. And you
know, we made this call, and we are making adjustments to this
call back at the end of July. But it was fundamentally premised
on getting the water off the flood plain so people, farmers,
businessmen could get back into their homes and start repairs,
much like the Corps needs to do to the levees.
And sir, I would add that there is nothing more important
than getting the levees repaired, whether to a 25-year level of
protection or all the way up to its full pre-flood--there is
nothing more important on our priority list than to do that in
anticipation of the 2012 runoff season. So that is why we are
moving money around, and we have got contracts in place. And
you know, we are shoveling dirt out there at L550 and 575.
There is many more places where we got to get on with it,
but----
Mr. Graves. And I am glad. And I know you guys, your number
one priority is that. I do have a quick comment, though,
because we keep talking about getting that water off so people
can get back in their homes and make repairs. I will be honest
with you. If you had a house in the flood plain right now,
would you make repairs to it?
General McMahon. Maybe not. It depends on where it was and,
you know----
Mr. Graves. I wouldn't spend the money.
General McMahon. Yes, sir----
Mr. Graves. I would continue to live--and we got people----
General McMahon. Well, I am with you. I mean it----
Mr. Graves. We got people living in Atchison County with
relatives and in hotels and whatever they got to do. Now their
house is open right now, and some of them are back there. But I
am not so sure I would spend a whole lot of money doing any
repairs to anything, as long as I had exposure.
Now, I am encouraged by the fact that you all can do all of
this internally. I am very concerned about the hamstrings with
the Endangered Species Act, which is a whole other issue. I
would hope people would allow for the fact that we have some
serious issues out there with people, communities, businesses,
you name it, and we want to be able to take care of that and be
able to move that money.
And I am encouraged, too, because--and you said you can do
that, if you jump through all the hoops you can move that money
over. And we need to find you some more money, but you can move
that money over for repair. And so I am going to be looking to
the Corps, and my constituents are going to be looking to the
Corps to get some of this stuff done, and back up the fact that
you are making levee repair that number one issue.
We all--you know, I am not going to be--I don't expect--it
is just not--we can't get all the levees repaired. But I would
expect you all to do everything within your power to lower the
level of those reservoirs, just as much as you can, within
reason. And I understand the hydrology and what is going on
with doing it too fast, also. But we have got to get those
water levels lowered, because we have got people exposed. And
that flood level is much lower than it was before.
And before I finish up, Mr. Chairman, there is one thing I
do want to clear up. Because we have heard--and I have heard
this from other people, and I heard this today in the committee
about the--that the money that is expended on environmental
issues and endangered species had nothing to do with this, and
that we shouldn't be attacking other priorities and all.
And Ms. Kunkel, I want you to explain to me some of the
things that have been done to the river in regards to shallow
water habitat, that sort of thing, and what effect that had on
those levee breaks.
Ms. Kunkel. All right. From the north end of my county to
the south there are 52 miles of levee. There are several
mitigation sites encompassing 8,000 acres. Those areas have
been purchased. The dikes have been notched that were used
originally to scour the river channel that kept a deep,
navigable channel in my area. By notching all of the dikes, it
allows sand siltation to fill in as sand bars behind the
notches. It also allows for a lower, slower flow river and
siltation.
We know now at the Rulo river gauge we cannot carry the
volume or the height of water that we were able to in 1993,
because the river channel has widened just above it in Rush
Bottoms mitigation area, and it allows the river to spread and
drop its silt load. So we don't have a good navigable channel,
and we have a wider, low-flow river that tends to spread itself
more efficiently.
We have pallid sturgeon chutes, which is an area where the
Corps of Engineers contracted to push dirt off into the river
to create these low-flow channel areas. Those chutes are
essentially just multi-fingerlets of the original channel that
allow the water to meander throughout the flood plain area. But
in many cases, as the water picked up speed and volume, it went
into those chutes and directed itself directly at the levees,
creating slides and scour holes on the river side of the
levees, or eventually causing the entire levee substructure to
fail. Also created sand boils on the exterior portion.
Those are the ongoing issues. And some of those areas we
have 60-foot holes now that encompass over 4 acres. That is the
equivalent of about 3\1/2\ to 4 football fields. They are 60-
to 80-foot deep. I have 15 of those in my county. So we are
going to have to realign the levee at this point. You cannot
fix that. The levee now has to come back and be put out as a
realignment away from those areas, rendering those farmers and
their land that was near those areas completely useless. Does
that explain your----
Mr. Graves. Thanks. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to bash this
issue any more, but I do want to say I look forward to
continuing to work with the Corps, General, in the future. I
would encourage you all to be less concerned about your image
and be a little more responsible with your emails, because that
really aggravated me when I saw it.
But thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the opportunity
to take part in this.
Mr. Gibbs. Part of our last representative's question--I
just got a quick question for the general.
During a flood event, that takes priority over anything
else like the Endangered Species Act or anything, and you do
things. But obviously, not during a flood event--the Endangered
Species Act, for example, comes into play and could create
challenges. Is that what I am hearing? Is that correct?
General McMahon. During a flood event, flood control is
preeminent, without a doubt. Endangered Species Act and Clean
Water Act and other--NEPA is another environmental law--are the
laws of the land. And so, you know, we are compliant with the
laws of the land.
And the Missouri River recovery program is a means to an
end for us to meet our statutory requirements under ESA, Clean
Water Act, NEPA, to do the right thing in accordance with the
law of the land. And it allows, then, those eight authorized
purposes to unfold to the benefit of the people in the basin.
So it is, again, part of the delicate balance that is the
Missouri River Basin. And we are not going to get around the
need to comply with the law.
Mr. Gibbs. I just wanted to be clear on that.
General McMahon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, General. And on that point, in
hearing--because I am the ranking member, subcommittee on water
and power. So we have had many hearings over the issue of
drought and of the rivers and dams, et cetera.
And in California we have had many farmers and businesses
testify. And one of the things that was brought to our
attention is that many of the farmers in areas that are very
productive indicate to us that they need to have that
ecological balance, that they need those estuaries, those
wetlands to be able to have the filtering of the water that
they use for farming.
So, to me--and you are right, this is the law of the land,
and it also was put there for a purpose. Balancing that is the
question, and not being too far on either side. And that is
just a commentary that past experience has taught me.
General, the impact on the non-Federal levees, how does
that affect your ability to mitigate your delivery?
General McMahon. We have an obligation under Public Law 84-
99 to repair non-Federal levees that are in the rehabilitation
inspection program. And the difference between a non-Federal
levee and a Federal levee is that non-Federal levee repairs are
cost-shared with the local sponsor. And that----
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, what is the cost share percentage?
General McMahon. I think it is 75 percent Federal and 25
percent non-Federal--OK, I am sorry, 80/20. I stand corrected.
Thank you.
Mrs. Napolitano. 80/20. Yet the taxpayer is also paying for
those repairs, correct? Who benefits from that? And how are we
going to do a more equitable balance?
And I understand some of these areas do not have the
ability, financially, to meet with these. But let's understand
that is also the rest of the United States paying for those
taxes that pay for the repair of those levees, that 80 percent.
So to me that is something that--I am not sure whether that
will share in the equation, but certainly it brings to light
how dependent we are on the funding to be able to mitigate
everybody's concerns.
So, while we may be casting aspersions on the Endangered
Species Act, certainly--and as I tell people, we too are a
species. When will be our turn?
So, going on to another question. Mr. Lawrence, is there a
more appropriate way to communicate with the basin? How can we
suggest, inform, educate, and reach out to those folks? If they
were faced with very quick updated analysis that they didn't
have the time to really reach out, what would be the best way
to be able to reach out?
Mr. Lawrence. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. I
think that the military already has threat system in place. And
if you had something similar to that on the Missouri River--in
other words, threat condition alpha, there is nothing imminent,
there is nothing that is going to happen in the immediate
future, we are in good condition, no issues, then you start
going on down through the different threat conditions, and then
you come up with one that is going to say this is something
that is dangerous, something is going to happen, and that would
be something that everybody could understand fairly easily, it
works very well in the military, and it is something that I
think that would work very well----
Mrs. Napolitano. General?
Mr. Lawrence [continuing]. Communicate with the public.
General McMahon. I am familiar with the system. And you
know, I think with any system, Congresswoman, it depends on how
much credibility is has with the people that it serves, and how
widely it is used.
And so, you know----
Mrs. Napolitano. So you got an education to do----
General McMahon. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Napolitano [continuing]. The populace. And
understanding that Mother Nature is not going to wait for us to
be ready for anything, she is going to throw things that we--
like Katrina, like some of the fires in California, things
that--the drought conditions.
And then, of course, there is WAPA, which I deal with. And
the fact that if we go into a drought condition there won't be
enough water to turn the turbines to make the electricity which
will cause rolling blackouts and non-delivery of electricity to
farms and other cities. So that is a very, very critical issue
to me, and one that I will continue to move forward on.
Ms. Kunkel, what would be--what would have been, in your
estimation, the impact, had the Corps not been able to do what
they did in helping?
Ms. Kunkel. I appreciate the question. And I do want to
clarify that my county has flooded 4 out of the last 5 years.
So when I am speaking to you all about flooding conditions and
the Endangered Species Act roles and the other elements of land
purchase and mitigation, I am not specifically speaking about
the Corps' activities in this singular flood event.
And so, because of that nature, ma'am, we recognize in the
county that we have got to do better. You know, we have got to
come to a compromise with the Corps of Engineers, and we have
got to look at developing a Federal levee system from north to
south. I only have it in about 18 miles of the county, and
those levees did not breach. Those Federal levees held. They
have significant damage, but they did hold.
And so, we need to look at a cooperative effort locally to
come together and put my varying small non-Federal levee
districts together into a larger Federal district, with some of
the cost share burden on the local people to recognize that
they have got to pay taxes into that system to maintain it and
keep it up and keep it moving forward.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, I did notice that you were
testifying that some of the non-Federal levees were not as wide
or as deep. And so, consequently, they were more prone to
breaching.
Ms. Kunkel. Absolutely. And we have seen breaches in May of
2007, June of 2008. We had an early flood in April of 2009, and
June and July of 2010, and then May through the fall of this--
--
Mrs. Napolitano. What would have, in your estimate, been
the cost had the Army Corps not been able to work as
effectively as they did?
Ms. Kunkel. The cost in our county? Well, I know that they
spent over $3 million maintaining L497 for sand boils. In
addition, about $4 million maintaining----
Mrs. Napolitano. No, I am talking total overall cost.
Ms. Kunkel. Total overall in the county? Those are the two
levees that we saw the Corps working on this year, so I would
anticipate about a $7 million impact and loss of those levees,
had they not have come forward and worked on those.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. And thank you, again, for being
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gibbs. I want to thank the panelists for your
perseverance, being here. I think this has been helpful. I
think it is always good to have a good communication
discussion, because we all want to do the right thing and
protect lives and property. And I commend the work you do.
And I know that General McMahon has talked about they have
learned some things too, that everybody has learned from this
event. And communication is a big part of that. And I think we
move forward--we can work to make the best policy and help get
the--get our goals achieved and protect lives and property.
So, that concludes this hearing. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 2:02 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

