- REVIEW OF INNOVATIVE FINANCING APPROACHES FOR COMMUNITY WATER INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF INNOVATIVE FINANCING APPROACHES
FOR COMMUNITY WATER INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS--PART I

=======================================================================

(112-73)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 28, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-103 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         Columbia
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            BOB FILNER, California
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington,   GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
Vice Chair                           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               LAURA RICHARDSON, California
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFF DENHAM, California              NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma               (Ex Officio)
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter and attachment: Discussion draft, H.R.
___, a Bill to provide financing assistance for qualified water
infrastructure projects, and for other purposes, 112th Cong.,
2012...........................................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Mayor Gregory A. Ballard, Indianapolis, Indiana, testifying on
behalf of the U.S. Conference of Mayors/Mayors Water Council...    13
David R. Williams, Director of Wastewater, East Bay Municipal
Utility District, Oakland, California, testifying on behalf of
the National Association of Clean Water Agencies (NACWA).......    13
Aurel M. Arndt, General Manager, Lehigh County Authority,
Allentown, Pennsylvania, testifying on behalf of the American
Water Works Association (AWWA).................................    13
Eric S. Petersen, Esq., Partner, Hawkins Delafield & Wood LLP....    13
Thaddeus R. Wilson, Vice President, M3 Capital Partners LLC......    13
Jeffry Sterba, President & CEO, American Water, testifying on
behalf of the National Association of Water Companies (NAWC)...    13
Jeffrey A. Eger, Executive Director, Water Environment Federation    13
Steven A. Fangmann, P.E., BCEE, Executive Vice President, D & B
Engineers and Architects, testifying on behalf of the American
Council of Engineering Companies (ACEC) and the Water
Infrastructure Network (WIN)...................................    13

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. Earl Blumenauer, of Oregon..................................    49
Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson, of Texas.............................    52
Hon. Bill Pascrell, Jr., of New Jersey...........................    54

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Mayor Gregory A. Ballard.........................................    55
David R. Williams................................................    65
Aurel M. Arndt...................................................    73
Eric S. Petersen, Esq............................................    77
Thaddeus R. Wilson...............................................    84
Jeffry Sterba....................................................   102
Jeffrey A. Eger..................................................   110
Steven A. Fangmann, P.E., BCEE...................................   117

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Timothy H. Bishop, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment, request to submit statement of The
Associated General Contractors of America......................     5

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Gregory M. Baird, Ex-Municipal Utility Chief Financial Officer
having served in California and Colorado, written testimony....   124
Robert A. Briant, Chairman, Clean Water Construction Coalition,
written statement..............................................   129
Diane Linderman, P.E., PWLF, President, American Public Works
Association, written statement.................................   132
Mark Policinski, Executive Director, Ohio-Kentucky-Indiana
Regional Council of Government, and Vice President, National
Association of Regional Councils, written testimony............   137
Ryan Schmitt, Chairman, NUCA, letter to Hon. Bob Gibbs, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, February 28,
2012...........................................................   143

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

REVIEW OF INNOVATIVE FINANCING
APPROACHES FOR COMMUNITY WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS--PART I

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources
and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment will come to order, and I would like to welcome
everybody today.
I do want to recognize a former Member, Mr. Ron Packard
from California. Good to see you. Of course, I was not here
when you were here, but I have heard good things about you. So
welcome to the committee.
I will start with my opening statement. We have got a great
panel today, and we will recognize you in a few minutes. But
first, again, I would like to welcome everybody to the hearing
today on potential innovative financing approaches for
community water infrastructure projects. This is the first
portion of a two-part hearing. We will hold the second hearing
on Wednesday, March 21st.
We are all well aware that the needs for communities to
address water and wastewater infrastructure are substantial,
and these needs are growing. Our Nation's water and wastewater
infrastructure is aging, deteriorating, and in need of repair,
replacement, and upgrading. This has resulted in frequent
leaks, blockages, and inadequate treatment of pollutants.
The needs are especially urgent for hundreds of cities and
towns around the Nation as they are trying to remedy the
problem of combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer
overflows for communities lacking sufficient independent
financing ability. Many cities could end up spending as much as
$1 billion to $5 billion each, or even more, to eliminate the
combined sewer and sanitary sewer overflow issue.
Numerous other regulatory priorities are placing additional
burdens on communities. For example, many of our Nation's
wastewater utilities are being forced to install extremely
expensive advanced waste treatment to remove the next increment
of pollutants, including nutrients. In addition, EPA has
initiated a controversial national rulemaking that lead to
communities facing the prospect of substantially increased
costs for controlling pollutants from stormwater runoff.
Moreover, many communities face increasing regulatory
burdens under the Safe Drinking Water Act for their public
drinking water systems. All these initiatives are adding
additional layers of regulatory requirements and economic
burdens that our communities are having to somehow deal with.
According to studies by the EPA, the Congressional Budget
Office, and others, the costs of addressing our Nation's clean
water infrastructure needs over the next 20 years could exceed
$400 billion, roughly twice the current level of investment by
all levels of Government. The needs for drinking water
infrastructure drive this figure even higher.
This is a staggering amount of money. A large portion of
the Federal, not to mention State, regulatory mandates are
going unfunded by Federal and State governments. Rather, our
local governments are being forced to pay for more and more of
their costs of these mandates, with the result that local
communities and ratepayers are increasingly getting
economically tapped out.
Increased investment needs to take place, which leads to
the question, where is the money going to come from? There is
no simple answer to that question; rather, we need to make a
variety of financing tools available for infrastructure
financing, or the toolbox. This includes alternative financing
approaches that would make more funds available. There is a
tremendous amount of capital from the private sector and other
sources potentially available for investment in our
infrastructure.
We have been hearing how in recent years, the financial
markets have been discovering water and wastewater
infrastructure, and how this is becoming a more popular asset
class that is increasingly attracting billions of dollars in
private investment capital. We have also been hearing that
there are some barriers that have inhibited bringing private
sector capital into the municipal water and wastewater markets,
but with some restructuring and developing of innovative
project financing mechanisms, we could start to overcome these
barriers.
There are a number of past and current legislative
proposals that could provide additional means of increasing
investment in infrastructure. For example, there is legislation
to remove the volume cap that restricts the amount of private
activity bonds that States and localities may issue in any
given year for water and wastewater facilities.
In addition, the subcommittee is looking at a potential
financing tool that would provide Federal credit assistance in
the form of direct loans and loan guarantees to finance
significant water and wastewater infrastructure projects. This
draft legislative proposal will be entitled the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act, or WIFIA. This WIFIA
proposal is in part modeled after the TIFIA program for the
surface transportation projects and other credit programs
governed by the Federal Credit Reform Act.
And there are other proposals, including the Clean Water
SRF Reauthorization legislation, that this subcommittee has
advanced in past Congresses and it is included in the bill that
the subcommittee Ranking Member, Mr. Bishop, has introduced
this Congress. Also, a few weeks ago we did have a hearing on
integrating the process, the permitting process, to address
issues of costs and streamlining prioritized projects for
municipalities as part of this total package.
At today's hearing we will hear from a variety of witnesses
about these proposals and other potential ways we can encourage
increased investment in infrastructure, including from private
sources.
Now I will recognize my Ranking Member, Mr. Bishop, for any
remarks you may have.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for holding today's hearing on the importance of investing in
our Nation's crumbling wastewater infrastructure.
As you know, over the past decade this subcommittee has
held numerous hearings on State and local needs to repair and
replace its wastewater infrastructure. According to EPA's most
recent Clean Watersheds Needs Survey, States have identified
almost $300 billion in capital investment needs to meet their
wastewater and stormwater treatment and collection needs over
the next 20 years. Other organizations, including the
Congressional Budget Office and the Water Infrastructure
Network Coalition, have identified annual funding gaps ranging
from $3.2 billion to $11.1 billion in order to make up the
shortfall between annual needs and the current expenditures
from all sources.
This subcommittee has also, under both Republican and
Democratic majorities, taken significant steps to address these
long-term infrastructure challenges, including passages of
several bipartisan water infrastructure financing measures over
the decades. These past measures highlighted the best of what
this subcommittee and this full committee is capable of doing,
bridging any potential disagreements between the sides and
moving forward on joint proposals that garner overwhelming
support in committee and on the House floor, most recently in
the 111th Congress by an almost 3 to 1 vote of support.
I am encouraged today that both sides of the aisle seem to
be advocating for a renewed commitment to meeting our Nation's
wastewater infrastructure challenges, and have put forward
proposals to do just that.
All of the witnesses here today have been presented with a
copy of the chairman's discussion draft, the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2012, as well as a
copy of the bipartisan bill that I introduced, the Water
Quality Protection and Job Creation Act of 2011, along with
Ranking Member of the full committee, Mr. Rahall, and
Congressmen LaTourette and Petri.
Both bills include mechanisms modeled after the successful
Transportation Infrastructure, Finance and Innovation Act, or
TIFIA program, as it is known, authorized in TEA-21 to leverage
additional capital for wastewater infrastructure investment.
Although there are some differences in approach, my first
imposition is that there are more similarities than differences
between these two drafts on this point, and that should give us
all reason to work more closely together.
The chairman's draft also picks up language from the
bipartisan bill introduced by a former member of this
subcommittee, Mr. Pascrell of New Jersey, and his colleague on
the Committee on Ways and Means, Mr. Davis of Kentucky, related
to private activity bonds.
In addition, H.R. 3145, the bill that I have offered,
continues this committee's efforts to reauthorize the Clean
Water State Revolving Fund, a program that has not been
successfully reauthorized in almost 25 years.
Putting aside the question of the size of the
reauthorization of appropriations for the Clean Water SRF, H.R.
3145 also includes several bipartisan changes to provide
communities with greater flexibility and how the Clean Water
SRF funds are up side to reduce the long-term costs of SRF
loans to local communities and to provide greater technical
assistance to small and rural communities that often do not
have the internal technical or financial capacity to address
water infrastructure challenges.
In addition, H.R. 3145 continues to explore the possibility
of creating a Clean Water Trust Fund, which could provide a
dedicated, sustainable source of long-term revenue for
addressing water quality challenges, akin to the Highway Trust
Fund or the Aviation Trust Fund.
Mr. Chairman, in my view, the existing Clean Water Act has
served this Nation well in meeting its water quality and water
infrastructure concerns, and needs to be part of the long-term
solution to addressing future challenges. The question of how
some of these alternative financing approaches we will discuss
today compliment, duplicate, or conflict with existing law in
meeting these future challenges will still need to be
addressed.
Again, I welcome today's hearing as an opportunity to begin
this conversation. I am hopeful that on this issue of meeting
our long-term water infrastructure challenges, we can find
agreement and move forward with one voice on an issue that
greatly benefits our communities, our economy, and our overall
public health and environment.
Mr. Chairman, before I yield back, I ask unanimous consent
to insert into the record two things: one, a statement for the
record from Representative Pascrell; and the second is a
statement from The Associated General Contractors.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[The prepared statement of the Honorable Bill Pascrell,
Jr., appears together with other Members' statements. Please
see the table of contents for ``Prepared Statements Submitted
by Members of Congress.'' The statement from The Associated
General Contractors follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Cravaack, do you have a comment, opening
statement?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member
Bishop, for holding this hearing, innovative financing for
water infrastructure projects. This issue is vital to the
continued health and vitality of our fellow citizens and
economy, and needs to be addressed immediately. I would like to
welcome today's witnesses, and I would look for to hearing your
testimony on this important issue regarding the future of our
Nation's water infrastructure.
Our water infrastructure is the cornerstone for many parts
of the country, from our national security to our economy to
the health of our children. Our water and infrastructure needs
to be protected and improved in order to keep us safe, healthy,
and prosperous.
Our current infrastructure is getting to the age that it is
going to need to be significantly updated or completely
replaced. I know the 8th District of Minnesota is facing the
reality of aging water and infrastructure systems, and
dizziness of cities and townships that I represent are looking
for efficient and innovative solutions to this problem.
For example, a facility in my district located in Chisholm,
Minnesota is currently operating at or above design capacity
and is in need of replacement due to its age and lack of
operating consistency and the lack of availability to increase
treatment capacity. This has led to a construction moratorium
and inability to meet current and future stringent Lake
Superior drainage basin effluent requirements. The
deterioration is so severe that the potential of a catastrophic
failure is not if but when.
This is the situation facing many similar projects, and I
hope we can discuss answers here today. I am very pleased to be
discussing a way to pay for these much-needed improvements
instead of just passing more debt on to future generations.
I will be interested to hear any options or solutions of
this very important situation because we need results, and I am
sure both Democrats and Republicans can agree to the necessity
of our success.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and their
thoughts on the future financing of water infrastructure
projects. Thank you again, and I will look forward to hearing
your testimony. And I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Napolitano, do you have an
opening statement?
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Ranking Member Bishop, for holding this very critical and
important hearing.
Investing in our clean water infrastructure does create
jobs and does protect the public's health. Our Nation's
infrastructure--and we hear that in this subcommittee, and we
hear it at home--they are deteriorating to the point that it is
causing great angst for the local elected officials in many of
my areas. They are in need of critical repair, and there is no
way many of these communities can fund the necessary repair and
replacement.
So we need long-term solutions that are going to be helpful
in addressing this aging infrastructure to not only improve the
water quality and the health of the environment but to create
the jobs that come with it. We must continue to invest in
improving our wastewater treatment because it will directly
support clean water supply. And there is new technology that
can be used and be able to possibly cut the cost of being able
to do all this repair, needed infrastructure repair.
I strongly support H.R. 3145, the Water Quality Protection
and Job Creation Act of 2011, and congratulate both Ranking
Member Bishop and Ranking Member Rahall on the full committee
for introducing it. It provides $13.8 billion in a Clean Water
State Revolving Fund over 5 years. What better than to have the
States be able to help the communities?
It is desperately needed to address these challenges facing
our country's communities. And our EPA's most recent Clean
Water Needs Survey found, as was stated by the Chair, $400
billion worth of wastewater system repairs over the next couple
of decades. My figure stated $300 billion, Mr. Chairman. I am
glad you are stating it a little higher because you may have
better figures than I do.
These treatment plants have the capacity for solar, wind,
and biomethane energy production, and we must continue to look
at what is feasible, less expensive, and be able to get the new
evolving technology recognized and utilized. This bill will
help some of our water challenges, and this is one of the major
ones.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I urge my colleagues to help us
get this bill through and be able to support our communities. I
yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
I welcome our panel again, and we will start with our first
witness. He is the mayor of Indianapolis, Mr. Gregory Ballard.
He is testifying on behalf of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
Welcome. The floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF MAYOR GREGORY A. BALLARD, INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE U.S. CONFERENCE OF MAYORS/MAYORS
WATER COUNCIL; DAVID R. WILLIAMS, DIRECTOR OF WASTEWATER, EAST
BAY MUNICIPAL UTILITY DISTRICT, OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, TESTIFYING
ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CLEAN WATER AGENCIES
(NACWA); AUREL M. ARNDT, GENERAL MANAGER, LEHIGH COUNTY
AUTHORITY, ALLENTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE
AMERICAN WATER WORKS ASSOCIATION (AWWA); ERIC S. PETERSEN,
ESQ., PARTNER, HAWKINS DELAFIELD & WOOD LLP; THADDEUS R.
WILSON, VICE PRESIDENT, M3 CAPITAL PARTNERS LLC; JEFFRY STERBA,
PRESIDENT & CEO, AMERICAN WATER, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF WATER COMPANIES (NAWC); JEFFREY A.
EGER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, WATER ENVIRONMENT FEDERATION; AND
STEVEN A. FANGMANN, P.E., BCEE, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, D & B
ENGINEERS AND ARCHITECTS, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
COUNCIL OF ENGINEERING COMPANIES (ACEC) AND THE WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORK (WIN)

Mr. Ballard. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member
Bishop, and to the House Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee's Subcommittee on Water Resources and the
Environment, for inviting me to testify. As mentioned, my name
is Greg Ballard. I have been the mayor of Indianapolis since
2008.
I am testifying on behalf of the U.S. Conference of Mayors,
and I am here today to communicate the concern of our Nation's
mayors, and share about the rising costs of water and
wastewater infrastructure, and to ask for a renewed partnership
with Congress and the U.S. EPA to provide sensible relief to
local governments as they work toward their clean water goals.
It is important to recognize that everyone wants to do the
right thing with regard to the environment. And as a mayor, it
is my job to be a steward for my citizens. I want them to have
the best and the safest water, and so do my peers around the
country. So does EPA. So does Congress. We are all in agreement
on this. In fact, the American cities provide some of the
safest and cleanest water in the world. However, this comes at
a hefty price.
In the last decade, public spending on water and wastewater
grew by 65 percent, to $855 billion. During that same time,
local government long-term debt grew by 82 percent, so $1.6
trillion as of 2009, while local government revenues declined
in the face of a struggling national economy.
Clearly, this is an unsustainable problem. It is one reason
the U.S. Conference of Mayors is calling on Congress to help us
more sensibly and flexibly achieve our shared clean water
goals.
Congress has successfully partnered with local government
on clean water goals in the past. In the 1970s and 1980s,
Congress approved capital construction grants, while local
governments shouldered the responsibilities--or the
repercussions--or meeting or missing those goals. When these
grants were replaced by the State Revolving Loan Fund program,
it marked the beginning of a guideline retreat from shared
responsibility.
Congress shed financial responsibility for clean water
goals, but allowed the administration to continue to set
aggressive rules. As a result, many local governments now
shoulder significant long-term debt to finance water and
wastewater plants that they have had little say in developing.
These are unfunded mandates, pure and simple.
Congress can provide immediate relief by passing
legislation that increases financing flexibility at the local
level--for example, the modification of the Tax Code to remove
State caps on the use of private activity bonds for public
water and wastewater infrastructure investment, as seen in
House Bill 1802 and Senate Bill 939.
We also support the Water Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act that has been talked about, which can lower
overall costs for large capital water projects by as much 16
percent, and that could happen with direct loans to cities.
This will help address some of the most pressing debt
challenges facing our cities as we strive to meet clean water
goals.
But the U.S. Conference of Mayors is also seeking a more
sensible way forward. The proliferation of Federal regulatory
mandates has drastically increased local water and wastewater
spending requirements. Over 780 cities and water/wastewater
utilities have or will experience sewer overflow enforcement
actions by the EPA.
We are calling on Congress to require EPA to set clean
water priorities and reasonable expectations on affordability.
This will give us the flexibility to find innovative and
efficient solutions to our local water and wastewater
challenges as we did in Indianapolis.
Indianapolis originally faced $3\1/2\ billion in expenses
under a 2006 consent decree. That figure quickly grew by $300
million more through cost overruns, and most certainly would
have continued to balloon.
In 2008, we reevaluated the steps necessary to resolve our
clean water concerns with an eye towards better results at a
lower cost. Though difficult, Indianapolis was able to amend
its EPA consent agreement twice. In each case, the city reduced
the overall price of the solution and got better environmental
results. In fact, our residents will benefit from cleaner water
10 years sooner than under the original consent decree while
saving $740 million.
Indianapolis enjoyed forging a partnership with the EPA to
find commonsense, less costly fixes to the challenges that we
face. In fact, EPA called the renegotiation with my city as a
win-win for everyone involved. It was a great example of
governments working together. We demonstrated that flexibility,
creativity, and government can go hand in hand.
Unfortunately, the Indianapolis model is too often the
exception to the rule. The U.S. Conference of Mayors urges the
EPA and Congress to use the maximum flexibility allowed in the
Clean Water Act and any future legislation to reduce the cost
burden of reducing or eliminating sewer overflows. We also ask
you to require EPA to prioritize mandates, and to allow
flexibility and affordability to play a greater role in
determining all clean water solutions at the local level.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. We will have questions and answers when the
whole panel gets through their opening statements.
I would like to welcome at this time Mr. David Williams,
who is the elected board member of the Central Contra Costa
Sanitary District Board of Directors in Central Contra Costa
County, California. He is also a director of Wastewater at the
East Bay Municipal Utility District in Oakland, California. He
is also president of the National Association of Clean Water
Agencies in Washington, DC.
Welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Williams. Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member Bishop, and
members of the subcommittee, I am David Williams, president of
the National Association of Clean Water Agencies, and here
testifying on behalf of NACWA this morning; also Director of
Wastewater at the East Bay Municipal Utility District in
Oakland, California, and elected board member of Central Contra
Costa Sanitary District in Martinez, California. Thank you for
inviting me.
The Clean Water Act will be 40 in October. We have seen
four decades of exceptional public utility leadership. In 1972,
90 percent of the Nation's waterways were impaired due to
pollution. EPA now estimates that at 45 percent. We have come a
long ways; there is still a ways to go.
We were certainly helped along the way with the clean water
grant program, and later the SRF. Today the SRF provides
approximately $5 billion in low-interest loans. In addition,
municipalities expend nearly $100 billion on providing water
and wastewater services. This supports millions of jobs and
also exemplifies local commitments and leadership to ensure
clean, safe water.
These investments continue to be made under increasingly
difficult circumstances such as the shrinking Federal financial
support, increasing cost of regulatory requirements, and in the
midst of a major economic downturn.
Despite these challenges, utility leaders are transforming
the way we do business through unprecedented innovation. This
is exemplified by energy conservation and recovery efforts;
water recycling; biosolids reuse; resource recovery from waste
streams, such as extracting phosphorus from wastewater and
using that for agricultural fertilizer; green infrastructure
and low-impact development to lessen the impacts of stormwater.
This is all in addition to maintaining the core infrastructure
needed to collect and treat the wastewater.
I will give you an example of my utility at East Bay
Municipal Utility District. Ten years ago we started a resource
recovery program. Under this program, we bring in liquid waste,
such as fats, oil, and greases; food processing waste, such as
cheese waste or beverage waste; animal processing waste from
the chicken and beef industries; and recently, even solid
materials such as commercial source-separated food scraps from
grocery stores and restaurants.
We take these organic wastes and put them in anaerobic
digesters, where they are digested and stabilized. A by-product
is methane gas. We capture the methane gas and generate green,
renewable energy from these waste materials. We do this at our
power generation station that uses clean burn engines and a
turbine. Today we are meeting our 5 megawatt daily demand at
our wastewater treatment plant solely from these wastes, plus
we are providing 2 megawatts of green energy back to the grid.
Today's POTWs not only collect, treat, and dispose of
municipal and industrial wastewater, but they are reimaging
themselves as green factories. By becoming green factories,
POTWs generate revenues that help keep rates low. There are
recycling benefits to the environment. Revenue and energy
generation free up capital for investment. That, of course,
creates jobs. And jobs, of course, creates increased tax
revenues.
In pursuing all of these efforts, financing is a key
ingredient. The types of innovative financing mechanisms being
contemplated here, plus others yet to be identified, could be
very helpful to continue the progress we have made today to
promote the types of innovation I have described.
Simply put, more money on the table is helpful, whether it
comes from low guarantee loans such as WIFIA, exempting water
and wastewater projects from the volume cap on private activity
bonds, or other approaches. NACWA supports new additions to the
municipal financing toolbox.
Some important considerations, however. We want to make
sure that new mechanisms do not negatively impact existing
well-used funding mechanisms such as SRF. An example is that
funding a new program should not increase public agency costs
to access the existing bond markets or other capital markets.
Funds from new financing tools should also be available to
help clean water agencies fund innovative projects and new
technologies. The budget constraints that make innovative
financing a vital discussion today also demand we look at the
other side of the coin--namely, we need to reassess the command
and control structure of the Clean Water Act.
I testified before this committee last year on NACWA's
money matters campaign. The theme of that campaign is: Smarter
investment to advance clean water. Its intent is to shed light
on growing financial and compliance challenges posed by the
Clean Water Act regulations.
NACWA has called for an integrated planning approach. This
approach will serve to prioritize competing costs of
requirements and help achieve maximum water quality benefits at
a cost that will not break the bank, which is our ratepayers.
EPA is working on their integrated planning and hope to have
the framework finalized by March.
Finally, if we find that under EPA's integrated planning
that the 40-year-old Clean Water Act does not have the
flexibility to accomplish the goals of cost-effective clean
water, NACWA hopes that we can continue to work with this
subcommittee to consider targeted changes to the Clean Water
Act to effectively address 21st-century challenges and ensure
another four decades of water quality improvements and
unrivaled utility leadership.
The cost-effective, innovative, green factory concepts that
I have described are the underpinnings of NACWA's 20/20 vision
of the water resources utility of the future. In the coming
months, NACWA is developing an advocacy agenda for specific
legislative steps that will help ensure any roadblocks to this
vision are removed and the needed tools and support are
available for utilities. And we look forward to working with
this subcommittee to make the utility of the future a reality
today.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome our next witness, Mr.
Arndt. He is the general manager of the Lehigh County Authority
in Allentown, Pennsylvania. He is testifying on behalf of the
American Water Works Association.
Welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Arndt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Chairman
Gibbs, Ranking Member Bishop, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Aurel Arndt, general manager and chief financial officer
of Lehigh County Authority, which provides water and wastewater
service to more than 22,000 customers in Lehigh and Northampton
Counties in eastern Pennsylvania.
Throughout my career, including service on the executive
board of the Government Finance Officers Association, the board
of the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Finance Authority, also
known as PENNVEST, and the Water Utility Council of the
American Water Works Association, I have focused my efforts and
interest on water infrastructure finance.
I deeply appreciate this opportunity to speak today on
behalf of AWWA and its more than 50,000 U.S. members on the
need for innovative financial mechanisms to sustain and
rejuvenate our country's water infrastructure.
Yesterday we released a report titled, ``Buried No Longer:
Confronting America's Water Infrastructure Challenge.'' We will
be sure to provide copies of this report to the committee. This
report reveals that replacing and expanding our buried drinking
water infrastructure will cost at least $1 trillion over the
next 25 years. During that time, the required annual investment
will more than double, growing from $13 billion to almost $30
billion per year by the end of that period.
I must emphasize that this $1 trillion is only for buried
drinking water infrastructure, largely the pipes underground.
Aboveground drinking water facilities, wastewater, stormwater,
and other water-related needs are also very large and must be
added to this forecast to reflect the true magnitude of the
water investment before us.
I would like to focus my remarks today on the new financing
tool addressed in the draft legislation released last week,
which would help American water utilities address this
challenge. I must emphasize, however, that AWWA strongly
believes the cornerstone of water infrastructure finance is and
should remain local rates and charges.
We have had a chance to review the draft legislation, the
Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act, or WIFIA, and
we wholeheartedly endorse this approach. As described in the
draft, WIFIA will fill a significant gap between what current
water infrastructure tools can do and what needs to be done.
We urge this subcommittee, the full committee, and the rest
of Congress to enact this legislation, which is modeled after
the highly successful Transportation Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act, or TIFIA.
As we see WIFIA, it has three significant attributes that
collectively cannot be matched by any other new water
infrastructure financing tool.
First, WIFIA would increase capital available to utilities
for infrastructure investment. Water utilities already use a
variety of approaches to finance their capital needs, including
the State Revolving Loan Funds, municipal bonds, corporate
bonds and equity, and private activity bonds, among others.
Unfortunately, the investment need before us will push many
utilities beyond the limits of those traditional financing
sources and undermine the ability to set affordable customer
rates.
Second, WIFIA will provide a lower cost of financing for
many utilities. We anticipate that WIFIA would access funds
from the U.S. Treasury and use those funds to provide loans,
loan guarantees, and other credit support for projects at rates
at or close to Treasury rates. In most market conditions,
Treasury rates are lower than the cost of capital on most other
sources of water infrastructure financing.
However, reducing the interest rate by just a few
percentage points can amount to a significant savings. For
example, lowering the cost of borrowing by 2\1/2\ percent on a
30-year loan reduces the lifetime project cost by almost 26
percent, the same effect as a 26-percent grant. Moreover, the
savings can significantly accelerate water infrastructure
investment by making it more affordable for utilities and their
customers.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, WIFIA will have
minimal cost to the Federal Government. All of us are well
aware of the importance of controlling the Federal budget and
the deficit. WIFIA is highly responsive to these concerns.
Under the Federal Credit Reform Act, a Federal entity can
provide credit assistance to the extent that Congress annually
appropriates budget authority to cover the subsidy cost of the
assistance--in other words, the net long-term cost to the
Federal Government.
Under WIFIA, that long-term cost is minimal, first because
loans are repaid in full with interest to the WIFIA
administrator, which in turn repays the Treasury, again with
interest.
In addition, there is minimal credit risk because virtually
all water-related loans are repaid in full.
That fact is highlighted by a Fitch rating report which
determined that the historical default rate on water bonds is
.04 percent--I repeat, .04 percent--putting water service
providers among the best credits in the United States.
Moreover, the leveraged SRF programs across the country have no
history of defaults, also placing them among the strongest
credits in the country.
We note that TIFIA is able to leverage Federal funds at a
ratio of 10 to 1. With the water sector's strong credit ratings
and history, the ratio for WIFIA should be even greater because
the subsidy cost required by the Federal Credit Reform Act
would be minimal. If the WIFIA leverage ratio is set at 25 to
1, which is actually 100 times lower than the risk ratio of .04
percent, a $200 million appropriation will produce $5 billion
in infrastructure investment. It is important that we are not
advocating loan forgiveness or negative interest loans or other
similar credit aspects that would increase the cost of the
WIFIA program to the Federal Government.
In conclusion, WIFIA will allow us to do more with less--
specifically, to build more water infrastructure at less cost,
and to top that, our Nation will get a cleaner environment,
better public health and safety, and a stronger foundation for
our economy.
We thank the subcommittee for its leadership in offering
this important tool, WIFIA, to help address a significant need
with our water infrastructure. We offer to work with the
subcommittee in communicating the value of WIFIA to the rest of
Congress and our respective publics.
Thank you again for this opportunity to appear here today.
I will be happy to answer any questions and to provide you with
any other assistance I can now or in the coming months. Thank
you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome Mr. Eric Petersen. He
is a partner in the Hawkins Delafield & Wood law partnership in
New York City.
Welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Petersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member Bishop, and members of the
subcommittee, my name is Eric Petersen, and as was mentioned, I
am a partner at Hawkins Delafield & Wood, a leading national
law firm in the fields of public finance, public contracts, and
public-private partnerships. I specialize in water projects,
and represent the interests of municipal water and wastewater
utilities.
Hawkins has negotiated major water infrastructure contracts
for Seattle, San Diego, Phoenix, Santa Fe, San Antonio,
Washington, DC, New York City, and 75 other cities, counties,
and authorities over the past 20 years.
Federal financial support for water infrastructure, in my
view, consists mostly of the tax exemption of interest on
municipal bonds issued for water and wastewater projects.
Proposals continue to surface in Congress and from the
administration to raise revenue by curtailing, by any number of
means, the tax exemption of interest on municipal bonds.
Passage of any of these measures would only serve to tighten
the financial vice on the water industry.
Municipal water bonds are tax-exempt only if they are
issued by the municipality itself, so-called governmental
bonds. Bonds issued for water projects by private companies,
known as private activity bonds, are not tax-exempt and thus
carry the higher interest rates of corporate bonds.
As a result, if a city wants to have a private firm design,
build, finance, and operate a new project, known as a public-
private partnership or P3 project, the private financing
element causes the debt to be taxable and generally makes the
overall project costs too expensive.
The Internal Revenue Code does contain an exception to the
provision that makes private activity bonds taxable. Water
projects are part of a category of private activity bonds
called exempt facility bonds. The total amount of exempt
facility bonds that can be issued on a tax-exempt basis in each
State, however, is tightly capped.
Private financing of public water infrastructure has thus
been effectively blocked. The planning process for large water
projects takes years, and the uncertainty and unlikelihood as
to the availability of tax-exempt private activity bond volume
cap for a proposed water project, as a practical matter,
eliminates private financing and P3 approaches to project
implementation.
Unrestricted tax-exempt private financing of public water
infrastructure is no cure-all. Most projects surely will
continue to be municipally financed using traditional water
revenue bonds. But I am convinced that certainty as to the
availability of tax exemption for privately financed water
projects could create a significant level of renewed interest
from the private sector in providing innovative and flexible
solutions to a wide variety of municipal water project
challenges.
This was indeed the case in 1986, when certainty as to the
tax-exempt private activity bond financing for municipal solid
waste projects, which was provided by the Tax Reform Act of
1986, unleashed a wave of additional investment in waste to
energy and other facilities needed in the municipal solid waste
management field, totaling over $15 billion.
To conclude with a real and current example in the water
sector, the San Diego County Water Authority this year is going
to contract for the purchase of water from an $800 million
seawater desalination project in Carlsbad. It is a public-
private partnership with Poseidon Resources which will design,
build, finance, and operate the plant.
Poseidon's private financing makes the project bonds
private activity bonds, but the company has secured volume cap
allocation from the State. This is an unusual and fortunate
occurrence, made possible only by the collapse in demand for
private activity housing bonds in the present market.
The price of water with tax-exempt interest rates is
projected at approximately $1,850 per acre-foot. With taxable
financing at interest rates about 100 to 150 basis points
higher, the price would be over $2,000 per acre-foot, or around
a 10-percent increase. It is quite possible that this key water
resource project for California would not proceed had lower
cost, tax-exempt financing not been secured by the private
company. The value of assured tax exemption for water private
activity bonds is thus quite plain.
Thank you for this opportunity. I look forward to your
comments and questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome Mr. Thaddeus Wilson.
He is vice president of M3 Capital Partners in Chicago.
Welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gibbs,
Ranking Member Bishop, members of the subcommittee, it is an
honor to be here today to discuss innovative financing
approaches for community water infrastructure projects. My name
is Thad Wilson, and I am a vice president with M3 Capital
Partners, a management-owned investment and advisory firm based
in Chicago, Illinois.
Through an advisory affiliate, M3 currently manages equity
commitments of $2.9 billion on behalf of a U.S. public pension
plan, focused on long-term investments in real estate.
M3 is currently forming a North American water
infrastructure fund that we anticipate will initially be
capitalized by a U.S. public pension plan as the
``cornerstone'' sponsor.
It is expected that the fund will focus primarily on
offering an innovative design/build/operate/finance approach to
municipal water infrastructure project delivery. We believe
this approach offers a robust form of public-private
partnership, or P3, to municipalities to capitalize their water
infrastructure improvements.
In the U.S. today, there is a significant and growing need
for investment in our critical water infrastructure, as we have
heard in detail this morning. Given State and local funding
challenges, particularly in the current environment, accessing
private capital through P3 structures may be a compelling
option for municipalities.
At the same time, public pension plans need long-term
investments that can provide stable returns for their
beneficiaries--teachers, firefighters, police, and other public
employees.
In my view, the primary benefits of water infrastructure
P3s include the following.
Because a P3 is not an outright sale or privatization,
municipalities can retain long-term ownership and control of
their water facilities.
Municipalities can also accelerate the launch of new
projects, which may help to meet compliance-driven deadlines
and may generate near-term employment opportunities for the
local economy.
Municipalities can transfer key risks to the private
partner. As a result, the private partner is well-aligned with
the municipality and is putting its capital at risk, with a
requirement to perform its obligations throughout the term of
the P3.
And finally, municipalities can potentially realize life-
cycle cost savings as a fully integrated team takes on
responsibility to effectively design, build, operate, and
finance their water infrastructure projects.
Potential measures to facilitate more water infrastructure
P3s include the following.
Encourage broader appreciation for the value of water and
water infrastructure, supporting true cost pricing for water
services, where appropriate.
Increase awareness of the many social benefits from water
infrastructure investment, such as conservation and reuse of
water from water recycling initiatives.
Increase awareness of the potential benefits of P3
structures, combined with efforts to implement regulations that
facilitate the use of P3s.
Help to lower the cost of debt financing for private
partners in water facility P3s by removing the State volume cap
on private activity bonds for such projects.
And finally, specific to the Water Infrastructure Finance
and Innovation Act legislation the subcommittee is currently
preparing, in Section 104(b) on public-private partnerships, I
would recommend amending the discussion draft to include ``the
private financing or development partner'' as an additional
``entity eligible for assistance.''
In summary, municipal obligations to provide quality water
services align well with the increasing desire of public
pension plans to invest in stable infrastructure assets. P3s
utilizing public pension plan capital can help to meet water
facility investment needs, and more municipalities should find
it advantageous to explore this innovative financing approach.
I thank you for your time today and for your consideration
of this issue.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome Mr. Jeffry Sterba. He
is president and CEO of the American Water Company, and he is
also testifying on behalf of the National Association of Water
Companies.
Welcome.
Mr. Sterba. Thank you. Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member
Bishop, members of the committee--I will turn that on to make
that better. Now you can hear me. Most people hear me so loud
they would just rather I lowered my voice.
I appreciate the invitation to appear before you today. I
am Jeff Sterba, president and CEO of American Water, which is
the largest publicly traded water and wastewater company
operating in the United States. We have over 7,000 employees
who serve more than 15 million customers in 30 States of the
United States and a couple of Provinces in Canada.
I am testifying on behalf of American Water and the
National Association of Water Companies, which represents
numerous companies in the private water sector.
This committee has heard from many about the disturbing
status of our country's water and wastewater infrastructure,
and I applaud your commitment to do something about it. The
primary point that I will make in my testimony is that in this
era of very tight Federal, State, and local municipal budgets,
private capital is, and can be made more, available to help
address our crumbling infrastructure and the economic harm that
it causes. This can be done without changing the fundamental
nature of public ownership of water because we are talking
about the infrastructure that treats and delivers it, not the
ownership of it.
American Water serves roughly 4\1/2\ to 5 percent of the
United States, and we invest roughly $1 billion per year in
upgrading the infrastructure, which is about 7\1/2\ percent of
the total investment that is made.
If we couple that with the investments made by other
private water companies, which are roughly also about $1
billion, that is $2 billion, which is roughly equivalent to the
amount that the U.S. Government invests through the two
revolving fund mechanisms for both clean drinking water and
under the Clean Water Act.
So, while there is substantial private capital at work
today, it is not sufficient. Ranking Member Bishop, you
mentioned the $3 to $10 billion annual shortfall. So we have
got to find another set of ways to create more capital for
sustainable water management projects. So let me touch on four
ways fairly quickly.
First, three of the four proposals are legislative in
nature, but the first can largely be accomplished through a
policy shift. Right now, if a community is going to partner
with a private water company to improve or expand its
infrastructure, its customers will likely have to pay a large
penalty to remove existing municipal debt because of the way
the IRS interprets some of its rules.
This penalty can drive a 15- to 25-percent increase in
interest cost with no real benefit, and that 15- to 25-percent
increase in interest cost is paid for by customers. The penalty
comes from having to retire existing low-cost debt, pay
issuance costs for replacement debt, and possibly having to
prefund amounts greater than the amount of debt to be paid off.
Now, we are not talking about changing the ownership
structure. We are talking about a long-term lease. There is
nothing gained that I can tell by this defeasance requirement
except higher cost to customers. There is no cost to the
Federal Treasury to make this change, and it would enable
access to new capital to repair and upgrade water and
wastewater systems, adding to the economy and creating jobs. So
let's not enable financial barriers for local governments.
Instead, let's rewrite the rules that hinder these win-win
public-private partnerships.
The second tool has already been touched on, and that is to
create greater access to private activity bonds for all public
purpose drinking water and wastewater projects. H.R. 1802, the
Sustainable Water Infrastructure Investment Act, would do that
by removing the water projects from State volume caps.
Experts have stated that this would generate at least $2
billion in new investment each year, an amount which, using
U.S. Conference of Mayors' analysis, would translate into some
60,000 jobs. We appreciate the inclusion of similar language in
the draft WIFIA legislation.
Frankly, the WIFIA legislation is the third idea I would
like to mention. It primarily seeks to lower the financing cost
of infrastructure investments. NAWC commends the organizations
which have put this forward, and we generally support the
principles of WIFIA.
It is not clear, though, how much WIFIA will really
increase the total amount of capital investment rather than
just substitute for municipal debt or State Revolving Fund
leveraging that would otherwise occur. While lowering the cost
of debt through a Federal subsidy is a worthy goal, the real
priority is to increase the amount of capital that can flow
into this needed infrastructure.
Finally, as part of the WIFIA proposal, we strongly
encourage the subcommittee to redress an unfortunate oversight
in the Clean Water Act. Currently, private water utilities are
not eligible to participate in the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund. Moreover, while the Safe Drinking Water Act gives States
the option to make private water utilities eligible for the
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, only about half the States
have done so.
The part of WIFIA that helps leverage State Revolving Funds
would provide little benefit to the millions of American
taxpayers who are customers of NAWC member companies. Existing
Federal programs such as the State Revolving Funds and any new
Federal programs such as WIFIA should benefit all taxpayers,
including customers of private water companies.
Now, in the end, we know intellectually and we have to
understand that the cost of water and wastewater infrastructure
upgrades will put upward pressure on rates. Multiple surveys
have found that American voters are willing to pay more to help
ensure appropriate infrastructure and service. However, we must
bring operational efficiency and low-cost capital to the table
to minimize this impact.
Private water companies are integral to doing so, and we
stand ready to help the committee on this important challenge.
Thanks, and we will take any questions you have.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome Mr. Jeffrey Eger. He
is the executive director of the Water Environment Federation
in Alexandria, Virginia.
Welcome. The floor is yours.
Mr. Eger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Bishop
and members of the subcommittee. I join this distinguished
panel in thanking you for hosting this very important hearing.
My name is Jeff Eger. I serve as the executive director of
the Water Environment Federation, WEF. It is an 84-year-old
professional and technical organization with 36,000 members,
including scientists, engineers, and others working for clean
water in North America and around the globe.
We are the sponsors of WEFTEC, the largest annual water
conference in the world, and our peer-reviewed publications
serve as the benchmark for best practice in wastewater
treatment, stormwater management, and water quality.
The majority of our members, including those of the Ohio
Water Environment Association, work in and for municipal
government, so the topic of financing for publicly owned
treatment facilities is a very important one for us.
Prior to coming to WEF, I served for 18 years as the
executive director of Sanitation District 1, the second-largest
public utility in Kentucky. SD-1 maintains $1 billion in
physical assets, including 1600 miles of sewer lines, 143
wastewater pumping stations, and 3 major treatment plants. Two
of those plants were designed and constructed during my tenure,
and to help with this, we secured more than $80 in low-interest
loans through the State Revolving Loan program. Federal
financial assistance was an important component of our overall
financing package.
I am also proud that during my time at SD-1, we tried to be
proactive in identifying our capital needs and working with
local leaders, including elected officials in the business
community, to obtain support for rate increases, having enacted
double-digit rate increases seen out of the last 10 years.
We also worked with our State and the U.S. EPA to implement
a holistic watershed-based approach to protect water quality
that reduced cost and enabled us to assure that ratepayers saw
that their money was being spent cost-effectively.
This experience led us to our working with Mayor Ballard's
organization, the U.S. Conference of Mayors, to bring the
issues of affordability and priority-setting forward as a
national issue. Mr. Chairman, we appreciate the attention that
you provided to this issue during the subcommittee hearing late
last year.
As other witnesses have noted, local governments are facing
the worst financial circumstances in more than a generation. If
we are going to continue to provide essential services and make
progress in water quality, it is time to reimagine the way we
provide local water services.
We need to encourage innovation--innovative technologies,
innovative management approaches, and innovative financing. As
you heard from my associate, Mr. Williams, we believe that we
are on the cusp of transforming from a waste treatment industry
to a resource production industry. Funds for research and
implementation have never been more important and critical in
this regard.
We are approaching the 40th anniversary of the Clean Water
Act. The Clean Water Act contained a number of innovations,
including a grants program to help cities meet the ambitious
national requirements. Fifteen years later, the 1987 amendments
phased out grants in favor of another innovation, the State
Revolving Loan program.
WEF was an early supporter of the SRF program, and as I
noted earlier, the Clean Water SRF has been remarkably
successful. We fully support the continuation of the SRF, and
we want to thank Congressman Bishop for including
reauthorization of the SRF in his legislation introduced last
October.
But now, 25 years later, it is time to innovate once again.
The WIFIA concept, discussed earlier and proposed in draft
legislation, is one opportunity for Congress to assist local
communities with their water infrastructure needs in a way that
makes sense today. WIFIA would provide much-needed low-interest
funding in a manner that compliments the SRF and leverages the
available Federal dollars.
As has been mentioned, reduction of just 1 percentage point
in a long-term loan could mean savings of millions of dollars
over the life of that loan. These savings mean that available
public funds will go further in addressing our critical
infrastructure needs.
Mr. Chairman, subcommittee members, we know that this
Congress in particular is facing some serious issues, including
concern about Federal spending and deficit reduction. It can be
challenging to see a clear path forward, even on an issue like
clean water, which enjoys widespread public support and where
there is a strong history of bipartisanship.
Innovative financing legislation provides an opportunity to
demonstrate once again that clean water is a national priority,
and that leaders here in Washington are sympathetic to the
needs of local governments.
In a few weeks, WEF will be launching a major new public
awareness campaign, ``Water Is Worth It.'' We have already gone
public with an electronic billboard in Times Square, and over
time, will be working with the other organizations here at this
table, and we hope with you, to reinforce the value of water.
We see introduction and eventual passage of new water
infrastructure financing legislation as a very important step
in supporting the value of water and our essential water
infrastructure. We stand ready to work with you and your staffs
to perfect this legislation and move it forward.
Thank you for your time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
At this time I would like to welcome Mr. Steven Fangmann.
He is the executive vice president of D & B Engineers and
Architects in Woodbury, New York. He is testifying on behalf of
the American Council of Engineering Companies and the Water
Infrastructure Network Coalition.
Welcome.
Mr. Fangmann. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member
Bishop, and the distinguished members of the Water Resources
and Environment Committee.
My name is Steve Fangmann. I am executive vice president of
D & B Engineers and Architects, a Long Island based firm with
over 45 years of expertise in environmental engineering and
ranked by Engineering News Record as one of the top 200
environmental design firms.
During my career I have worked for many communities on
wastewater management and water supply services, and formerly
served as the Deputy Commissioner of Public Works for the
Nassau County DPW where I was responsible for the overall water
and wastewater management of the department, which included two
major wastewater facilities and a $400 million upgrade of both.
I was also responsible for water management, planning for
Nassau's sole source groundwater aquifer system, as well as
3,000 miles of a separate sewer collection system.
Engineering firms who work closely with local government
officials have a considerable appreciation of the difficulty
municipalities and utility districts face in balancing their
constituents' demands, public safety, and environmental
protection, all in the context of extremely limited funding
options.
I am testifying this morning on behalf of the Water
Infrastructure Network and the American Council of Engineering
Companies. WIN is a broad-based coalition of the Nation's
leading construction, engineering, labor, conservation and
municipal water and wastewater treatment providers. ACEC is the
business association of America's engineering industry with
thousands of firms that specialize in water and wastewater
design and consulting.
We commend the subcommittee for the timeliness of this
hearing today. There are few Members of Congress who are not
aware that the country is facing a water infrastructure funding
crisis. The question is what can we do to solve it. We know
that we must solve it because without safe and clean water for
our communities, not only is public safety at risk, but also
water dependent industries such as agriculture, commercial
fishing and tourism would be at risk and would be unable to
contribute the hundreds of billions of dollars annually that
they currently provide to our economy. We simply cannot afford
to postpone the solution.
We think the answer is not just one silver bullet. What
communities need is a comprehensive toolbox of water
infrastructure financing options. The water infrastructure
financing challenges we face have been a century in the making
and will take all of the best ideas that have been presented
today to the subcommittee, as well as many that have yet to
have been developed, to meet this challenge.
For today's hearing, we would like to focus on just four
proposals of the many that have been discussed. The development
of a TIFIA Program for water infrastructure, as championed by
Chairman Gibbs, and the innovative finance tools in the Water
Quality Protection and Job Creation Act, as introduced by
Congressman Bishop, all must be tools in the toolbox.
In addition, we commend Chairman Gibbs for including H.R.
1802 in his draft water infrastructure finance bill. The
Sustainable Water Infrastructure Investment Act, which has
strong bipartisan support, provides an exemption from private
activity bond State volume caps for all water and wastewater
projects.
We also support a dedicated source of funding for water
infrastructure, as well as reauthorizing the State Revolving
Funds for water and wastewater projects.
Regarding TIFIA, WIN and ACEC believe that the development
of a TIFIA-like program for water infrastructure makes eminent
sense, and we are pleased that water infrastructure funding
legislation being advanced by Chairman Gibbs and Congressman
Bishop has embraced this financing concept.
Engineering firms who specialize in highway transportation
projects are great proponents of leveraging potential of TIFIA,
but its usefulness is sometimes limited because of the revenues
required, such as toll roads or fees. The TIFIA concept is
better suited for financing water infrastructure projects.
Municipal water and wastewater projects have a built in system
of customer user fees or volume rates collected on a regular
schedule and dedicated only to water services and
infrastructure. These fees guarantee that bonds can be paid
back and offer minimal risk to the lender, as others have
stated here. We estimate that 90 percent of the water projects
would fit in this category.
We also think that some important modifications would make
WIFIA proposals more effective, streamlined and transparent. We
have outlined these in detail in our written testimony. In
particular, we would urge that the existing State Revolving
Fund programs be used to the maximum extent practicable to
distribute WIFIA loans. The States already have a 25-year
mechanism in place for distributing SRF loans, a mechanism that
selects projects based on an objective ranking system that is
publicized and available for review.
In addition, it would be far more cost effective for the
Department of Treasury to oversee approximately 50 loan
agreements with the State SRF financing authorities instead of
hundreds or potentially thousands of loans to individual
communities. We think that limiting access to WIFIA to only $20
million or larger projects could restrict its usefulness to
many medium size and smaller States.
A direct loan program of State SRF financing authorities
would allow the States to use their existing ranking systems to
issue the loans.
We also hope that the WIFIA proposal would incorporate the
improvements to the SRF Program, such as extended loan
repayments and expanded project eligibilities that are part of
the SRF reauthorization bills passed by the House.
And finally, we would strongly resist efforts to have WIFIA
funding supplant existing SRF funding to the States.
I will just quickly touch on private activity bonds. They
will have an important role to play and should be definitely a
part of the toolbox. Currently each State is limited, as stated
by others, by the volume cap. What happens with water and
wastewater projects, our projects are out of sight, out of
mind, meaning underground structures do not get the public's
attention. So the private activity bonds are not used for those
types of projects with a volume cap.
It is not a new idea. The Federal Government lifted some
low-volume caps when the Nation was facing a financial crisis
with respect to the development of adequate solid waste
disposal facilities, as testified before me.
Regarding the Clean Water Trust Fund, WIN and ACEC continue
to believe that a long-term, deficit neutral, dedicated funding
source for water infrastructure must be one of the tools in the
toolbox. Though not perfect, dedicated trust funds have
financed the majority of our Nation's highway and airport
infrastructure construction, and as general funds become
scarcer, we must consider the concept.
We remain committed to working with the committee to
identify viable funding sources for a Clean Water Trust Fund.
Again, on the SRF, we are strongly supportive of
reauthorization, and in conclusion, we are extremely encouraged
by the subcommittee's efforts to develop the next generation of
water infrastructure financing tools. The House Transportation
and Infrastructure Committee and this subcommittee, in
particular, have a long history of developing water
infrastructure funding legislation that earns broad bipartisan
support.
We look forward to working with the bipartisan leadership
of this subcommittee to perfect the innovative water
infrastructure financing tools discussed at today's hearing and
deliver a bill to the President's desk this year.
Thank you for the hearing.
Mr. Gibbs. I will start off the go-round of questions here,
but just a couple of comments. You have probably noticed in the
draft legislation we are working on it is left blank the
dollars that will be put in. That is because we are trying to
figure out how we are going to pay for it, at least the
exposure to the taxpayers, and so we are working through that.
I think the overall theme versus the support here, there is
obviously a need for more financing, but I guess I will open it
up to the panel starting off. We heard a little bit about doing
some new innovative thinking with like the WIFIA and not be in
conflict with other programs because we do not want to have
unintended consequences. So kind of along that line you may
want to maybe discuss a little bit to make sure that we are not
going to do something that is going to cause problems for the
current SRF or some of our other financing programs.
Then also I think you could probably touch a little bit
maybe on what impediments you might see, either Federal, State
or local, that could be challenges that we need to try to work
through in the legislation.
So whoever wants to address that. Mr. Arndt.
Mr. Arndt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we see it, WIFIA is really a complement to the other
tools that are already in place. I know there has been some
discussion of does it become a substitute for other programs. I
will focus on the SRF.
When you look at what the SRF does, it really helps those
utilities that in many cases cannot fund their infrastructure
on their own, and as a result, you see things like grants. You
also see very low-interest loans and that sort of thing. So we
are not looking to essentially replace that capability which
comes forward from the SRF.
Likewise those entities, particularly the higher credit
rated utilities that are out there, can access the bond markets
quite readily, and again WIFIA is not meant to substitute for
that access to the bond market. It is a supplement to that.
In summary my comment would be that it is one more tool in
that toolbox that we need to fill the gap and, in particular,
where we see the increasing needs in areas such as the
infrastructure replacement and renewal expenditures which are
unprecedented and just emerging at this point in time, to fill
that gap that is going to grow progressively as time passes.
Mr. Gibbs. Maybe just to follow up now with Mr. Petersen
because your testimony I thought was excellent. In your
experience working with private-public partnerships, how do you
see to, you know, bring that money in under a WIFIA concept?
Mr. Petersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, our experience tends to be at the planning stages of
these projects, and if you can put yourself in the shoes of an
administrator of a water or wastewater public authority and
they have a large capital need, let's say a CSO Program or a
replacement wastewater plant or a new water treatment plant,
something like that. They will engage a team of consultants.
They will us their own internal resources, and they will look
at all of the options that are available to them. They will try
to plan for the optimal technical solution. They will project
costs. They will have a plan of financing for the project. They
will have a financial advisor advising them on current market
interest rate conditions, and so forth.
And then they will turn to the question of how are they
going to actually deliver the project. Are they going to
deliver it using traditional design-build with the municipal
operations and municipal bond financing? Are they going to try
something a little more innovative like the design-build
contracting two contracts in one for efficiency and more
expedited delivery; maybe even include private operations in
the mix?
Then they will turn to the question of should I consider
private financing in this mix of potential ways of delivering
this project. And as I was trying to say in my testimony, that
is where they always stumble.
We went through a business case exercise considering
different project delivery methods for a major wastewater
treatment plant in Pima County, for example, in the Tucson
area, a million people. They need to replace an old plant, and
they went through this whole kind of analysis that I just
summarized and they attempted to ascertain the risk adjusted
net present value of life-cycle costs of the project under all
of these different approaches of delivering it and financing
it.
And the conclusion was they picked a design-build-operate,
one contract with three elements, with public financing
traditionally. They would have picked design-build-finance-
operation, a P3 type of project with private financing but for
the uncertainty as to the availability of tax exempt financing.
That is where the rubber meets the road.
As I indicated and as I think you all know from discussing
this in the past, private financing is obtainable for water
projects if you get wide cap allocations, but you can never be
sure. And the legislation you are considering will take that
uncertainty away.
And I think in the case of the example I just gave in Pima
County, they might well have selected private financing to get
the debt off their own balance sheet, put it in the balance
sheet of the private project company that would develop it if
they had some assurance that they could count on the taxes and
financing that they would benefit from through the terms of the
contract.
Mr. Gibbs. Just to follow up, we know that with the
proposal the risk is really on the taxpayers, and of course
that helps bring in this private equity. Also, you know, you
have a good stream, a good track record because of the
ratepayers' fees.
I guess to conclude here in my first round of questions is
one question that comes up, and I think I know the answer, but
I want to make sure it is on the public record, what
historically would be the default rate on water-sewer type
projects that maybe we should be looking at for when I have to
defend or argue what the cost and what the risk is to
taxpayers. What kind of default rate would there be for this
kind of operation?
Does anybody want to take a stab at that?
Mr. Petersen. I will answer that if I might. Our firm does
a lot of bond counsel work, bond counsel to public agencies,
and works with rating agencies. Most all of the data is rated
by the investment rating agencies, and in general as several of
us have said here on the panel, municipal water and sewer
revenue debt that is secured by pledged rates and charges is
very secure. The default rate is near zero, and that is why
most have very strong investment grade credit ratings, in many
cases stronger than even tax secured general obligation debts,
which is subject to, you know, the vicissitudes of the economy.
This is just straightforward rates and charges for water and
sewer, very strong credit.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, Mr. Sterba.
Mr. Sterba. Mr. Chairman, if I could answer your question
about whether there are conflicts that exist between what is
being proposed and other existing financing mechanisms. From
our perspective we do not see conflicts so much as we do see
opportunities for leveraging.
So, for example, one of the mechanisms in WIFIA that can
bring new capital to the table, as opposed to just lowering the
cost of capital, is direct loans. But if you leverage that by
requiring private capital to be brought to the table in order
to qualify for a loan, then you are effectively getting double
value. So you are bringing a loan to the table and then
encouraging another source of capital to come along with it.
That is something that has not necessarily been required,
but there is a provision in WIFIA that says the Administrator
can take into account whether or not other private sources of
funding or other sources of funding are brought to the table.
So I would encourage the committee to utilize that because it
can enhance the pool of overall funding.
The other comment goes back to one of the things that I
mentioned about something that could be done administratively.
It is very similar to what Mr. Petersen referenced, except it
deals with existing assets. Say you have a municipally owned
system that was built some time ago and financed with tax
exempt debt. It has not been invested in, has not been kept up,
and it also has growth and renewal obligations that the
municipality cannot meet on its own. So it turns to an entity
that provides expertise in that.
Today, the debt that is currently outstanding must be
either repaid or defeased, increasing the cost to customers
without adding value. And this issue, I think, may be able to
be tackled solely administratively working with the IRS. It
would help bring new capital, some of which may come through
WIFIA, some of which may come through a private purpose entity
that is going to fund the new capital additions, but without
adding the burden on the existing capital that is already
financing assets built 5, 10, 15 years ago.
Mr. Gibbs. That is an excellent point. My time is up.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the panel. It has been very, very helpful testimony.
We have a lot of commonality here. We have agreement that
we clearly have a problem that we have to address. We have an
agreement that we cannot address it sufficiently with the
amounts of money that are currently on the table, and we have
before us in effect two different proposals which are, I think,
complementary as opposed to contradictory with respect to how
we go about trying to fund this or what role the Federal
Government would play in funding these water infrastructure
needs.
The draft bill that the Chairman proposes takes basically a
WIFIA approach. The bill that I filed along with Ranking Member
Rahall and with Members LaTourette and Petri takes sort of an
approach in which it creates a suite of activities, a more
robustly funded SRF, the creation of a trust fund, and then a
WIFIA approach.
Two differences that I would like to explore and get your
guidance on. One is in the bill that I filed. The WIFIA
approach type funding would continue to flow through the SRF
and judgments would be made by whatever entity the State has
set up allocate SRF funds. In New York State, it is the
Environmental Facilities Corporation. There are analogues all
over the country.
In the Chairman's draft, it seems as if decisionmaking with
respect to what projects would be funded would be vested with
the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
And so my question is you are the stakeholders. You are the
guys who are on the ground. Is it better to have the decisions
made by a body that is State-based or is it better to have the
decisions made by a Federal or is it better to have the
decisions made by a Federal body?
So, Mr. Fangmann, let me start with you.
Mr. Fangmann. Well, having a lot of experience with EFC in
New York, one of what I believe are the best run SRF programs
on the wastewater side, I think going through that model is the
best way. I testified to that effect on behalf of WIN and ACEC.
The idea there is they broke it down into priority groups
throughout the State so that the most popular city is
guaranteed some bulk of money, but as well as the local
communities downstate and upstate so that the money is spread
through the State on an equitable basis based on need and
priority. You know, what will probably benefit from the
projects?
So that is all built into the existing program. So I see
additional funding come through a loan to that same program
would be an efficient way of moving financing.
Mr. Bishop. Other members? Mr. Arndt.
Mr. Arndt. Perhaps a bit of correction. In the draft
legislation as we see it, the EPA Administrator would
effectively be charged with allocating the funds. There are
actually two different mechanisms that are made available in
that legislation. In the case of large projects they would have
the ability to directly access with the funding via an
application, I presume to the Administrator. In the case of the
remaining systems who are not eligible for that large project
or large utility status, they could in turn work through their
SRFs. So it is not an all or a nothing type of approach in that
regard.
I would comment that I think the SRFs have an advantage in
that they are an established organization. They have criteria.
They have had the history of working in that funding arena for
now 20-some years, and as a result, I think there is a working
relationship that has been developed. Those agencies tend not
to be regulatory agencies. They tend to be financial
organizations which I think is an important aspect, that the
primary focus be to finance, not as a regulatory approach.
In that regard, some of our earlier discussions related to
WIFIA actually called for the establishment of an authority of
some sort to provide the funding as opposed to working through
EPA, which is still, we believe, workable. However, we
recognize the advantages of working through an established
agency as well.
So I think there is perhaps some more consideration that
could be given on that point.
Mr. Bishop. Are you saying that it is a jump ball?
Mr. Arndt. I think what is included with the draft, I
think, is workable and that we would support. However, perhaps
it could be refined. Perhaps the Administrator could delegate
that authority to an authority type organization which has more
of a financial focus.
Mr. Bishop. I would just say I appreciate that. When we
were drafting our bill, our original draft was the direct
approach, and the stakeholders told us no. The stakeholders
told us to say with the established mechanism, which is the SRF
for the reasons that you just cited. People are familiar with
it. It works. There is an established criterion, and that it is
something that entities are comfortable with.
My time has expired. I have another question, but I will
defer. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. All right. Anybody down here? Just raise your
hand. Representative Napolitano, go ahead.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
In listening to the individuals talk about all of the needs
that our communities have, as a past mayor of a small city I
understand exactly some of the issues that affect our local
communities.
Mr. Ballard, you talked about EPA prioritizing and some of
the mandates that affect the ability for some of the
communities to be able to meet those requirements, and you
stress the need of flexibility.
We have been able to in our local area to bring the
Regional Director to talk to the Councils of Government to be
able to have direct input from them as to how they are affected
or not affected by the mandates in our area. I am not sure if
anything of that nature is going on and you could suggest to
the Conference of Mayors that this is something that is
available to them. It has been made available to us.
The new concepts, Mr. Williams that you talk about, is the
utilization of new technology, of the green technology, of
being able to convert methane gas into electricity to run a lot
of stuff, but there is a lot of other technology coming out.
How much of that is being used and being incorporated into
long-term plans? And are we actively looking at a way to reduce
the energy usage in planning for further need as we move
forward in upgrading or maintaining or structuring new areas?
Mr. Williams. So for years, publicly owned treatment works
have been looking at their energy demand inside their plants,
and they do energy audits and that type of thing to reduce the
energy demand, put in more efficient mechanical equipment,
lighting, that type of thing.
What I was talking about was actually going beyond that,
and that is actually generating more energy by bringing in
waste material, waste material that currently goes to landfills
or in some cases actually have energy put into it in order to
help the disposal process. So what I am finding in California
is that 10 or so years ago not too many plants were doing that,
but more and more plants are beginning to do it.
One thing you are seeing a lot of, is plants beginning to
take in fats, oil and greases which are very digestible and
create a huge amount of energy and using that to power their
treatment plants.
Mrs. Napolitano. How is this--I am sorry. My time is
running out--how is this being able to increase the
participation of the three Ps, the public-private partnerships?
Mr. Williams. Some of these things take additional capital.
So if you were able to partner with the public sector on that
and bring in capital to actually build the facilities needed to
do this, that would be very beneficial.
Mrs. Napolitano. And does this affect a lot of the smaller
communities that may not be able to afford to be able to find
out where these partnerships can be formulated or how they can
obtain some of the assistance they are going to need to upgrade
and maintain?
Mr. Williams. It would definitely help smaller communities
because smaller communities oftentimes just do not have the
wherewithal to build facilities that are needed to produce the
green energy.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, as you know, Government does move
very slowly in being able to move forward, and we want to be
sure that we have those new concepts made known so that we can
continue to advocate, whether it is with the Department of
Energy or with EPA and other agencies.
Mr. Arndt, you talk about doing more for less. The Federal
debt currently precludes thoughtful necessary action. We have
to go on the current trend, which is no earmarks, no pork, pay
for, et cetera. So how would that be able to increase the
participation of the public-private partnerships? And how do we
make this more available to communities that have no idea where
to go?
Mr. Arndt. Like a lot of things, no simple answer, but one
of the things that has been included in our written comments
and others have alluded to that here is that----
Mrs. Napolitano. Would you move the mic up please?
Mr. Arndt. Yes. One of the things that is included in our
testimony is the fact that WIFIA should be allowed to take a
subordinate position on financings which we believe would then
leverage or encourage private investment and essentially act as
an incentive for that purposes.
Beyond that, fundamentally, if you have a lower cost source
of capital, which effectively is one of the attributes of
WIFIA, what it does is increases affordability to the
ratepayers. It increases the certainty that the debt would be
repaid with interest as it becomes due, and also it increases
the capacity of the utility to do more projects.
I think when you put all of those things together, you end
up with a net improvement beyond where we are today.
Mrs. Napolitano. Understood. My time has run out, but with
the indulgence of the Chair, I will ask one more question and I
will be done, and that is are any of you proposing to any of
your cities, communities or the partnerships that you have to
look into the future because of the increase in population and
the demand it is going to create on the infrastructure itself,
one?
And two, what are you doing to educate the general public
about the need to increase the rates, whether it is
incrementally or generally saying that these needs are going to
be vital to the delivery of clean, potable water?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen?
Mr. Ballard. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
As you probably know as a former mayor, you have to always
educate your constituency on the rates. We were facing large
rate increases, and that is why we had to do what we had to do,
by negotiating with the EPA and coming up with creative
financing and all that we could with creating infrastructure
and all that we possibly could at the local level.
I think mayors across the country are generally doing that.
They are looking for new solutions like WIFIA. They are looking
at all sorts of financing opportunities. They are looking at
being more creative with technology, all while telling their
constituency that rates are probably going to go up regardless
of what we do. And I think they understand that, and as you
know, that is a delicate balance as you move forward.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mayor Ballard, I am sorry I did not get to hear your
testimony. I was in another meeting, but I was here when we had
the Mayor of Omaha here, I guess, a few months ago who told all
of the problems he had with EPA. I notice you mentioned him in
your testimony.
But in your testimony you talk about that you were under
this consent decree that had a potential cost of $3.5 billion,
and then it ballooned up even from that another $300 million,
but you say that you were able to renegotiate that and reduce
the overall price and get a better environmental result.
How much money were you able to save, and how did you do
that? I mean, what better things were you able to do after this
renegotiation?
Mr. Ballard. Well, it was a difficult process, Congressman,
and thank you for your question. It took a while to get there,
to be honest with you. It did balloon up to $3.8 billion by the
time we had entered office. We knew that that was a huge number
that directly was going to go to ratepayers. No question about
that.
I was lucky enough to hire some rather brilliant people to
work for the city. They had run water companies before
actually, and they went to the EPA and said, ``We need to
relook at this. We think we have a better solution.''
That is what we did. We told them we thought we had a
better solution, and we thought we could make it greener. We
thought we could make it faster, and we thought we could make
it cheaper. To be frank with you, initially that did not matter
very much.
Mr. Duncan. Do you mean that did not matter to the EPA? Is
that what you mean?
Mr. Ballard. Right, and so we had to essentially negotiate
for well over a year, especially on the second amendment and we
told them that we had that combination of gray and green
infrastructure, which we thought would be more environmentally
sound and a lot cheaper for the citizens of Indianapolis, and
it took over a year of negotiation. We were very happy that we
got that done, and everybody came out in saying that was a win-
win solution.
But I would tell you, as I said in my oral testimony today,
we are the exception to the rule. Mayors across the country,
and you just have to spend a couple hours at any Water Council
meeting that are dotted throughout the country to sense the
frustration that mayors are going through regarding this. It is
palpable. It is hurting them, and frankly, you can see on their
faces that they are very, very worried, and that's why whenever
I talk about it I ask for more flexibility, more
reasonableness, and as you may know, mayors, they just have to
get things done.
I mean, as I say, at the city level a buck is a buck, and
you have to get things done at the city level. And so there are
creative solutions out there, and the mayors and other
municipalities, maybe even smaller, are working their tail off
to be creative to work with the mandates that are thrown upon
us and to make sure that we can do it in an affordable manner,
and that is why we talk about prioritizing mandates, and that
is why we talk about being flexible with the EPA.
Mr. Duncan. Well, my dad was Mayor of Knoxville from the
time I was 11 until I was 17, and so I have great sympathy for
any mayor. I found out that everybody and his brother wanted to
be a fireman or a policeman, and the way after they went on the
force they wanted a promotion and a raise, and certain other
problems. Knoxville has had to spend a tremendous amount of
money over the last few years, and so I have heard some of
these things.
I am going to run out of time. I will say this. When you
said that the EPA did not seem to care about the cost, that is
really a sad statement because too often people in Government
do not worry about the cost because it is not money coming out
of their pockets, but they forget that there are a lot of poor
and lower income people that have trouble paying some of these
things.
Mr. Williams, let me very quickly ask you. I know you
expressed concern about the exploding costs on these things,
too, in your testimony, but you say that in this subcommittee
the best way we could help is to give maximum flexibility to
the local water agencies. Do you feel like the Clean Water Act
as it is now is not giving enough flexibility? Is that what
caused you to put that in your testimony?
Do you have an example?
Mr. Williams. The short answer is yes. I testified here
last year on the integrated permitting and planning that EPA is
proposing, and they are going to be finalizing that framework
in March. One of the things the clean water community is very
anxious to see is what does this actually look like.
We have looked at the framework, but it is hard to tell
from the framework how it is actually going to play out on the
ground. So we are interested in actually test cases so that you
can take a difficult situation where there is a number of
regulations and see how this actually plays out, see how they
are prioritized, and what flexibility is there.
And we would like to look at that holistically as the
entire clean water community in the Nation and just see what
happens. If it does not play out as we would like to see it
play out where you do get the flexibility, then we would like
to work with the subcommittee in terms of introducing
legislation that will provide that flexibility.
Mr. Duncan. All right. My time is up, but let me just
express one other major concern I have. Mr. Fangmann just a
minute ago talked about the distribution of funds. I represent,
you know, primarily an urban-suburban district in and around
Knoxville, but I also have some small towns and some rural
areas, and I have heard and read that while the problems of the
bigger cities are getting the most publicity and the most
attention, that there are a lot of even more problems in some
of these small towns and rural areas, and even more so because
many people in those areas do not have quite as much income as
people in the cities do.
So that is something that I think deserves a little bit
more attention than it has been getting. I see somebody on the
panel might want to say something about that. I see a couple of
people nodding their heads, but if any of you want to say
something about that, certainly feel free to do so.
Mr. Arndt.
Mr. Arndt. Thank you for that question.
The Buried No Longer Infrastructure Report that I mentioned
earlier looks at the infrastructure replacement and expansion
needs across the country, and they slice that both on a
regional basis and in terms of the system size, and one of the
things that is very revealing in that regard is when you look,
in particular, at small and very small systems on a per
customer basis, their costs of keeping pace with those
replacement and expansion, more replacement than expansion, are
much more costly and in some cases actually would lead to a
tripling of the user rates that are necessary to fund that kind
of investment.
That is not to diminish the impact, the concerns related to
urban areas. In particular, when you look at it from the
standpoint of the regional approach, when you look at the
Northeast and the Midwestern States, because they tend to have
the older cities their costs are quite significant and are
rising more quickly than what would happen in other parts of
the country.
So there is no individual group that comes out with a clean
slate as it were. Every category has its difficulties to deal
with, and so I would say that the needs are universal. They are
not limited to one area or one size system.
Mr. Duncan. We have been having a couple of examples of
small towns or cities around the country surrendering their
charters because they just could not meet all of the mandates
and the expenses of Federal requirements.
Yes.
Mr. Sterba. Congressman Duncan, just a thought. While we
serve 15 million people, we predominantly serve fairly rural
areas. A lot of those areas do not have the capacity to test
for emerging contaminants and comply with all the other new
regulations that come along. It puts an increasing burden on
small systems, but the big thing that we have found is they
lack purchasing power.
We are working with a community right now where when we
compare what they are paying for pipe, meters, and valves to
what comes through our supply chain, it was over a 35-percent
savings because a small community just does not have the
capacity to access some of these economies of scale.
Those are the kinds of things that can be done by attacking
the other end of the cost equation. Financing is part of it,
but how do we get efficient on the operating costs and on how
much you have to spend for capital?
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like permission to enter into the record a
statement from Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson. She could
not join us today, without objection.
Mr. Gibbs. So ordered.
[The Honorable Eddie Bernice Johnson's prepared statement
appears together with other Members' statements. Please see the
table of contents for ``Prepared Statements Submitted by
Members of Congress.'']
Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Bishop, I really do
appreciate this discussion, and to our witnesses, as always, I
either am forced to rethink some things that I thought I knew
or learn something differently. So I appreciate that.
You know, there is probably not one of us who cannot tell
stories about aging and failing infrastructure wherever it is
that we live. I happen to represent a district that is right
outside of Washington, DC. We have a couple million people
serviced by one water agency, and the challenges are really
great.
A few weeks ago I jumped into the Potomac River, something
completely unrelated, but it occurred to me that I did that,
and I felt perfectly comfortable that the water I was jumping
into was going to be clean because we were not having sewage
runoffs into the river. The river, in fact, was warmer than it
is in this room, but it reminds me of how much we do not think
about the water until something happens, a boil water
restriction, a water main break, any number of failures.
And so I appreciate that we all understand what the gravity
of the problem is. The question that I have first for Mr.
Wilson, I am intrigued by this discussion of the benefits and
value of using public pension funds to make investments,
especially in an economic and financial environment in which
the kinds of plans that you would not want to put at risk in
the general market, investing in water infrastructure is stable
by comparison.
But one of the things that I am confused about as I look at
your testimony is the recommended change in the chairman's
draft that is part of today's discussion. In your testimony,
you recommend that private investors like pension funds also
have direct access to the U.S. Treasury funds at subsidized
rates. And so I am curious as to why because it seems to me
that that would mean then competing with the State Revolving
Funds or other mechanisms for low-cost financing, which seems
at odds given that the argument begins with public pension
funds having, you know, sort of a lot to invest, and it is
important to invest, and there are benefits like accelerated
project funding, et cetera.
So how would it be in the interest of the 27 or so
municipalities that I represent to have you investing by
borrowing capital funds from the Treasury only to then reloan
the funds to the community? Help me understand that.
Mr. Wilson. Yes, thank you for your question.
Congresswoman, I was viewing that in the same vein as the
ability to access private activity bonds that are tax exempt.
So the private entity that would be set up to manage the
design, build, operate, finance of the new project, would
utilize primarily equity capital that may come from a public
pension plan. They may also want to utilize some debt
financing. So you have a total financing package, debt and
equity. They may access taxable debt for that. It could be
bonds. It could be bank financing, project financing.
The lower the cost of that debt financing that that private
entity puts together, the lower overall cost for the community
and for the project. So whether it is accessing private
activity bonds that are tax exempt or accessing other forms of
tax-exempt debt, it should help to lower the cost for the
project and should be able to be passed through to the
community.
Ms. Edwards. But is there not some burden shifting that
goes on there? Because I would worry about that. I mean, if a
municipality already has access to the SRF to do, you know,
other kinds of projects, they may also want to engage in a
partnership using the private equity, but would not necessarily
want to shift the risk to the Federal taxpayer or to the local
community because it is private activity.
I mean, you get a long-term sort of deal to make the most
that you can out of there, but also meeting the objectives of
delivering water in the system. So I would hate it if we get
into a situation where our taxpayers, either Federal or our
ratepayers locally, would then end up acquiring a burden for
this kind of private investment activity.
Mr. Wilson. I was thinking of it as the burden or the risk
would be taken on by the private entity, and the private equity
would be first at risk, as if they were financing it. They were
putting together the debt and the equity for the project. They
would take on the risk to deliver the project on time, on
budget, to make sure that it operates according to regulations
throughout the PPP term.
So the financing would team up with the service provider
that would offer design, build, operate services. They would
form one integrated team that would be financed with debt and
equity. They would be obligated to repay that debt, that
private entity. So that private entity would be at risk for the
repayment of that debt.
And my view was toward lowering the cost of the overall
capital that was pulled together for a new project such that
those costs could be passed on to the community.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, if I could just have one more question I
would appreciate it, and I appreciate your indulgence.
I just wanted to direct this question actually to Mr.
Williams. You raised a point, and I appreciate the partnership
that we have had with NACWA. I have learned so much from NACWA.
But you talked about green infrastructures being one of the
tools in the toolkit to lower cost for communities and also
provide the benefits that you can get in addition to doing your
traditional kind of infrastructure. I wonder if you could speak
to that as well as to the availability for municipalities of
those kind of investments.
I mean, I have introduced with your help H.R. 2030, a clean
infrastructure bill, and I just think we have got to
incorporate more of those techniques to offer something else to
local communities that is an option for them rather than the
tremendous amounts of money that they have just spent in
traditional infrastructure.
Mr. Williams. Yes. Whenever you are trying to meet
regulations, I think that a community needs to have a balance,
look at the overall cost, and compare the cost of the typical
gray infrastructure with the green infrastructure. So any kind
of innovative financing that goes forward should definitely be
able to fund things like green infrastructure if those things
appear to be cost effective.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for coming. I think we are having a
discussion about how to best finance something that we all seem
to agree needs to be done. The problem that I have is that the
American people do not understand this.
We are fighting every day here about a big transportation
bill on infrastructure that people can see and feel and touch,
and we are losing the argument on that. This is something, as I
think Mr. Fangmann said, out of sight, out of mind.
Now, I will tell you that if I tell people, ``Do you want
some clean water? Here you go, $6,'' no one complains and they
take it and they drink it and they give it to their kids. But
if I say for that same six bucks, ``Fix this,'' no one knows
what it is. Everybody here knows what it is. Mr. Mayor, I know
you know what it is. I got this when I was mayor.
And for the people at home who do not know what this is,
this is a 6-inch water main that is about 80 years old when it
was taken out of the ground, and what is in the middle here?
That is sediment, folks, normal, everyday, average gravity.
Every night when every American goes to bed, we shut off our
water. When we do, there is water in these pipes. It settles.
We turn on the taps in the morning. Anyone who drinks the first
drink in the water, especially in the older areas, you had
better let it run.
Anyone who has lived near a place where a fire department
has come down and opened up a fire hydrant, you all know what
happens. What happens is the fire hydrant opens up this
sediment, blasts it through, and you get this, and we drink it.
The problem is the American people never see this.
This has been on my desk for 20 years. Every single person
who comes in my office says, ``What in the heck is that?'' And
when I tell them that is your water pipe that you will find in
any American city, anywhere you live, they are all amazed.
Gentlemen, if you want to win the hearts and minds of the
American public, give one of these to every mayor, every city
counselor, every county executive, and make them put them on
their desk. Give it to every Member of Congress so that when we
go back and say we need billions to provide you clean water at
a lot cheaper rate, we now have a nice, easy visual.
Now, granted, I do not want you to give me a sewer pipe.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. I have seen those, too, but those are a little
bit more difficult to explain.
The reason I do this is because I think too many of us
forget. Everyone here knows exactly what you are talking about.
Mr. Mayor, you know what I am talking about. Every day we get
hit, schools, police, fire, and they are right. We want to do
more.
The argument is not that. The argument is when you have to
make a decision, every mayor, every Governor, every President,
every Member of Congress makes the decision. I have got to do
it all, cannot do it all, what can be seen?
When it comes to infrastructure, we do bridges fast. A
bridge falls down. We fix it. A sewer collapses. We fix it.
This can take 80 years to build up, but not one of us wants our
children to drink it. Not one of us wants our mother to drink
this. Not one of us wants to fix our own pipes to make sure
that they do not get clogged up with this, and yet it is in
every single American community, and nobody knows it.
So what I really want to plead for you to do is, yes, we
will have this debate on how to finance fixing these things,
but please help me educate the American public so they can
engage in this and they know what they get when we go back to
them and say, yes, it is expensive, but here is what you get.
As the richest country in the history of the world, we
should not have undrinkable water in any corner of this
country, and yet we do. At home because my State has chosen to
put billions of dollars into cleaning the water, I just turn
the tap on unfiltered, drink it all day long, not early in the
morning. In most parts of this country you cannot. This is what
you do. This is what you do.
And I am not against this. This is fine. It is nice and
convenient for here. I cannot have a tap right here today, but
I do not want you to have to spend a buck and a half to have a
drink with lunch, and I know you do not either.
So as this whole discussion goes through and we are talking
about the intricacies of finances, that is the important way to
do it. But if we do not win the hearts and minds of the
American public, we are going to be talking to ourselves now
and forever more.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Eleanor Holmes Norton, do you have a
question?
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. I had
another hearing and could not hear all of this testimony. This
issue is of great importance to the public and to me
personally.
First of all, I want to thank the National Association of
Clean Water Agencies who helped me get a bill through here when
the GAO came forward with the opinion that Federal agencies
should not have to pay their stormwater fees because it was a
tax here in the District of Columbia, and of course the Federal
Government cannot tax. Of course, it was a fee for the
homeowners. It was a fee for the businesses, and ultimately the
Congress agreed it was a fee, and so the Federal Government is
paying its share as well.
I do want to speak about the visibility issue that my
colleagues have raised. It is certainly true that the surface
transportation bill which had to be pulled even though people
do express real interest in roads and transit, it had to be
pulled here and hopefully will come back, but the invisibility
of public works underground surely has something to do with the
problem we face here, and that arousing the public is
important.
Let me suggest that when there is a problem, it is not hard
to arouse the public on clean water. We had a lead in the water
scare here, right here in the Nation's capital. It aroused the
public a lot. We had hearings here. As you are aware, lead or
traces of lead in the water and its effect on children, on
pregnant women, and then people began to distrust the water,
and my colleague who says, well, this is an alternative. This
is America. The whole notion that we have come to the point
where some people believe you have to pay for water in order to
have clean water is a step way back in the extraordinary
progress our Nation has made.
So let me put it this way. We have at least 33 States at
last count who were in the same position that the District of
Columbia that I represent is in, where the water comes from a
single source, a combined sewer system. That was the way to do
it when these older systems were built.
So we have two problems. One is containing the water when
there is excessive rainfall so that you get the water
contaminating the river and everything around it, and we have
two extra ordinary rivers here, one of which is very important
for our water supply, the Potomac River, and then you have a
problem that increasingly I believe we are not dealing with and
do not know how to deal with. It is one thing to force the
agencies to make sure there is not lead in the water and there
is not arsenic in the water. But now we have reports of
substances in the water that we have never had before, such as
antibiotics.
No one has to my satisfaction at least said to me that when
these antibiotics are in the water because of natural waste,
particular in stormwater overflow systems; that no one has
assured me that the water I am drinking is not contaminated
with some of these newer substances. I would simply like to get
your views on whether we are informing the public in the right
way.
We are going to talk about pipes underground and even the
very important issues here, and I thank the chairman for this
committee about how to finance them because that is about the
how, not just the what. As long as we are talking about
something that the public cannot see, feel, visualize, feels
strongly about, I am not convinced we are going to get anywhere
on this subject.
So I raise the issue that makes us an advanced Nation, the
notion that you can draw your water supply and be assured that
it is safe separates us from developing nations, something that
the public assumes. How we can raise the level of visibility of
clean water and not simply what it takes for the water to go
through, which gets fairly technical, I would like to hear all
that you may have to say on how we can talk about what is
really at issue, what the public really cares about, which is
what comes out the pipes, not the pipes and the infrastructure
that delivers it.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Eger. Thank you, ma'am.
We could not agree with you more, the Water Environment
Federation. As a matter of fact, just within the past month the
board of trustees of the Water Environment Federation has
pledged a half million dollars to drive a messaging campaign
that we are calling Water's Worth, and we have invited many of
our associates here at the table and many of those in the water
industry to join us as well.
We have an advantage, as does many of the associations
here, where we have what we call a ground game. We have member
associations, our sectionals that represent States that are
involved in local communities that, quite frankly, have been
underutilized by many of us in the association world, but are
just as anxious and hungry as you are driving this message and
getting the concern that we need to make this investment.
We are looking at a 3- to 5-year commitment to this
messaging. I mentioned earlier in my testimony that we launched
it with our research foundation and New York Water Group. We
are now having a billboard in Times Square that talks about the
value of water and what it's worth, and on March 22nd, which is
World Water Day, we will be launching this initiative with our
member associations, but we hear you.
I spent 20 years in this business, many of those as Utility
Director, and I am frustrated as well with the under
appreciation, and we have got to take the cover off of it, and
we have to talk about it more. Hopefully you will see more from
all of us in this industry to do that.
Ms. Norton. Yes. I thank you for that effort, I must say.
Mr. Arndt. Congresswoman, many of your comments address the
issue of drinking water, and I would start with the statement
that there is no safer water in the world than the water that
we have here in the United States. That said, it is a
continuing quest to maintain that quality.
Ms. Norton. You really think the water in the United States
is safer, for example, than the water in some other advanced
countries in the world?
What do you say about antibiotics in the water?
Mr. Arndt. Well, one of the things that I need to point to
is that every year every water supplier sends out something
called the consumer confidence report, which provides the
details on what the quality of the water is in that particular
community. Unfortunately, those documents get very little
readership, and there are actually proposals under
consideration right now to change the method in which those
consumer confidence reports are distributed.
We unfortunately suffer under the circumstance that what is
out of sight is also very often out of mind, and the only time
it becomes obvious is when there is a problem or a failure, and
unfortunately that does nothing but undermine the confidence of
the public and just as you have indicated.
One of the things that we need to do as an industry, and I
am sure all of the associations at the table here have some
level of effort going forward to do just that; we need to make
sure that we reach out to every group of stakeholders out there
that have a benefit or a role to play in our water supply,
whether it is manufacturing that needs our water, whether it is
the general public that needs the water for drinking and
sanitation, and that is something that we need to do day in and
day out, and it just as important as financing our
infrastructure because ultimately we can invest in the best
infrastructure in the world, but if the public will not use it,
it has become a wasted expenditure.
And I think that is the message you presented here and the
prior Congressman. Sometimes we need to be a little bit more
dramatic about it to make sure that the public understands what
the challenge is before us. There is no silver bullet. We just
need to keep working at it.
Ms. Norton. I appreciate what you are saying. I do not
think we should undermine confidence in our water supply. I
mean, when I got into restaurants, I say, ``Give me DC water.''
We have a terrific waterworks. They call themselves water. They
no longer put the word ``sewer'' in their name. It used to be
call the Washington Sewer Authority or something, but they call
themselves water, and they try to sell the notion that the
water is safe, and I do drink the water.
On the other hand, you and I agree that as long as people
simply have confidence, do not read the reports that you are
speaking about, they apparently are not awakened to the issue
sufficiently to pay for cleaner water, and you see certainly
Congress is not.
So the notion that the gentleman indicated about raising
the consciousness is very important, not to say, by the way,
that we had lead in the water here. We did not say everybody
panic. We indicated though that you had to be careful about
young children.
I drink the water even though I do not know if there are
antibiotics in it, but I am not sure that my new 1-month-old
grandchild should have anything to do with this water, even
though I believe it is safe for me. We are finding things in
children, cancers of the kind that were not heard of when I was
a child. I do not know what the cause is. I know a lot of
people just do not want to take chances, and since the one
ingredient that we all share is water, I think the people who
are going to buy this, first and foremost, are people who have
children under 18, because they do not want to be responsible
for exposing very young bodies to what they may be more
vulnerable to than we are.
So I think this is a narrow issue, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate your indulgence. I just want to make this point
because I am very pleased that you raised it. I know that there
are countries that do a better job in finding antibiotics, for
example. I certainly do not want to undermine the confidence of
the American people in their water supply.
At the same time I do believe that the posters and the
messaging that is going up in Times Square and around the
country will help people to understand that this is not all for
free and that we all have to pitch in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
What we are going to do I have a quick question or comment,
and I do not know if anybody wants to respond. Then Mr. Bishop
has the last question and we are going to wrap it up.
But I wanted to go back to a little bit of the discussion
and give you what my thinking is. We were talking about the SRF
and the EPA and what is the vehicle to administer like the
WIFIA Program for an example. Now, my thoughts are and my
understanding the way how things work now in the SRF is that
the EPA, through a very complicated formula process,
capitalizes Federal dollars to the SRF to the States.
Now, the reason in the draft bill, and it is one of the
reasons we are having this hearing, is we are trying to figure
out the best way to go. As we all know, the SRFs are smaller
projects, and this draft legislation gives us the ability for
them to aggregate and use the WIFIA concept, the bigger
dollars. But the reason we at this point have the EPA
administering that or being the vehicle is because these are
bigger projects, and we are trying to allocate, as we all know,
a limited amount of dollars.
And so if you think it, and this is how you will probably
want to respond, how the SRF is capitalized, and we are talking
bigger dollars, the question is the SRF. It has got to be
holistic and look at the whole country. That is kind of our
thinking right now, our rationale.
So I would love to hear what your thoughts are. You know,
what is the best way to administer the program? Yes, Mayor
Ballard.
Mr. Ballard. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Of course, I would tell you from the U.S. Conference of
Mayors' perspective, we like local. We like as close as you
can. So that is what we are really just on record for that.
Mr. Gibbs. Well, I obviously believe in federalism and
think that local is better, too. But I guess what I am thinking
is we have to have some mechanism. We could be talking, you
know, hundreds of millions of dollars for these big projects,
and who is going to decide, you know, if it should go to New
York City or if it should go somewhere else.
Mr. Ballard. I understand that. But as much local input as
possible, and I realize that you are talking State at this
point. I understand that.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes.
Mr. Ballard. But we would like that.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. I would just offer that each State has big
dollar projects that they could utilize innovative financing
for, and I would support Mr. Ballard in terms of local is
better. I would, being from California, also urge that the
allocation formula for distributing funds to the States be
updated. There are plenty of big dollar projects within all of
the States, so it is not just New York City or Chicago that
would benefit. It is nationwide.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Arndt.
Mr. Arndt. To clarify my earlier comments, one of the
dynamics that we faced with the SRFs is that they are largely
unable to finance the large projects. I will not say that it
never happens, but it is very rare to find projects, for
example, exceeding $20 million that are financed by the SRFs,
and it seems to me that one of the things that we need to
overcome and can overcome, as has been included in this with
the draft legislation, is to allow the large projects to go for
direct funding because there are certainly economies and
efficiencies of doing that.
The SRFs clearly have a relationship with the smaller and
midsize utilities, and that is why I believe the bill is
drafted as it is, to allow the SRF to be an intermediary for
that particular purpose. So I do not think that the SRF is
perhaps best equipped to deal with those larger utilities, and
that is why we endorse the bill as it has been presented.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Petersen.
Mr. Petersen. It may be another dimension here. Our
experience with the SRF administrators in various States is
that they are not always receptive to alternative approaches to
project delivery. We have run into several State SRFs who
actually oppose design-build contracting, for example, as
opposed to traditional design-bid-build, and when you expand
that to design-build-operate or the full P3 as we have
discussed, the design-build-finance-operate, there is actually
institutional opposition to that degree of private sector
involvement, long-term operations, private financings, some of
the complexities that Mr. Wilson talked about with private
equity capital.
So if you run this through the States you may well find
yourself in many circumstances running into that kind of almost
ideological opposition to that degree of private sector involve
in public water infrastructure.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, great. Yes, Mr. Petersen.
Mr. Petersen. Yes, as I stated before, the States,
especially, I believe, New York, have a system in place where
they are able to divide the monies up for the larger projects
as well as the smaller projects, and maybe there might be some
tweaking of the SRF, you know, some of the things that have
been in previous bills and would be in this bill to help the
States better manage the funds so that the larger projects as
well as the small projects can get the funds.
The WIFIA legislation would allow some of the larger
projects to get that funding, but would also help on the bottom
end of it for them to go further down the list with their
existing SRF funding to reach the smaller projects. So I think
it is a win-win through the States.
Mr. Gibbs. Great. Thanks.
One just quick question, Mr. Williams. I have to comment
because I am always impressed when I hear people doing what you
said you are doing out there with the biodigester. Is there a
lot of that starting to happen in the municipalities? Are you
kind of leading the charge?
Mr. Williams. I believe that my utility is the first that
actually is powering its entire treatment plant solely from
wastes that come in. However, I will say that that is something
is getting a lot of attention. You can hardly open any kind of
an industry journal and not read about the advances that are
being made across the country in terms of utilization of biogas
and bringing in high-strength waste, fats, oil, and grease to
digest and produce biogas. It is these types of things that are
very common in communities.
So I think it is certainly catching fire across the
country.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, Mr. Petersen.
Mr. Petersen. I would say on this point and just for your
information, there is a major contracting signing happening
this afternoon at DC Water, as Representative Norton indicated
for a design-build-operate biogas cogeneration facility right
down here 8 miles south of here at Blue Plains Waste Water
Treatment Plant. They are taking biogas from a new set of
digesters they are going to build, and they are going to
produce a lot less sludge; take that energy and build a
cogeneration facility to run the biosolid treatment plant and
reduce the electric bill at DC Water. They might have even gone
P3 with that project had tax exempt financing been available
for the private DBO firm.
Mr. Gibbs. I have always been a strong proponent. We have
got some digesters in my area of the country, not
municipalities, but they are involved in it because it is a
private entity, and they are moving the sludge from a sewage
treatment plant, and they are digesting. Of course, as you all
know, it does two things. It produces energy, but it also is
less stuff going into the landfill and it is great for the
environment.
You do not hear a whole lot about that because maybe it is
not as glamorous as some of the other things, but it is a real
good program.
Mr. Wilson, would you like to comment quickly?
Mr. Wilson. I would just add that from the public-private
partnership standpoint projects like biogas generators, also
water recycling facilities that can generate revenues for a
municipality, we can help to implement those projects and then
monetize the value of the future revenues coming off of those
projects as a way to reduce the cost for the municipality. So
that can be part of the P3 package.
Mr. Gibbs. Great. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am sort of back to where I was a little while ago. As I
indicated, we chose when we did our bill to route the WIFIA
type funding through the SRF in part because we heard from the
stakeholders that that was a process they were familiar with
and though that worked and we should keep.
The second concern that I had was that if we create a
separate funding mechanism that does not go through the SRF,
that ultimately the SRF withers away. I will tell you what my
frame of reference is. My background before coming to Congress
was higher education. I was a college administrator for 29
years.
I should point out I am not a snob, and I should also point
out that I have somehow maintained my faith.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. But there is a Revolving Loan Fund in higher
education called the Perkins Revolving Loan Fund. You all may
remember it was the National Defense Student Loan Fund or the
National Direct Student Loan Fund. That has not received a new
Federal capital contribution since, I think, 2000 or 2001, and
under current law, it is slated to go out of existence in 2014.
So I am concerned that if we create a separate funding stream
that is apart from the SRF with the pressure that appropriators
are under, that it will be an easy call to stop the Federal
capital contribution to the SRF, and that over time we will see
the SRF suffer the same fate as the Perkins Loan Fund I think
is about to suffer, although I hope we can fight that off.
So I guess I want to, again, put to you as the stakeholders
and the practitioners: is that a concern that you share? Am I
worst casing it?
Someone, please. Yes, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. That is definitely a very significant concern
of NACWA, the concern being that Congress has all kinds of
pressures, and there are all kinds of demands for money and
financing, and to the extent that if you have something out
there separate, it is like, well, did we not address that and
they got their money, and you move on.
So the SRF has been a mainstay for 25 years, and NACWA
would certainly like to see that continue. So it is a concern,
and that was part of our testimony that it should not be to the
detriment of the SRF with something like the WIFIA.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
Anyone else care to comment?
Mr. Arndt. I guess I would just reemphasize what I said
earlier, that WIFIA and the SRF program are not in competition
with one another. They are dealing with two different sets of
clients, as it were, in that the SRFs are very much providing
funding for those that do not have the ability to access
funding at all under highly subsidized circumstances typical.
WIFIA does not address that need. WIFIA basically provides
money at the margin at the lowest possible cost for those that
need to do projects.
Mr. Bishop. And I think I heard you say before that you
think that that would be more for the larger project, and the
SRF would be more for the smaller project. Is that what I heard
you say before?
Mr. Arndt. No. If I did, I did not intend to say that.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Mr. Arndt. Certainly the direct access for the larger
projects is there, but the SRFs also have access where they can
essentially put together a pool of projects which may be
smaller.
Mr. Bishop. So what I think you are saying is that if we
were to go this separate route, it would be incumbent upon all
of us to make sure that we protect the SRF, that one does not
fall away because we are pursuing another avenue. I would hope
that that is something that we would all agree on.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much and thank you all very
much.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you very much, and like I said, we will
have our second panel on March 21st, I believe it is, on this
issue. So thank you for coming, and this adjourns the
committee.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

