- A REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED $400 MILLION LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA, FEDERAL COURTHOUSE PROJECT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED
$400 MILLION LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA,
FEDERAL COURTHOUSE PROJECT

=======================================================================

(112-59)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 4, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-099                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

7_____

Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,               Columbia
Arkansas,                        HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
Vice Chair                         MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BOB FILNER, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,      (Ex Officio)
Tennessee
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................     v

TESTIMONY

Goldstein, Mark L., Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues,
Government Accountability Office...............................     9
Morrow, Hon. Margaret M., District Judge, United States District
Court, Central District of California..........................     9
Peck, Robert A., Commissioner, Public Buildings Service, General
Services Administration........................................     9

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Goldstein, Mark L................................................    69
Morrow, Hon. Margaret M..........................................    87
Peck, Robert A...................................................    96

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Morrow, Hon. Margaret M., District Judge, United States District
Court, Central District of California:

Memorandum from the United States Marshals Service for
the Central District of California to the Chief
District Judge which details security deficiencies of
the Spring Street Courthouse, November 2, 2011.........    11
Assertion that the proposed housing plan for the district
court is consistent with Judicial Conference courtroom
sharing policies.......................................    28
Assertion that consolidating the district court and
bankruptcy court in the Roybal Building would not be
cost-effective or practical............................    36
Additional comments regarding the June 2010 Government
Accountability Office report...........................    43
Additional comments regarding bankruptcy courtroom space.    47
Napolitano, Hon. Grace F., a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, request to submit letter in support of the
Los Angeles courthouse project signed by 19 Members of the
California delegation..........................................     6
Norton, Hon. Eleanor Holmes, a Delegate in Congress from the
District of Columbia, request to include letter from Hon. Jose
F. Serrano, a Representative in Congress from the State of New
York, November 3, 2011.........................................    60
Peck, Robert A., Commissioner, Public Buildings Service, General
Services Administration:

Actual utilization of old courthouses in cities where new
ones have been built...................................    23
Response to information request from Hon. Jeff Denham, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California    31
Slides 1-10 referenced during hearing............................   101

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Correspondence in chronological order:

Dan Mathews, staff member, Subcommittee on Economic
Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management, memorandum regarding California border
station and courthouse GSA staff trip, to Hon. John L.
Mica, Ranking Republican, Committee on Transportation
and Infrastructure, April 23, 2009.....................   111
Hon. Eleanor Holmes Norton, Chairwoman, and Hon. Mario
Diaz-Balart, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Economic
Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management, joint letter to President Barack Obama,
August 2, 2010.........................................   113
Hon. Jeff Denham, Chairman, and Hon. Eleanor Holmes
Norton, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Economic
Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management, joint letter to the Hon. Martha Johnson,
Administrator, General Services Administration, October
21, 2011...............................................   118
Morrow, Hon. Margaret M., District Judge, United States District
Court, Central District of California:

Cover letter to Hon. Jeff Denham, Chairman, and Hon.
Eleanor Holmes Norton, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management, requesting that supplementary materials be
included in the hearing record, November 22, 2011......   120
Additional information and views of the Central District
of California on several questions posed by the
subcommittee members at the hearing....................   122
Joint letter from Hon. David B. Sentelle, Chief Judge,
United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit, and Hon. Royce C. Lamberth, Chief
Judge, United States District Court for the District of
Columbia, and chart that reflects space assignments in
the two buildings occupied by those courts, November 8,
2011...................................................   129
Letter from Hon. Loretta A. Preska, Chief Judge, United
States District Court, Southern District of New York,
about the impact of courtroom sharing on that court,
November 22, 2011......................................   133
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.012

A REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED

$400 MILLION LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA,

FEDERAL COURTHOUSE PROJECT

----------

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public
Buildings, and Emergency Management,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The Subcommittee on Economic Development,
Public Buildings, and Emergency Management will come to order.
We are going to be challenged this morning with a very
aggressive floor calendar. So my goal is to get through opening
testimony before the first round of votes. I know we have a
number of questions. We will probably reserve those to try to
get those through between the first and second series of votes.
Let me first thank our witnesses for being with us today.
The purpose of today's hearing is to review the latest GSA
proposal for a new courthouse in Los Angeles, and to consider
if the project is a wise use of taxpayer money given the well-
documented overbuilding in the courthouse program and the
current fiscal crisis in our Government.
Last Congress, at the request of the subcommittee, the GAO
completed a review of the 33 courthouses constructed between
2000 and 2010. What the GAO found was incredible. GSA built
over 3.5 million square feet of courthouse space that we don't
need at a cost of $800 million. As a result, the judiciary
abandoned existing courthouses across the country and severely
underutilized every new courthouse. The GAO identified three
reasons for this waste: First, GSA built courthouses bigger
than Congress authorized; second, the judiciary's 10-year
projections of the number of judges were not worth the paper
they were written on; and third, if the judges shared
courtrooms we wouldn't need as much courtroom space as we have.
As a result, the subcommittee sent a letter to the
President indicating we would not authorize any new courthouses
until there were significant reforms in the courthouse
construction program. We also demanded the judiciary conduct a
real courtroom utilization study so that a third party could
figure out how many judges can share a courtroom, because
without the data or analysis, it is very difficult for us to
determine if these projects are a good idea or a waste of
taxpayer dollars. So it is in this context the GSA and the
judiciary want to resurrect the Los Angeles courthouse
proposal.
Over the last 11 years, the judiciary projected there would
be somewhere between 72 and 81 judges in Los Angeles by 2011 or
2014. The judiciary declared Los Angeles the number one
judicial space emergency in the United States, and proposed a
massive new courthouse. However, today we know the primary
justification for a new L.A. courthouse is wrong. There are
fewer judges in L.A. now than there were in 1997.
Let's put up slide 1, please.
Today, we have two buildings with 61 courtrooms and only 59
judges.
Put up the second slide.
In 2004, they projected 81 judges, and today we have 59.
It seems to me that the projections on which the judicial
space emergency and the new courthouse were based never really
materialized. I am also concerned the remaining funds are not
near enough money to build the courthouse you are proposing.
And we certainly don't want to see big cost overruns.
In 2008, when GSA proposed an even smaller courthouse, the
judges of the Central District of California unanimously
rejected it, citing the GSA's cost estimates were unrealistic,
and that the new plan would not address their capacity
concerns. If there wasn't enough money to build a 414,000-
square-foot building in 2008, how is it possible to build a
650,000-square-foot one today? And if the funds are sufficient,
would there be enough money to convert the abandoned courtrooms
in the Roybal or Spring Street Buildings? I am afraid that this
will have to be--where GSA spends all of the money----
Let's put up slide 3.
Eighty-five courtrooms for fifty-nine judges, half of which
should be shared courtrooms under the judiciary's own sharing
policy. We have seen this before in at least seven other cities
where new courthouses were built and the ones sit vacant as a
burden to the taxpayer and eye sores to the community. To avoid
this, I think GSA will have to ask for a lot more money.
Slide 4, please.
Over $700 million will be needed to build a new courthouse
and convert the abandoned courtrooms into office space. Yet
GSA's construction budget is zero. GSA has no money for other
critical projects. A half a billion dollars for the Coast Guard
headquarters is being constructed, but there is no money for a
road to actually get to the building. Critical infrastructure
work at the White House is being delayed indefinitely because
the building fund is empty. So again, that is the reason to ask
those couple of questions on how we are going to come up with
the extra money on Spring Street and the Roybal Buildings and
the third new courthouse for the amount of money that is
already out there. At this time I feel like it is unwise to use
taxpayer money to build a third L.A. courthouse.
Before I close, I would like to raise one last point.
Yesterday morning GAO briefed me on the judiciary's courtroom
utilization study and the courtroom sharing models it developed
with an outside expert. Among other things, the simulation
company GAO used works with hospitals to determine how many
operating rooms they need. Apparently hospitals don't have
operating rooms for every single surgeon. It is far too
expensive to do that. Yet hospital needs have an operating room
available for emergencies. So GAO had the computer simulation
modified to incorporate the judiciary's courtroom utilization
data, and now it can figure out how many courtrooms you need,
so there will always be a courtroom available. GAO ran this
centralized sharing model for Los Angeles, and it appears all
of the judges can fit in just the Roybal Building, no new
courthouse would be needed, and Spring Street could be sold.
I look forward to hearing from GSA and the U.S. courts
today to understand their current proposal, its cost, and its
justification. I also look forward to hearing from GAO.
I now would like to recognize Ranking Member Norton from
the District of Columbia for 5 minutes to make any opening
statement she may have.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
today's hearing on the status of the Los Angeles, California,
Federal courthouse construction project, if you can call it
still a project since it has sat in abeyance for half of my
time in Congress, and of course its compliance with current
courtroom sharing policies and the General Services
Administration's current asset management strategy in Los
Angeles.
Today's hearing on the long-delayed Los Angeles courthouse
has as its necessary context a Government Accountability report
that this committee commissioned in 2008 to examine courthouse
planning and construction, including management and costs. The
GAO report, issued last year, contained astonishing findings of
mismanagement by GSA and the judiciary, of the courthouse
program, and documented wasted funds as well as space. GAO
determined that the 33 courthouses constructed by the GSA since
2000 included 3.56 million square feet of space above--3.56
million square feet above the congressionally approved
specifications, a frequent overestimation of the number of
judges that courthouses would need to accommodate, and failure
to implement courtroom sharing despite the committee's mandate.
In essence, virtually every mandate of this committee has been
routinely and systematically ignored by GSA and by the
judiciary.
The GAO found that the total value of the extra space was
$835 million in construction costs and $51 million annually in
rent and operating expenses. The GAO report confirmed what this
subcommittee had indicated during almost 15 years of oversight
of the courthouse program; namely, reducing the size of
courthouses through more accurate projections of the number of
future judges and using courthouse sharing could save the
Federal Government significant amounts of money.
Every courthouse authorized by this committee since 2007
has required courtroom sharing and has restricted the use of
projections of new judges. In fact, in some cases, as a result
of reducing the number of courtrooms, we have been able to plan
to move Federal agencies out of expensive long-term leases and
into owned space.
The Los Angeles courthouse was first approved by this
committee in July 2000. The project's budget, originally
supported by GSA, has ballooned over the past decade from $266
million to almost $1 billion simply because of the refusal to
build the courthouse as mandated by this committee and by the
Congress of the United States.
The most recent official action occurred in March 2008,
when the GSA administrator wrote to the chief judges in
California to propose constructing a scaled down, 400,000-
square-foot courthouse with 20 courtrooms and 20 chambers, in
addition to renovating the Roybal Courthouse for $700 million.
On March 26, 2008, the judges rejected GSA's proposal,
requesting a larger courthouse with 36 courtrooms and 45
chambers, which would have been significantly more expensive.
It is as if this committee didn't matter. The judges say
they reject the courthouse. I don't know what this subcommittee
is supposed to do. But that is not the way it works up here.
Although one of the judges' primary justifications for their
request is the lack of security in the current Los Angeles
courthouses, they rejected the GSA proposal that would have
addressed the security concerns.
This is the very same conversation we have long been having
with GSA and the judiciary about sharing, projections of
additional judges, and maximizing the use of existing assets.
There are empty courtrooms across the country because of
resistance to congressional directives to share courtrooms
whenever possible. This subcommittee has been clear in its
mandate that all new courthouse construction be reconsidered
under the sharing guidelines. And the Los Angeles courthouse
should be no exception.
I emphasize that although we require courtroom sharing, we
are also, and always have been, sensitive to issues of
security, and will examine these concerns carefully today in an
effort to make sure members of the judiciary are not at risk in
carrying out their duties. The American taxpayer has no stomach
for waste, especially for waste on new large courthouses where
judges insist that they decide, not the taxpayers, the size of
the courthouse and whether sharing will occur; and especially
when vital Federal programs are being scaled down or
eliminated.
We intend to work with GSA and the judiciary to ensure that
good asset management decisions are made in the courthouse
program. We certainly appreciate the testimony of each of
today's witnesses, and we welcome any thoughts and suggestions
they may have. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I ask unanimous consent that Mrs. Napolitano of
California and Ms. Richardson of California, who are both
members of the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, be
permitted to participate in today's committee hearing. Without
objection, so ordered. Ms. Napolitano, you have an opening
statement?
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, I do, Mr. Chair. Thank you very much,
and Ranking Member Norton, for allowing me to participate. And
I do ask unanimous consent to submit a letter signed by 19
Members of the California delegation, including Senators Boxer
and Feinstein, in support of the Los Angeles courthouse
project, and also urging GSA to proceed immediately with
construction of the project. For the record, without objection,
unanimous consent to submit the letter for the record?
Mr. Denham. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.014

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I strongly
support the Los Angeles County courthouse project. I live in
Los Angeles County. The current Los Angeles County courthouse
has been declared a space emergency by the Judiciary
Conference, and continues to be its top priority for a new
courthouse. This has been maybe what, a decade in the making?
And I think it is time we remove all the obstacles and move
forward, because they have complied with all the requirements
that this subcommittee has imposed upon the Central District of
California, which is the largest district in the Nation,
covering seven counties and over 17 million people. The
division serves four counties with a population of 13 million.
This court has dramatically outgrown the existing Spring
Street facility built in 1938. That is just 2 years after I was
born. The court has been forced to divide its operations
between this courthouse and the Edward R. Roybal Federal
Building and the courthouse three blocks away. This split
operation creates countless inefficiencies and critical
security concerns. I am under the understanding that there are
prisoners in orange uniforms traveling in the same areas that
judges and other members of the courthouse are in transit to
their offices.
The new courthouse is necessary to accommodate an increase
in the number of active and senior district judges, as well as
magistrate judges from 59 to 65, and an increase in bankruptcy
judges from 10 to 14 over the next decade. After a longstanding
dispute over the size of this project, the judiciary and GSA
have come to a cost-effective compromise. The building will
have 24 courtrooms, 32 chambers. This is 17 courtrooms and 8
chambers smaller than the authorized plan. The project has been
fully funded, with no additional funding needed. The current
market conditions in L.A. will allow the Government to maximize
value in building the courthouse now. The local economy will be
stimulated by infusion of funding and new jobs with a
construction project of this size.
The unemployment rate in the L.A. metropolitan area is 12.5
percent. Most of that rate is attributed to the construction
sector. So this project incorporates courtroom sharing
policies, it incorporates the directives of this committee to
maximize the use of the Roybal Building, and not to request any
additional funding for the project.
Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, I hope that we will support this
project, and I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would like to welcome again our
witnesses here today, and just remind them we already have a
vote underway. So we are going to try get through as much of
the opening testimony as possible before we take a short
recess.
On our first and only panel today, we have the Honorable
Margaret M. Morrow, a United States district judge, U.S.
District Court, Central District of California. Welcome. And
Mr. Robert Peck once again, commissioner, Public Buildings
Service, General Services Administration. And Mr. Mark
Goldstein, director of physical infrastructure, Government
Accountability Office.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record. Without objection, so ordered. Since
your written testimony has been made part of the record, the
subcommittee would request that you limit your oral testimony
to 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF HON. MARGARET M. MORROW, DISTRICT JUDGE, UNITED
STATES DISTRICT COURT, CENTRAL DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA; ROBERT
A. PECK, COMMISSIONER, PUBLIC BUILDINGS SERVICE, GENERAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION; AND MARK L. GOLDSTEIN, DIRECTOR,
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE

Mr. Denham. Judge Morrow, you may proceed.
Judge Morrow. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Norton, and Congresswoman Napolitano. I am Margaret Morrow, and
I am a district judge in the Central District of California,
resident in Los Angeles. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before this subcommittee today to discuss the Los Angeles
courthouse project, which has been and remains the judiciary's
number one courthouse priority.
Over the past 18 months, the judiciary has worked closely
with the General Services Administration at both the national
and local levels to develop a plan for a functional and cost-
effective facility that will provide long-term, secure housing
for the Los Angeles District Court and for the public that uses
the building. As I will describe, the courthouse that is
planned has 350,000 square feet less than the project that this
committee considered in prior years. It has 17 fewer courtrooms
and eight fewer chambers. The plan does not require any
additional appropriations. It does not provide space for
projected judgeships. And it includes courtroom sharing for
senior and magistrate judges.
The Central District of California is one of the largest
and busiest courts in the Nation. It handles a high percentage
of complex criminal cases involving drugs, murder, street
gangs, prison gangs, and terrorism. The court currently
operates in the Spring Street Courthouse and the Roybal Federal
Building two blocks away. Active and senior district judges and
magistrate judges have chambers and use courtrooms in both
facilities. Between now and 2019, 14 judges will be eligible to
take senior status. Nine of those will become eligible in the
next 5 years. In addition, if the two judgeship bills currently
pending before the Congress as S. 1032 and H.R. 2365 were to
pass, the district would have nine new district judgeships.
I want to emphasize, however, that despite the pendency of
these bills, and consistent with the concerns that have been
expressed by this subcommittee, by the full committee, and by
the GAO in its June 2010 report, the project that the judiciary
and GSA have developed does not include any space for projected
judgeship positions.
All those familiar with the existing facilities in Los
Angeles agree that there are serious operational,
infrastructure, and security concerns that must be addressed.
The Spring Street facility was built in 1938. There are serious
seismic problems with the building. The building is also
riddled with asbestos, which makes improvements complicated and
costly. Due to its age, the existing infrastructure does not
support modern-day technology, and the building systems are old
and need upgrades or replacement.
In addition, the Spring Street location has many serious
security issues that affect the safety of the public, parties,
jurors, witnesses, and victims, as well as the safety of the
marshals, court employees, and judges. It is critical to
recognize that many of these problems cannot be resolved by
modifying the building given its particular footprint. This is
why it has always been anticipated that the court would vacate
the Spring Street facility. Every day prisoners are brought
into Spring Street in vans that are unloaded in the judges'
parking garage. As a result, judges frequently encounter
prisoners as they are being unloaded and moved into the
building. Because there are many courtrooms that do not have
adjacent cellblocks or any secure prisoner access, and because
the secure prisoner corridor that serves the balance of the
courtrooms is so small that it places both the marshals and the
prisoners in danger, prisoners are often moved to the
courtrooms through public corridors and elevators where they
cross paths with parties, with jurors, with victims, and with
witnesses.
The United States Marshal for the Central District of
California has written a letter dated November 2, 2011, which
details these security deficiencies. And I would like to submit
that letter for the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.019

Judge Morrow. Though GSA planned to award a contract to
build a new courthouse in fiscal year 2006, due to
unprecedented escalation of construction costs in Los Angeles
at that time, the project budget exceeded the funds
appropriated and authorized, and GSA withdrew its request for
proposal due to lack of competition and inadequate funding.
Since that time, the judiciary and GSA have devised a plan for
a courthouse that is smaller than that actually proposed, that
is cost-effective, functional, and safe, and that is responsive
to congressional directives to maximize the use of the Roybal
Building to the extent practicable, to share courtrooms, and to
work within the funds that have already been appropriated for
this project.
The new plan will contain 24 district judge courtrooms and
32 chambers, reduced space for the clerk of court and U.S.
Marshals Service. The Roybal Building will continue to be used
for courtrooms and chambers for senior judges who can't be
accommodated in the new facility and for magistrate and
bankruptcy judge courtrooms and chambers. The judiciary and GSA
believe that they have found an efficient and cost-effective
solution to the Los Angeles courts' housing problems that
addresses congressional concerns and that will be safe for the
public.
I would be happy to take any questions you have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Judge Morrow.
Mr. Peck, you may proceed.
Mr. Peck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Norton,
and Congresswoman Napolitano. Thank you for inviting me here
today to discuss the new Los Angeles courthouse project. And I
would like to thank you also for continuing to support the
administration's efforts to pass civilian property realignment
legislation and improve our asset management.
The Federal courts play a critical role in our Nation's
democracy by ensuring fair and impartial administration of
justice for all Americans. GSA is proud to build courthouses
worthy of that role, and we have developed a strong partnership
with the Federal judiciary to do so. Since the inception of our
Design Excellence Program 16 years ago, GSA has developed a
strong track record of delivering high-quality buildings that
support the courts' unique needs, while enhancing the building
surroundings. GSA and the courts have continually improved and
refined the management and oversight of these projects.
The judiciary has developed and implemented policies that
require courtrooms to be shared among judges. The judiciary has
also revised its estimates for projected future judgeships
based on current data, reducing also their space requirements.
GSA, likewise, has improved our management of the courthouse
program and implemented strong space management controls. We
ensure our courthouses are constructed within the budget and
scope.
I have to say I am concerned to hear continued reference to
the GAO report on which we held a hearing last year and the
conclusions of which I thought we discredited to a large
extent. For example, in their report GAO applied the courts'
revised sharing standards retroactively to completed projects
and then claimed the space was overbuilt based on those later
standards. GAO took incorrect measurements of our buildings,
assuming high-ceiling spaces and atriums were in fact gross
square footage of an asset that we somehow had to build, as if
we were paying money to build empty high-ceiling space.
But to move on, today's hearing focuses on the Los Angeles
courthouse. Due to security deficiencies in the existing
buildings and courtrooms that do not meet the courts' space
needs or functional requirements, the L.A. courthouse has been
the courts' number one priority for the last decade.
Between fiscal years 2001 and 2005, the project received
appropriations and was fully authorized. However, the project
could not move forward for several reasons, including
construction cost escalations and programmatic changes.
Congress has made clear on numerous occasions that GSA should
work with the courts to develop a viable solution for the
project within the funding already appropriated.
The courts and GSA have worked closely over the last couple
of years to develop a feasible solution for a smaller district
courthouse that supports the judiciary and their mission needs,
providing secure courtrooms and chambers. GSA and the courts
have incorporated the sharing guidelines. We have eliminated
projected judgeships and developed a solution to build this
courthouse within the latest management guidelines and using
lessons learned over the past several years.
We now have a plan to deliver this facility within the
current appropriation and authorization. This proposal includes
24 district courtrooms and 32 chambers in the new courthouse,
totaling approximately 650,000 gross square feet of space. This
project is a worthwhile investment that will enable GSA to
improve the security and meet the functional needs of the court
while taking advantage of the unfortunate downturn in the
market to deliver the project within the current appropriation
and to create thousands of construction jobs in a hard-hit
industry.
GSA is ready to move forward with this project. We already
own and have cleared the site and are ready to issue a contract
solicitation. The new courthouse, with the existing Edward R.
Roybal Federal Building and Courthouse, will meet the courts'
requirements for 49 courtrooms. That includes district,
magistrate, and bankruptcy courtrooms. This project will
increase space efficiency and consolidate court functions.
Moving forward, GSA will assess the potential reuse of the
Spring Street facility and the possibility of modernizing it to
accommodate executive branch agencies who are currently housed
in over 1 million square feet of leased space in Los Angeles.
In conclusion, the L.A. courthouse project has idled far
too long. GSA and the courts now have a plan that can be
completed within the current appropriation, mobilize this
funding to put people back to work, and help the courts meet
their mission needs. GSA is ready to move forward with this
project, providing the courts with a secure state-of-the-art
courthouse, helping improve court functions and services, while
keeping tenants and the visiting public safe. This project is
not only important to GSA and the courts, but also to the
congressional appropriations committees who have urged GSA to
proceed with this construction over several years now.
Thank you for inviting me to appear before you today. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss our management of the
courthouse program and to describe the new path forward for the
Los Angeles courthouse, and I welcome your questions. Thank
you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Peck. Thank you, Judge Morrow,
for your opening testimony. We are going to break at this time
for an estimated 15 minutes to vote, and then we will begin
back immediately with Mr. Goldstein's testimony.
[Recess.]
Mr. Denham. The committee will reconvene back with opening
testimony from Mr. Goldstein. You may proceed.
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Norton, and members of the subcommittee. We are
pleased to be here today to discuss our recent work on Federal
courthouse construction issues and on the L.A. courthouse in
particular.
In 2000, as part of a multibillion-dollar courthouse
construction initiative, the judiciary requested and the
General Services Administration proposed building a new
courthouse in Los Angeles to increase security, efficiency, and
space. But construction never began. About $400 million was
appropriated for the project.
For this testimony, GAO was asked to report on the status
of the courthouse project, challenges GAO has identified
affecting Federal courthouses nationwide, and the extent to
which these challenges are applicable to the L.A. courthouse
project. This testimony is based on GAO's prior work on Federal
courthouses, much of it for this committee, during which GAO
analyzed courthouse planning and use data, visited courthouses,
modeled courtroom-sharing scenarios, and interviewed judges,
GSA officials, and others.
GAO reported in 2008 that GSA had spent about $33 million
on design and site preparations for a new 41-courtroom
courthouse, leaving about $366 million available for
construction. However, project delays, disagreements between
GSA and the judiciary about what to build, unforeseen cost
escalation, and low contractor interest had caused GSA to
cancel the project in 2006 before any construction took place.
GSA later identified other options for housing the L.A. court,
including constructing a smaller, new courthouse or using the
existing courthouses, the Spring Street Courthouse and the
Roybal Federal Building and Courthouse.
As GAO also reported, the estimated cost of a new
courthouse option as of 2008 was over $1.1 billion,
significantly higher than the appropriation. All the other
options were rejected by the courts because they believed that
GSA underestimated the costs and created overly optimistic
project schedules that they feared could not be met.
Finally, in a 2008 letter to the GSA signed by Judge
Morrow, the L.A. court unanimously opposed a new 20-courtroom
building, stating in part that the remaining appropriated funds
were not adequate to construct a facility of this size. This
situation has essentially been deadlocked ever since.
The challenges that GAO has identified in recent reports on
Federal courthouses include increasing rent and extra
operating, maintenance, and construction costs stemming from
courthouses being built larger than necessary. For example, in
2004 the judiciary requested a $483 million permanent annual
exemption from rent payments to GSA due to difficulties paying
for its increasing rent costs. GAO found in 2006 that these
increasing rent costs were primarily due to increases in total
courthouse space. And in 2010, GAO reported that more than a
quarter of the new space in recently constructed courthouses
was unneeded.
Specifically, in the 33 Federal courthouses completed since
2000, GAO found 3.56 million square feet of excess space. This
extra space is a result of courthouses exceeding the
congressionally authorized size, the number of judges in the
courthouses being overestimated, and not planning for judges to
share courtrooms. In total, the extra space GAO identified is
equal in square footage to about nine average-size courthouses.
The estimated costs to construct this extra space, when
adjusted to 2010 dollars, is $835 million, and the estimated
annual costs to rent, operate, and maintain it is $51 million.
At the time of that report, GAO recommended that GSA ensure
that new courthouses are constructed within their authorized
size, that the Judicial Conference of the United States retain
caseload projections to improve the accuracy of its 10-year
judge planning cycles, and that the Conference establish and
use courtroom-sharing policies based on scheduling and use
data. GSA and the judiciary agreed with most of the
recommendations, but expressed concerns with our methodologies
and key findings.
Mr. Chairman, it is quite clear that each of the challenges
GAO identified related to unnecessary space in courthouses
completed since 2000 is applicable to L.A. First, as GAO
reported in 2008, GSA designed the L.A. courthouse with 13 more
courtrooms than congressionally authorized, which would have
added more than 200,000 square feet of space to the project
without legislative approval. This increase in size led to cost
increases and delays.
Second, in 2004, GAO found the proposed courthouse was
designed to provide courtrooms to accommodate the judiciary's
estimate of 61 district and magistrate judges in the L.A. court
by 2011, which as of October 2011 exceeds the actual number of
such judges by 14. This disparity calls into question the space
assumptions on which the original proposals were based.
Third, the L.A. court was planning for less courtroom
sharing than is possible. While in 2008 the judiciary favored
an option proposed by GSA that provided for some sharing by
senior judges, according to our 2010 analysis there is enough
unscheduled time in courtrooms for three senior judges to share
one courtroom, two magistrate judges to share one courtroom,
and three district judges to share two courtrooms. In 2011, the
judiciary also approved sharing for bankruptcy judges.
Additional courtroom sharing could reduce the number of
additional courtrooms needed for the L.A. courthouse, thereby
increasing the potential options for housing the L.A. court.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Norton, this concludes my
testimony. We are pleased to answer any questions you may have.
Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
GSA has taken exception to some of the methodology you used
such as applying sharing models retroactively, incorrect
measurements. What is your response?
Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Chairman, I think it is disappointing.
We have discussed this issue with Mr. Peck on a couple of
occasions. The comptroller general has even sent a letter to
GSA on these issues. So I have a couple quick comments I will
make.
Regarding sharing, it is the role of GAO to look at
budgetary consequences of Government policies. And it has been
the policy of the courts for the most part to not share
courtrooms. That policy has had a clear impact on increased and
potentially wasteful spending of tax dollars, as our report
showed. This is something the courts should have analyzed
themselves so that the lawmakers could have a better
understanding of the costs and benefits of this policy.
On gross square footage, Mr. Peck says that we measured
incorrectly. GAO did not measure anything. Let me repeat that:
GAO did not measure anything. We relied on GSA measurements and
on GSA blueprints.
Mr. Peck says that we incorrectly included atriums. This
policy is GSA's policy. It clearly states that atriums are
included in gross square footage. That policy has been in place
for the entire period of construction that we looked at.
Regarding atrium costs, we did not impute the same construction
costs to atriums as other spaces. We averaged the costs of all
spaces, including very expensive courtroom space and less
expensive atrium space. Our report notes that atrium space
costs less to construct and maintain than other spaces. We
asked both GSA and outside experts, including BOMA, about the
suitability of this methodology. And all of them, including
GSA, supported the approach.
And then finally, GAO applied appropriate generally
accepted inflation factors to account for the cost growth in
the construction market. And again, we validated this approach
with both GSA and outside experts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. And Mr. Peck, I would ask you for a brief
response. The prospectus that we see, especially in this case,
the prospectus did not define the same square footage.
Real quickly, the one that I am looking at here, second-
floor atrium area, even the roof line on the fourth floor, you
know, we have done basic square footages for my office. You
know, when we calculate square footage per employee in my
office we consider the hallways, the restrooms, the meeting
areas, every area. So when we get a prospectus, we are looking
at the same thing. We are approving a building. Build a
building, keep it within this cost, and meet the parameters. So
the atrium I would assume would be in the same square footage
as everything else that is in the building. We are leaving it
up to you and the architects, but we expect the square footage
to be maintained the same, which hasn't been done on every
building.
Mr. Peck. Right. I believe--so if you want my answer, it
gets complicated, because there are different ways of measuring
space in the real estate industry. But GAO has basically
fundamentally confused cubic square footage and linear square
footage. For example, if you were to take the square footage of
this room and you measure the walls from wall to wall in a
rectangle, you get one measure. If you then multiply it----
Mr. Denham. Let me stop you and ask you real quick, because
the study that I am looking at here on atriums and closed
courtyards and lobbies comes from your GSA Public Buildings
Service National Building Space Assignment Policy, and it has
that same square footage in there.
Mr. Peck. Yeah, the square footage. But what I am saying is
they count a five-story atrium as if we had built five floors.
And then he multiplies, as he just said, he multiplies the cost
of that atrium by the average square footage cost in the
building. And what I am objecting to, more than the measurement
of the space, is multiplying by a dollar number to come up with
an inflated and erroneous estimate of how much it costs us to
build that space. You know, the committee's authorizations and
the appropriations that we get give us a dollar budget for a
building. And that is what we fundamentally focus on. For Mr.
Goldstein and GAO to suggest that there was $800-some million
of overbuilding in the courthouse program, believe me, we would
have known that and they would have known that a long time
before he did that study.
Mr. Denham. But the problem is you come back to Congress
and ask for more money, and you build a building after the fact
that is much bigger than what was originally anticipated in the
prospectus.
Before you answer, I am going to bring this down to you
because in the gross square footage in your policy book it says
B through 3 are all included in the gross square footage. So it
is in your calculation. We will come back to that. I want to
make sure you have a copy of that.
Mr. Goldstein, frequently GSA would request funds to
construct a new courthouse or annex to supplement, not replace,
the existing courthouse. However, it seems when a new
courthouse is built, the old one is either abandoned or
minimally used.
Can you put up slide number 6?
These courthouses right here, were these abandoned
courthouses included in your 3.5 million square feet of extra
GAO identified?
Mr. Goldstein. Some of them were and some of them were not,
Mr. Chairman. We had visited over a number of years many of
these buildings for a lot of our different reports. Some of
them we identified as extra space in our rents report back in
2006. And some of them are included in the report that we
issued last year. So it is a combination, sir.
Mr. Denham. Which ones, out of these courthouses, all of
which have abandoned courthouses in major cities where we are
leasing huge amounts of space, which of these courthouses have
you considered in the 3.5 million square feet of wasted or
unneeded space?
Mr. Goldstein. I believe we included Miami, Washington,
Brooklyn, Tucson. For this particular report, we did not
include Seattle or Richmond. But they were part of our study
when we looked at the reasons why space and rent increased in
the courthouses several years ago.
Mr. Denham. And Mr. Peck, on this same list, how many of
these vacant or severely underutilized courthouses are on GSA's
excess list or disposal list?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I will have to provide that for the
record. I don't know. The only one here at the moment that I
have had conversations with people in GSA about recently is the
Dyer Courthouse in Miami, which is vacant and which I am
determined to move toward excess and surplus.
Mr. Denham. Is it on the surplus list today?
Mr. Peck. It is not today; no, sir.
Mr. Denham. OK. It is my understanding that none of these
courthouses are considered in the 14,000 excess properties that
we have today. And again, these are all hundreds of millions of
dollars of real estate that could be sold, or space that could
be leased; or, at a bare minimum, we could be doing the same
thing that we have done with the Old Post Office.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, as you and I are in violent
agreement about, there are assets that we need to move faster
to excess and surplus in our inventory. I would have to--I
would love to provide for the record where we are on all of
these properties, because as I said, I am only familiar with
one.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.020

Mr. Denham. Thank you. And if you could provide other
properties that might be in this same type of instance. We
tried to pick out a few that we knew of. But obviously, your
list would probably be much more inclusive than what we have.
But let me just point out, Mr. Peck, let's put up slide
number 8.
Just the Miami courthouse that you just mentioned, I think
there are some similarities here with the situation that we are
seeing in L.A., the Dyer Federal Building.
Let's put up 9 real quick.
This is a beautiful courthouse, beautiful courtrooms,
amazing historical building. It is empty. I called down there
yesterday to see who was in the building. Apparently there is a
security guard around there somewhere. We were unable to find
him yesterday. So we are going to send some people out there
just to see exactly who is there. But I am amazed to find out
that we have got an abandoned, beautiful courtroom, entire
facility here. It has been vacant ever since the new courthouse
opened. I was amazed to find out, when I asked the question
whether it was on the excess list, we have it listed as mission
critical. So I want to make sure this doesn't end up like the
Old Post Office that sits for two decades, and then it takes a
congressional order to actually get the problem moved forward.
Here you have got an amazing piece of property in an area where
we are leasing a huge amount of space, same as L.A., and yet we
have got this vacant.
Mr. Peck. First of all, in L.A. we have not yet built a new
courthouse. So it is a little premature to describe the Spring
Street Courthouse as underutilized, because it is utilized at
the moment. But as I said in my testimony and will be prepared
to brief you more, when we build the new Los Angeles courthouse
we will be prepared, we will take a look at where we are on
Spring Street. And we are going to look at one of two things.
One, we will either find that we can efficiently retrofit the
building and move Federal agencies out of leased space in Los
Angeles and into that building, or we will declare it surplus
and get rid of it.
Mr. Denham. Old Post Office we spend, what, $6.5 million a
year in maintenance costs?
Mr. Peck. I don't think it was $6.5 million in maintenance
costs. I think we were losing a couple million dollars a year
between what we got in rent and what we were maintaining.
But Mr. Chairman, may I just say the Old Post Office is a
little more complicated. And I want to report to you something.
One is that the building itself, the office part of the
building is in fact fully occupied. Not terribly well utilized.
And I agreed, when I was at GSA before, that we ought to get it
out. And can I just say that we have put out an RFP----
Mr. Denham. I am just using the Old Post Office as an
example, because we have exhausted that as an example here in
this. We are all very, very familiar with that one property.
This property here we spent----
Mr. Peck. I am trying to declare victory, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. We spend $1.2 million a year to operate this
abandoned building. So again, this is something we are looking
at. We want to make sure that the Spring Street Building
doesn't end up in the same type scenario. If we are able to do
courtroom sharing, we would want to make sure that we move or
utilize that property as well.
At this time my time has expired. Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, Mr. Peck, it is routine for Federal agencies to
attack the investigator. Everybody does it. Nobody likes when
GSA does a report and says what they don't want GSA to say. But
in essence, you have attacked the subcommittee because you said
that you thought that the report had been discredited by your
testimony. Do you really believe that the GAO report was
discredited when 33 courthouses were constructed above the
specifications of this subcommittee without your ever coming
back to the subcommittee to get new specifications? Where you
have allowed frequent overestimation of the number of judges?
And where, as the chairman has just shown, there are empty
courthouses and empty courtrooms?
I mean, it bothers me if you think that the report has been
discredited rather than that the GSA has been discredited.
Mr. Peck. I said, as Mr. Goldstein noted, we took exception
to the methodology. We had this out last--we discussed this
last year.
Ms. Norton. My time is limited, the chairman has already
indicated. And your notion of--if you believe that cubic--there
is something called cubic feet and square feet--then it was
your obligation to come to this committee to indicate that. And
I have been on this committee for 20 years. I have never seen
you come back to this committee and say to the committee, we
have new specifications that we need.
Now, I was at the Prettyman Courthouse, a courthouse I
supported. I was at the Prettyman Courthouse just the night
before last. What a beautiful courthouse, the Prettyman
Courthouse is.
Let me ask you, Mr. Peck, do you believe that this
committee thought that in building the Prettyman Annex that the
judges would completely abandon the existing courthouse and
that there would be almost nothing happening in the existing
courthouse? Do you believe that this committee believed that
when it authorized an annex to the Prettyman Courthouse here in
the District of Columbia? And how do you justify the fact that
that courthouse is sitting in the middle of Washington as the
major courthouse for the Federal courts in our city, and nobody
is using a perfectly beautiful courthouse?
And instead, when the judges saw there was some brand-new
courtrooms, they just all scooted over to the new courtrooms,
leaving a perfectly usable courthouse without any activity
occurring in it.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, I am not sufficiently familiar with
the current activities in the Prettyman Courthouse to answer
your question. I don't know what the----
Ms. Norton. I submit it as one I am familiar with, which
illustrates my impatience with--your impatience with the GAO
report. Because it just says to me, Mr. Chairman, since he
thinks he is discredited, he is not going to follow it.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, I should note, just so I can respond,
we agreed last year when we had the hearing on the GAO report,
we said two things. One, is it in the years previous? And in
all the years in which the prospectus system has been in
effect, GSA and the committee have had the--have taken the
position that when the costs of a project went up by a certain
amount, GSA came back. Not when the square footage went up,
because the square footage can sometimes increase within a
budget. What we did agree to last year, I want to remind you,
is that we----
Ms. Norton. You don't have to remind me. I am aware of it,
and I appreciate the practice has been changed. And the
practice better have been changed. I don't think you were doing
us any favor, Mr. Peck. It seems to me that was the
professional thing to do. And that is what any agency ought do
when it goes above what has been authorized. I mean that is
just par for the course.
But let me ask you what you also agreed to. After the last
hearing, GSA, you said you would go back to examine the GAO
modeling, and that you would try to come up with a consensus
recommendation that three active district court judges can
share two courtrooms, or three senior district court judges
could share one courtroom.
Let me ask you: Have those meetings occurred and has there
been any consensus reached?
Mr. Peck. We have discussions all the time with the courts
about----
Ms. Norton. I am going to be very specific in my
questioning. Have you met with Mr. Peck with respect to the
issue I just described, the three-to-two and the senior judges,
three senior judges to one courtroom?
Mr. Goldstein. No, ma'am, there has been no discussion
about the model.
Ms. Norton. So meeting with people all the time is not
responsive to my question.
Mr. Peck. I said we were meeting with the courts.
Ms. Norton. Because in your mind the report is discredited,
even though when the report was--when the report was revealed
here, the committee was of a different mind. It appears that
you have not even done what you agreed to do when you testified
before this committee.
Let me ask you, at our last hearing, for example, you
agreed to study the Southern District of New York and its
sharing practices involving active judges. Now, have you
studied it? That is a real-time example. And are those sharing
practices reflected in the plans for sharing in the L.A.
courthouse proposal?
Mr. Peck. The sharing practice reflected in the L.A.
courthouse proposal is the sharing practice that was adopted by
the Judicial Conference of the United States. We are following
their sharing practice in this proposal.
Ms. Norton. Not the sharing practice that was in the GAO
report.
Mr. Peck. No, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. So the Judicial Conference of the United States
controls how taxpayer money is going to be spent for
courthouses.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, for many years, and you know I have
done this before, we have had lots of conversations with the
courts about their sharing practices. And the courts have
changed their sharing practices over the years. And in this
case we have in our program on the courthouses followed the
judiciary's sharing practices. That is correct.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Peck, this is what I mean. You follow the
judiciary instead of this committee. Now, this committee was
very impressed with the GAO report. And that was before we got
in the fix we are in now. Imagine this committee going and
saying to our colleagues, we ought not be doing sharing with
courthouses, even though your constituents are sharing where
they live these days. They are sharing food stamps these days.
Imagine how we feel about courthouses not sharing.
Let me ask, Judge Morrow, is sharing--does your testimony
involve courtroom sharing for active judges? And would you
describe how that would occur?
Judge Morrow. The proposed plan does not presently include
any sharing for active judges. It does incorporate the two-to-
one courtroom sharing ratio for both magistrate judges and
senior judges. And I should note that because this is probably
the last building that will ever be built in Los Angeles, over
time it is going to require active judge sharing as well,
because there won't be any other space.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.021

Ms. Norton. You betcha, Judge Morrow. You betcha it is
going to require it.
Let me ask Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein, you indicated that
using the modeling practices that you vetted with outside
experts that it was possible for 3 district court judges to
share 2 courtrooms, and that even in courthouses with more than
10 courtrooms there could be even more sharing. Do you have any
reason to believe that the L.A. courthouse, which would involve
no sharing by active judges, should be an exception that should
be granted by the Congress of the United States?
Mr. Goldstein. I wouldn't see a reason why, ma'am. In fact,
as you know, the judiciary's data, which is what we based our
models on, showed that at the highest level--which is the
active district judges--that judges are only using their courts
for court-related duties 2 hours a day. A third hour is used
for tours and bar groups and things like that. The fourth hour
is used for events that have been scheduled but canceled or
postponed, and the other 4 hours a day the lights are out. For
senior judges and for magistrate judges it is even less.
And that is why we developed the model. We did not, you
must recall, tell the judiciary that they should use our model.
We simply encouraged them to develop their own process to do
this and to develop their own assumptions. But they have never
done that.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Goldstein, on that same line of
questioning, your current model shows about 1.5 to 2 hours
courtroom use per judge per courtroom?
Mr. Goldstein. For a district judge's courtroom it shows--
this is the judiciary's own data that they did based on their
studies several years ago, the Federal Judicial Center--it
shows that the courtrooms are used for court-related duties 2
hours a day. They are used about an hour a day for senior
judges, and slightly more than an hour a day for magistrate
judges for actual court responsibilities.
Mr. Denham. Put up slide 10.
Mr. Peck, here is New York City, the Daniel Patrick
Moynihan Building, Thurgood Marshall Building. You can see
again the Patrick Moynihan Building in the background of the
Thurgood Marshall Building. Are we running into any problems
there right now with courtroom capacity?
Mr. Peck. In the Moynihan Building?
Mr. Denham. Well, there is only one that is being used
today.
Mr. Peck. Correct. Thurgood Marshall is under renovation.
Mr. Denham. Correct.
Mr. Peck. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Denham. OK. So we are renovating the Thurgood Marshall
Building, which is vacant right now during renovation. All of
the courtrooms are now being fully--or all the judges are fully
into the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Building. Once the renovation
is done in Thurgood Marshall, what is going to happen between
the two buildings?
Mr. Peck. The Thurgood Marshall, if I remember correctly,
and I would ask my staff to correct me, is mostly the appellate
court for the Second District. The Moynihan Building has taken
some of the--we have moved some of the chambers of the judges
from the Thurgood Marshall into the Moynihan Building, if I
remember the whole scheme correctly.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Goldstein, do we have any utilization
problems in the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Building to your
knowledge?
Mr. Goldstein. Not that I am aware of, sir.
Mr. Denham. Do you know what the courtroom usage is in
those buildings?
Mr. Goldstein. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Denham. Courtroom usage right now, hours per day per
courtroom?
Mr. Goldstein. We don't know for that particular one. We
can get back to you. We can take a look.
Mr. Denham. Do you have the current cost-sharing ratio on
that building?
Mr. Goldstein. We have just at this point with me today,
just the general ratios.
Mr. Peck. And Mr. Chairman, the Moynihan Building was built
before there was any court sharing at all, so it was built to a
different standard; a different standard, I just say again,
than we are going to use in the Los Angeles courthouse, the new
building.
Mr. Denham. I think these are two good comparisons between
the Miami building where you have got the Dyer Building that is
sitting vacant and not even on the excess property list--which
I would consider that similar to Spring Street--and here, where
you have completely shut down one huge building, moved
everybody into the second building, and actually have great
security and courtroom usage.
Mr. Goldstein, when the renovations to the Marshall
Courthouse are complete, what do you think the reutilization
rate is going to be on this building?
Mr. Goldstein. Well, you know, I don't know exactly, sir,
but it is interesting because, you know, as you know, all of
the judges moved into Pearl Street while that renovation was
going on. The Federal Judicial Center examined this several
years ago and found that the judges were doing quite well,
actually, in their sharing; that almost all of them said that
it had gone very well. And the people who were involved in
scheduling said that there were no issues and that no trials
had been postponed; that anytime they needed a hearing room,
one was obtained. So it seems to me that there may not be a
huge need for them to go back into the other building if
sharing is indeed working already.
Mr. Denham. So regardless of whether it was designed for
that or not, it is happening today, it is working today, you
have got everybody in one building. How many cases did you say
have been lost or suspended?
Mr. Goldstein. None.
Mr. Denham. None? No problems that you have heard of?
Mr. Goldstein. According to the judiciary itself and their
report.
Mr. Denham. I am looking forward to going to L.A. and
seeing the Spring Street and the Roybal Buildings next week to
see if we have got a similar-type scenario.
Mr. Peck, I wanted to go back to something you said when
answering Ms. Norton's question. When we look at a prospectus,
we look at both the scope and the money. And it is my
understanding you are no longer looking at both of those
issues?
Mr. Peck. No. I said that principally over the many years
that the prospectus system has been in effect, most of the
focus has been on containing costs. Of course the scope is
looked at, too. But with respect to coming back when a project
gets underway, we have come back when there was a money issue.
And I am saying once the project has been authorized and
appropriated and the project gets underway, we have come back
for a prospectus when the costs exceeded the amount that was--
that had been appropriated by more than 10 percent.
Mr. Denham. So when it has been exceeded?
Mr. Peck. When it has been exceeded by more than 10
percent. Because our rule with the Appropriations Committee is
that we can escalate the cost on a project up to 10 percent
without going back to them. But if the cost escalation does
exceed that, we have to go back.
Mr. Denham. Have you ever gone above 10 percent and not
come back to this committee?
Mr. Peck. I don't think so. But I would have to check.
[Supplementary information submitted for the record by the
General Services Administration follows:]

GSA has a longstanding practice of requiring multiple
levels of reviews before exercising our authority to
escalate projects up to 10 percent of the approved
limits. After reviewing 5 years of internal
escalations, we did not find any instances where we
exceeded the 10 percent without congressional approval.
To the best of our knowledge we have not exceeded our
appropriations for projects by 10 percent without
approval from the committees, as stated and allowed in
our appropriation language.

Mr. Denham. I am going to double-check that, because I have
heard differently.
Mr. Peck. On cost. On cost.
Mr. Denham. Well, on cost, yes. You should be coming back
on scope or cost.
Mr. Peck. Right. Right.
Mr. Denham. If you are drastically changing a building that
has been appropriated and been approved by this committee, if
the scope is drastically changed and you went from 50
courtrooms to 20 courtrooms, I would expect you to come back.
Under the law, under Title 40, you have to come back if it is
10 percent. So that is something I certainly want to look at
and make sure it hasn't been happening across the board. But
you are going from--you know, I will tell you, if I was running
a business that way and I waited until I was over 10 percent,
and then I went back to the banks after I got 20 or 30 or 40
percent over, I would be out of business.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Denham. You are waiting until----
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I am simply----
Mr. Denham. When you have spent 90 percent of the money----
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I am simply reflecting what the law
requires. I am not telling you what my personal predilection
would be or how I would do it if I ran a business. I am just
saying that we are required by law, if we exceed an
appropriation by 10 percent, to come back for notification to
the Appropriations Committee and approval to go forward.
Mr. Denham. And under law you are required to do that. My
concern is that you are not. My concern is that you are waiting
until 20 or 30 or 40 percent. And then at that point Congress
is under a real bind to say, Do we finish the project? Do we
reappropriate new money or not?
My concern would be when you get to 90 percent and you
realize something has changed. The requirement has changed. The
scope has changed. It is going to cost more money. The costs
went through the roof. Maybe steel has, the pricing has changed
way beyond what your budget would have ever imagined. You get
to 90 percent, you realize you are going to have some big cost
overruns, I would expect you to come back to Congress then, not
when you get to 110 or 115 or 120 percent of the cost.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to go back and see
if there have been instances where we have not come back when
we exceeded the 10 percent, number one. And number two, I will
certainly submit to you that I don't--it doesn't mean that we
are at 110 percent when we come back for approval.
My experience in the times when I have seen this happen has
been that when we think we are going to exceed by--I think we
are talking about just what you are talking about, when we
reach 90 percent or 80 percent or 50 percent for that matter,
and don't think we are going to be able to do it within the
budget, I believe we have come back to the committees and said,
OK, we are going to need more money. And by the way, we have to
tell the Congress a source for the funds, which we are required
to find savings from other projects to apply to a project when
we do go overboard.
But I am just saying that is--I want to assure you that we
agreed last year, and we will continue to provide if we
increase the scope, including square footage of a project by 10
percent, we will come back and inform you.
Mr. Denham. Have you come back to the Congress on this
project?
Mr. Peck. On Los Angeles?
Mr. Denham. The L.A. courthouse.
Mr. Peck. On the L.A. courthouse we have come back to the
Congress a couple of times before.
Mr. Denham. And the scope has definitely changed on this
project several times.
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. And at one point the justification was because
we needed--we were going to have a huge amount of judges we
were going to go out and hire. We are going to appoint new
judges. That number has changed several times now. And it is my
understanding now that new judges is not the concern. Now the
concern is Spring Street is just too old.
Mr. Peck. No, it is security concerns. And that has been
consistent since we first proposed the product. I would just
note that we are now back to--and I have to tell you, I will
think this is a good story on this project--we are back
proposing to you about the same amount of square footage that
we proposed when this project was first authorized in 2000. And
we are proposing to build within an appropriation that was
given to us in 2004 and 2005.
We have been told any number of times in this committee and
other committees that we should proceed with this project
within the budget that was appropriated in 2004, 2005, and we
are now prepared to do that.
Mr. Denham. Which was 72 judges. And we have 59.
Mr. Peck. I don't ever recall a projection for 72 judges in
this courthouse. There was a proposal for something like 41
courtrooms at one time. But as I said, and this is another----
Mr. Denham. The slide that was presented to you, the 2004,
we actually had 67, and the 10-year projection was 81. So we
were basing the scope of this project on 81 judges. In 2011,
this year, we have actual 59 judges.
Mr. Peck. That includes, I believe, bankruptcy and
magistrate judges. There are--you know, you can compare--it is
easy in this project, because there are lots of numbers
floating around, to compare apples and oranges. There are
district judges who require district courtrooms.
Mr. Denham. Apples and apples, that was the projection. You
are changing the scope of the project. That is the concern
here.
Mr. Peck. No, sir. The number of--in fact, the only way the
scope of this project has changed--and this has been in
response to concerns of the Congress over the years--is that we
no longer scope a courthouse project by trying to figure out
how many judges there might be in a district 30 years from now.
We simply don't assume any expansion in judgeships, and we take
a look 10 years out to see which judges might be taking senior
status and how many active judges there will be.
Mr. Denham. I am looking at the GSA prospectus, your
prospectus, apples and apples, exactly what you presented to
Congress. Number of judges, 72. That is the proposed 2011
number. And the actual number right now today is 59?
Mr. Peck. That includes a number of chambers for judges
that will be going senior, I am told. And again, that includes
district, magistrate, and bankruptcy judges.
Mr. Denham. OK. We are in agreement on something.
Mr. Peck. Pardon?
Mr. Denham. We are in agreement on something. OK. Apples
and apples now. What do you expect to use the Spring Street
Courthouse for?
Mr. Peck. If we continue to use the Spring Street
Courthouse in the Federal inventory, the only thing I can tell
you for certain that we know right now, because we haven't
completed a study of it, is that there are some historic
courtrooms that would be used for the grand jury, for U.S.
attorney practice, and some other courtrooms that might be
easily converted to conference room and training room space.
That is, if we decide to keep it in the Federal inventory. And
as I said, if it is cost-effective to do so, that would allow
us to move a lot of Federal agencies out of costly leased space
in the Los Angeles area. But we will have to make a
determination about whether we keep it in the inventory or move
it out of the inventory.
And I would like to assure you that that is a study that we
will move forward with quickly. So I am well aware that there
are previous instances in which the old courthouses weren't
pushed out of the inventory fast enough.
Mr. Denham. Quickly within the next decade? What is
quickly?
Mr. Peck. Well, a decade is a pretty long time.
Mr. Denham. I would agree. It took us two decades for the
Old Post Office. So I would like to clarify what ``quickly''
would mean.
Mr. Peck. I would be loath to tell you in Los Angeles
exactly how fast that would be. We have got do the study and we
have got to move it out. But I certainly think if we are moving
ahead with a courthouse, you then have to build a courthouse.
And the Spring Street Building wouldn't become excess until we
finish construction, which probably wouldn't be until 2016 or
so. So we are talking about a ways out before we do it. And
then I think you could make a decision and certainly excess and
surplus the building within a year after we move people out of
it.
Mr. Denham. If the Civilian Property Realignment Act were
in place and signed into law today, would this be a candidate
to be sold?
Mr. Peck. The Spring Street Building?
Mr. Denham. Yes.
Mr. Peck. Not right now.
Mr. Denham. If the new courthouse was built, would it be?
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. So we would not be looking to investing money
into this to redo it or renovate it for any other purpose.
Mr. Peck. I want to be really clear. What I said was we
would take a look at what it would cost to renovate the
building for Federal use and see whether that saved the
Government in the long run, over continuing to lease space. But
if it turned out it was too expensive to renovate and we didn't
get a return on it, then we would say it is excess to the
Government's needs.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
And final question. Judge Morrow, you had said that the
challenge that you face right now is that you are in two
different courtrooms and they are .4 miles away?
Judge Morrow. Two different courthouses, yes. They are
about two blocks away. The problem we have right now,
Congressman, is that we have active district judges and senior
judges and magistrate judges in each building. District judges
and magistrate judges perform, in our district, very different
functions. The district judges handle virtually all of the
civil trials, all of the felony criminal trials, all the guilty
pleas, all the sentencing. Magistrate judges do different
things. They handle habeas petitions, Social Security matters,
discovery, settlement conferences, things that require
different support functions from the activities that the
district judges do.
So we now have everyone split between two buildings. That
results in the marshals going back and forth between the
buildings all the time with the prisoners. It also results in
duplicative clerk's office functions in each building. And part
of the goal of the design plan that we have come up with with
GSA is to get all of our active district judges and as many of
our senior district judges as possible in one building so we
don't have to duplicate those support functions, and so that
the marshals are not constantly running back and forth between
the buildings the way they are now.
So it is a functional split, if you will, as opposed to
what we have going on now, which is basically running two
separate buildings doing the same things.
Mr. Denham. And you have a mix right now. You have district
judges in both buildings and you have magistrate judges in both
buildings?
Judge Morrow. Yes. And in the proposed plan we would have
all the active district judges and approximately 50 percent of
the senior district judges in one courthouse. We would have all
of the magistrate judges and some overflow senior judges, if
you will, in the Roybal Building. And of course the bankruptcy
court, which is a separate independent jurisdictional kind of
court, is also in the Roybal Building as well.
Mr. Denham. The district judges, that is where we run into
challenges with the marshals and security and----
Judge Morrow. Yes. Because we are the ones who are doing
all the felony work, the guilty pleas, the sentencings. I mean
the magistrate judges do handle arraignments, but those are
always done all in the Roybal Building. But these other
criminal activities are done exclusively by the district
judges.
Mr. Denham. Why not put all the district judges in the
Roybal Building?
Judge Morrow. A couple of things about that--first of all,
the way the Roybal Building is configured. Currently the
district judges who are resident in the Roybal Building--I am
one of those--are in a lower part of the building. There are
two towers, two elevator towers. And in order to move all of
the district judges into the Roybal Building, there would have
to be significant renovations of that building, because the
second tower, the higher tower, is now occupied by the
bankruptcy court. None of those courtrooms would work for
district court functions. They have no prisoner access. They
have no holding cells. They have jury boxes, but they are not
usable by the district court because they only seat 6 people,
and we need 14-people juries in criminal cases, and we seat 8-
person juries, by and large, in civil cases.
So the jury facilities are inadequate, the prisoner
movement is inadequate, and currently we have a holding cell
down in the bottom of the building. The Marshals Service has
indicated to us that in order to access those higher level
floors, they would have to build a holding cell, a second
holding cell on the 18th floor, which is where Congresswoman
Roybal-Allard's office currently is. They would have two
holding cells, two separate prisoner movements, and it would
create real problems for them in the building. So we can't use
the existing bankruptcy courtrooms. We would have to completely
reconfigure them. GSA would have to build a new elevator shaft.
It would be a highly costly venture.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.023

Mr. Denham. Mr. Peck, you weren't here during that time
when the Roybal Building was built, were you?
Mr. Peck. No.
Mr. Denham. It wasn't constructed wrong, was it?
Mr. Peck. Even before my time. I will say, just so we note
for the record, I was saying to our staff it seems like we have
studied just about every permutation and combination of
courtrooms, chambers, and buildings that you can imagine in the
Los Angeles District. I was out there last week looking at it.
And as you know, at one time there was a proposal that GSA put
forward to consider a combination of a new building and a
renovation of Roybal. We have looked at the renovation of
Roybal alone. It is very costly, as Judge Morrow noted. And
really, this is I think the smartest way to provide the space
we need for the district court judges. The Roybal Building
would be principally magistrate and bankruptcy, with some
courtrooms for senior district judges.
And finally, I would note something, that when we are done,
and again I think I have the numbers right, we will have
something between 42 and 49 courtrooms between the buildings.
Again, 21 that are active district judge courtrooms, 21; three
in the new building that would be used for senior judges. And
if the projections are right on the number of judges that go
senior in 10 years, we will have 73 judges sharing 40-some
courtrooms. So if you want to mix up all the courtrooms----
Mr. Denham. The projections haven't been right in the last
two decades.
Mr. Peck. But I want to be really clear these are not
projections of Congress creating more judgeships. These are
projections--we have kind of a baby-boom generation of judges
who are eligible to go senior. So we will end up for a while
with more judges who are senior, but we are not building very
many courtrooms for them. We are not counting on that.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, Mr. Peck,
when you look at a courthouse like the Prettyman Courthouse,
you walk into that courthouse, this is the main courthouse in
the District of Columbia, it is a perfectly suitable building,
but it is also an historic building. So, when you consider the
emptiness of the building now, or virtual emptiness of the
building when it comes to courthouses, it is difficult to know
how better utilization could ever be made of Prettyman.
Prettyman is historic for a number of reasons, including the
judges who served there and the trials that have occurred
there. And so, it makes you want to cry to go into a building
that no one ever thought would be abandoned and to see that
probably there is no good use that could be made of it now. It
also is on Constitution Avenue.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, may I say I actually share your
affection for the building. I filed briefs there when I was a
much younger attorney. I have served on a jury there. I have to
say there are two things to say about the whole Prettyman. One
was that the annex was built under the old projections, which
we have changed, on how we build courthouses. That was built at
a time when we did assume----
Ms. Norton. That is why I asked you in my prior round of
questions whether there was ever any intent to abandon
Prettyman. Nobody builds an annex with the thought in mind that
all the judges will no longer be in the historic courthouse.
Mr. Peck. That is correct. I don't think there was ever an
intention to abandon it. It is partially occupied now, and we
have actually been trying to find funds to renovate the
building, because I believe that the court thinks that there is
still a good use for it.
Ms. Norton. Well, if not, we are not going to be able to do
anything about it. It will just go down as one more reason why
we have to be very careful in the future.
Now, you are aware of an issue that was not of GSA's doing,
and that had to do with what has led to a new look at
utilization rates in Federal office buildings throughout the
country. We found that if you don't police that, that even
Federal agencies will think they are Federal judges, and they
will get utilization rates that taxpayers would be amazed to
see. And so, that occurred when the SEC was given authority it
never should have had.
I have introduced a bill. SEC, of course, has said it will
never do this again, but it was such an outlandish violation of
utilization rates that I have introduced a bill to take away
any authority from SEC, even though it has obviously given up
the authority. And I don't think any agency except GSA should
have such authority. But you know, we begin to wonder about GSA
when GSA is led by the nose by agencies. And it has happened
with agencies, and it certainly happened with the courts to a
fare-thee-well, as if the courts, Article III courts, as if
they have any jurisdiction whatsoever to say what courthouses
will or will not be built. We don't share jurisdiction over
that matter with judges or anyone else.
I want to ask you: Is there any difference between the
mandated decrease in utilization rates that the administration
and GSA is supporting and requiring active judges to share
courtrooms?
Mr. Peck. Well, first of all, if you will allow me to say,
we are achieving some significant success in talking to
executive branch agencies about reducing their utilization
rates.
Ms. Norton. Not only are you achieving it, let me commend
GSA. When you came before us--and I only regret that we did
only six or so of your leases this time--no one could help but
be impressed with the reduction in utilization rates and how
they reflected themselves--how that reflected itself in less
space that you asked for. It was astounding to see how much,
how many millions of dollars of space GSA saved simply by using
a reduced utilization rate so that people that work in Federal
agencies are going to have to work in less space.
My question to you, after commending you on what you are
doing I think so well with Federal agencies, is to indicate
why, if at all, there is any difference between decreasing the
amount of space, utilization space for other Federal employees,
and requiring judges to share courtrooms?
Mr. Peck. Well, I guess I would like to respond in two
ways. One is even with respect to executive branch agencies, we
are not in most cases just imposing a blanket number. We are
talking to them about their functions and asking questions
like----
Ms. Norton. You not only are doing that, and we never--this
committee has never stood for inflexibility. You not only are
doing that, those numbers are reflected in the prospectuses for
leasing that come before and are approved by this subcommittee.
So we know exactly what you are doing, we approve them. We know
there are differences between agencies. And there may be a
difference between courts. No one would require an
inflexibility when it comes to courts.
But I am asking a very specific question. And that is, what
is the difference between a decrease in the utilization rates
for Federal office space and requiring active judges to in fact
share courtrooms where that is feasible?
Mr. Peck. OK. Well, number one, I think that we should all
take some comfort in the fact that over the last decade the
courts have agreed to a different sharing policy. So in essence
they are reducing space. In fact----
Ms. Norton. But they have not agreed to share space when it
comes to active judges. We just had a judge testify here today
that there would not be sharing.
Mr. Peck. But they are sharing for magistrate judges, for
senior judges. You know, there are other space----
Ms. Norton. So this committee should be satisfied if the
judiciary goes along with some of what we mandated, not all of
what we mandated?
Mr. Peck. Well, I think that what the committee, as I
understand it, has mandated over the years is that we take a
look at sharing and see where----
Ms. Norton. You have testified you haven't taken much of a
look at sharing, because Mr. Goldstein is seated next to you,
and you haven't had any conversations with him about it.
Mr. Peck. Well, to be candid, my conversation about sharing
courtroom space has been with the courts, who are----
Ms. Norton. Why hasn't your conversation also been--I don't
object to your discussing this matter with the courts anymore
than I would object your discussing utilization rates with
Federal agencies. What I do object to is your having no
discussions with Mr. Goldstein when this committee was clear
that it was impressed with the GAO report. That is what I am
objecting to, Mr. Peck.
Mr. Peck. I don't know if you would call it a conversation,
but we certainly had a back-and-forth with Mr. Goldstein about
methodology and the results of his report.
Ms. Norton. Just a moment. So your testimony here today is
having had a back-and-forth with Mr. Goldstein, you do not
agree with Mr. Goldstein, so you are going to ignore the GAO
report?
Mr. Peck. We have not ignored the GAO report. In fact, as I
said, we have changed our policy with respect to coming back to
the committee for scope. And we are--we have also talked to
the----
Ms. Norton. Mr. Peck, you know what, you are filibustering.
Mr. Peck. No, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. That doesn't work with me. And this is what I
am going to ask. Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask that Mr.
Goldstein and Mr. Peck sit down, and within the next 30 days
submit a report to the chairman of this subcommittee on what
agreement, if any, you have reached with respect to the GAO
report. Within 30 days a document, 30 days of the day of this
hearing, not a back-and-forth. Mr. Peck, this committee
endorses, made that clear when it came forward, the GAO report.
So within 30 days, I want you to have a conversation with
Mr. Goldstein. And that conversation should be reflected in a
report as to what, if anything, you have decided in your
conversations with Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Peck. I will be happy to do that.
Ms. Norton. That is all I am asking.
Mr. Denham. And respond back to this committee with any
recommendations where there is an agreement between the two on
courtroom sharing.
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
At this time, I would ask unanimous consent that Ms. Brown,
who is a member of the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee, be permitted to participate in today's committee
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Peck, I think it is great that we are now going to be
having a conversation with GAO that should have happened a long
time ago. I agree with Ms. Norton on it. But you said you have
had conversations with the judicial branch. Do you have an
agreement with them on courtroom sharing?
Mr. Peck. Well, our agreement so far on courtroom sharing
is the policy that we have described, that there is courtroom
sharing with senior judges and magistrate judges.
Just one thing I would like to note. We focus a lot, and we
have been focusing for a long time, on courtroom sharing. There
are other aspects to the size of a courthouse that we also have
conversations with the courts about: size of jury assembly
rooms, the size of the district clerk's office, the size of
chambers, whether there are large--and if there aren't any
longer--large libraries when we don't use books as much as we
used to. So we have reduced the amount of space in courthouses
in areas other than just courtrooms.
Mr. Denham. I am looking at the Judicial Conference of the
United States, what they came back to this committee on. And in
the third paragraph, it says, ``After reviewing the data
gathered during the study, the Conference today adopted a
policy for senior trial judges to share courtrooms.''
Is there any courtroom sharing happening right now at the
Roybal Building, Judge Morrow?
Judge Morrow. For the district and magistrate judges in the
Roybal Building, no; in the Spring Street Building, yes.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Peck, are we following the Judicial
Conference report as far as the Roybal Building is concerned?
Mr. Peck. The Roybal Building was built before the Judicial
Conference adopted its sharing guidelines, so I defer to Judge
Morrow on how much sharing is going on right now.
Mr. Denham. In your opinion, Mr. Peck, is there any reason
that the Roybal Building would not be doing the sharing that
the judicial branch has recommended?
Mr. Peck. I am at a loss to answer your question in part
because I don't know enough. But I can tell you that when we
do--our plan is that the Roybal Building will reflect the
sharing policy when we are done with building a new courthouse
and moving people out of Spring Street.
Mr. Denham. Is it your plan to demolish seven courtrooms
within the Roybal Building?
Mr. Peck. It is--part of the plan, as I understand it going
forward, part of the plan would be to as many as seven small
courtrooms in the Roybal Building--we are not talking about
district courtrooms, but smaller courtrooms--and convert them
into chambers, as I understand it.
Mr. Denham. Are you sure they are not district courtrooms?
Mr. Peck. I don't know.
Judge Morrow. Congressman, may I respond to that?
Mr. Peck. Some might be district courtrooms. I don't know.
I know there are seven courtrooms, some are not district, and
they would be converted to chambers.
Judge Morrow. Congressman, we applied the new sharing
policies for magistrate judges and senior judges to calculate
the amount of space required in the new building and also to
calculate the amount of space that we would occupy in the
Roybal Building. And the net result of that, if I may disagree
with Mr. Peck, is that there would be three magistrate judge
courtrooms in the Roybal Building that would be vacant once the
new building is constructed and personnel have moved into
Roybal and into the new building.
Those we will need for chambers, because we do not have
enough chambers in the Roybal Building now to house all of the
judges who would move into that building. If that wasn't
feasible for some reason, then the court would release that
space to GSA so it could move executive branch agencies in
there. Because, as Mr. Peck has said, there is about 1 million
square feet of lease space in downtown Los Angeles that is
presently occupied by executive branch agencies.
Mr. Denham. Let's put up slide number 5 again. I think you
all have this in front of you.
So, looking at that courtroom, the bottom floors is where
we have the security, the holding areas, the district judges.
Under the GAO's model, we would be able to fit 47 judges there,
21 district, 9 senior, 17 magistrate. We also have, instead of
the 12, we have 16 bankruptcy courtrooms right now, 4 of them
being unused? Is that correct?
Judge Morrow. That is correct.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.026

Mr. Denham. Well, what are those four used for today?
Judge Morrow. I can't answer that question because it is a
bankruptcy court space.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.027

Mr. Denham. My chief consultant here says he toured it and
it was full of furniture. The four offices were shut down.
My question is, if we are shutting down Spring Street and
we have an opportunity to share courtrooms here, why are we
building a new courthouse?
Mr. Peck. Because all of the studies that we have done over
the years have shown that trying to retrofit the Roybal as a
courthouse that meets the security standards that we have for
the courts is expensive.
So is there enough square footage? There probably is. But
at the end of the day----
Mr. Denham. Mr. Peck, have you done a study on this
building as it pertains to courtroom sharing?
Mr. Peck. I would have to--I don't know if we have done it
with respect to courtroom sharing. We did it----
Mr. Denham. OK, hold on. Let me stop you there.
You have met with the judicial branch. You have agreed with
the judicial branch that there is going to be a new courtroom-
sharing model. You have come back to Congress and you said,
$400 million we are going to spend on this brand-new
courthouse. And the Roybal Building, which is a newer, secure
courthouse, you have not even done a study on courtroom sharing
there?
Mr. Peck. Mr.----
Mr. Denham. How do you propose--when you are building out
the entire L.A. area on a courtroom need, how do you find a
need to have a new building when you haven't done a courtroom-
sharing model on what we currently have?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, let me correct myself here. We have
taken a look, again, at the options of renovating the Roybal
and building a new courthouse to meet the courts' needs for
court district, magistrate, bankruptcy courtrooms, and to do it
in a secure environment. And our conclusion is that the best
way to do that is to build a new courthouse and to retrofit the
Roybal for certain other purposes, but not principally for the
district courtrooms.
So there will be sharing in the Roybal Building. They will
be sharing senior district courtrooms and magistrate and
bankruptcy courtrooms.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
It is my understanding, on the lower part of this, where we
have the secure area, where we have the holding areas, we also
have one floor that is completely just office space. It was
designed to have four courtrooms in it. It came to this
committee in a prospectus to have four courtrooms in it. Yet
there was not a need to have extra courtrooms at the time, so
we put--instead of having the secure area being utilized for
courtrooms, we now have that as office space.
Is that correct, Mr. Peck?
Mr. Peck. I am told that that is correct.
Mr. Denham. So we could certainly redevelop that one floor
back to its original purpose and put four new district secure,
state-of-the-art courtrooms in there.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, the problem is that you can
describe it as secure, but we can't, in this building, without
doing things like building a new elevator shaft, make the
building a secure courtroom to handle prisoners in the way that
we do it in modern courthouses with three separate circulation
systems.
Mr. Denham. I am looking forward to touring it firsthand,
seeing it firsthand.
Mr. Goldstein, can you explain this model here?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. What that model represents--as you
know, we developed this model with simulation experts, and our
model was peer-reviewed by the people who made the software, so
it has been vetted and validated.
So our approach includes: all case-related activities are
included; all time allotted to non-case-related activities,
including preparation time, ceremonies, educational purposes,
are included; all events that are canceled or postponed within
a week of the event are included, and that is 60 percent of all
events that are scheduled in a courtroom.
So what we did is, the model was then developed using,
again, the judiciary's own data. And so, based on the number of
current judges in the district court, there were three
approaches. under a dedicated sharing model, which allows
judges to be assigned a courtroom which they share, you would
need 26 courtrooms--17 district and 9 magistrate. Centralized
sharing within type, meaning that the district judges share and
then that the magistrate judges share, shows that you need 22
courtrooms--15 for district and 7 for magistrate. And fully
centralized, in which you have all judges sharing across the
spectrum, you could have 21 courtrooms.
If, indeed, the projections for additional senior judges
were actually to come true--and, in many cases, we know they do
not--you would need an additional three courtrooms at that
point.
Mr. Denham. So an additional three courtrooms. That would
be converting the one floor of office space into the four
courtrooms?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. And you also have, of course, the
arraignment, you know, courtroom that exists as well.
Mr. Denham. So there is one extra courtroom, and you could
also redo one of the upper floors as well?
Mr. Goldstein. That is my understanding, sir, yes.
And this would still allow, based on the most conservative
use of the model that we developed, somewhere between 18 and 22
percent of time for courtrooms when they are still not being
used.
Mr. Denham. Eighteen to twenty-two percent----
Mr. Goldstein. Even after this, yes, sir.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. That wouldn't be used, vacant
space.
Mr. Goldstein. Not vacant. Well, in the existing courtroom,
the time, the time during the day, where the courtrooms would
still be dark.
Mr. Denham. So if we had a sudden influx of judges, could
we even accommodate more in the Roybal Building than----
Mr. Goldstein. We can certainly take a look and get back to
the committee. I would hesitate to tell you the full
utilization rate until I did that.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
I am way over my time. Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am just not really, kind of, comfortable with the tone of
this meeting, having gone through building a courthouse in
Orlando, a Federal courthouse, and the first Federal courthouse
that was built after the Oklahoma City bombing. And so, some of
the factors that you consider--safety is the first factor.
And I would like to hear from the judge on the safety
issue. Because I will be in Los Angeles next week, and I
personally want to tour and get an update and see for myself.
Because, you know, it is one thing for us to put something in
writing, but it is a definite difference as to how it pans out
in the district.
So can you give us an update? Because I am most concerned
about the safety aspect.
Mr. Denham. And, Judge Morrow, before you respond, Ms.
Brown, I am planning on being there next week as well. I would
look forward an opportunity if we can coordinate schedules, we
could see it firsthand together. That would be a good
bipartisan way to----
Ms. Brown. Sounds like a date to me.
Mr. Denham. Sounds good.
Judge Morrow. And we would love to give you a tour, all of
you who would like to come.
Yes, Congresswoman, I can respond to your question. We have
two facilities in Los Angeles, the Spring Street Courthouse and
the Roybal Building. Roybal has relatively good security.
Spring Street is really the problem.
Spring Street is a very old building; it was built in the
late 1930s. It has no secure prisoner circulation to many of
the courtrooms in the building. The secure prisoner circulation
that does exist goes to some of the courtrooms, and the
marshals have stopped using that because it is so dangerous to
transport the prisoners in this very narrow, winding corridor,
that they are fearful for their own safety as well as the
safety of some of the inmates. So these prisoners are being
moved through the building in public hallways and on public
elevators, where they run into parties, witnesses, jurors,
victims, judges, court personnel.
And large numbers of them have to be moved, often, at one
time. Because, in our district, we have a number of gang
prosecutions where we have 50 to 70 defendants in one case. The
Department of Justice has partnered with the Los Angeles Police
Department to do large gang takedowns in Los Angeles, because
it has one of the highest gang populations in the country. And
all of those cases are brought in Federal court because our
penalties are higher.
So we have all of those kinds of cases. The Department of
Justice also determined to transfer members of the Aryan
Brotherhood prison gang from prisons all over the country into
our district so that they could be prosecuted in our district.
We had death-penalty-eligible people in that case. We had very
serious security risks with those defendants. We have to take
special measures when we have those kinds of cases in the
district.
So the marshal is, I think, reasonably concerned about the
state of the security in the Spring Street Building. And the
problem with it is, because it is such an old building and
because of the particular configuration of the building, GSA
cannot come in and fix those problems. They cannot be fixed.
And so it is a real concern for us.
There is also a concern that is somewhat unique to the
judges, in the sense that the prisoners are brought to the
courthouse in small vans. A large prisoner bus cannot come into
the courthouse. It is just not large enough for that to happen.
So they are brought, very frequently, in these small vans.
Those vans pull into the judges' parking lot, the judges'
parking area in the building. Judges are getting out of their
cars, the prisoners are getting out of the vans. They come
face-to-face with one another. And they all have to be in the
courtroom at the same time, so there is no sitting back and
waiting until the prisoners have been taken in. It is a
dangerous situation. And, once again, the building can't be
fixed to remedy that problem because you cannot put a sally
port on the building.
So there are definite concerns and issues with security in
that building.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Peck, would you like to respond?
Mr. Peck. I was out there last week, and I actually saw the
area that Judge Morrow is talking about, where the vans come in
and let the prisoners out. There were a couple of courtrooms in
there where the prisoners and the marshals have to be in a very
narrow space, which is dangerous for the marshals. It is a
problem waiting to become even more evident, or tragically
evident.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Peck, when you were out there, did you see
the four courtrooms that were full of furniture?
Mr. Peck. I did not this time. I had one other time. There
was a very small--I don't know if I am talking about the same
space, but I do recall seeing a very small--what had been
called a courtroom, looks like a conference room, a one-story
space that is now used for storage. It was not a two-story
full-height district courtroom that is being used for storage.
There are a number of courtrooms in this complex that we
are calling courtrooms that are pretty small spaces. And to be
fair and honest, the bankruptcy proceedings are pretty much
just counsel and don't require the same kind of space that a
district court requires.
Mr. Denham. And just for the record, I am not saying that
we should never build any courtrooms in the L.A. area. I am
just saying that we ought to fully maximize the ones that we
have today--use sharing, use a courtroom for more than an hour-
and-a-half a day, use a courtroom not to store furniture but to
actually conduct court in it.
And when we have made a secure area with a holding area and
we have changed our prospectus and changed our building model
to facilitate office space, rather than the courtrooms that
were once proposed, we ought to take a look at those things
before we go moving forward on a $400 million project that
could possibly go into a half-a-billion-plus project.
Mr. Peck. Well, Mr. Chairman, I couldn't agree with you
more that, before we spend this kind of money on the taxpayers'
behalf and their money, that we make sure that we are doing it
as efficiently as possible. What I am----
Mr. Denham. Wait. Before we do it as efficiently as
possible, yet you have not done a court sharing analysis on the
Roybal Building.
Mr. Peck. No, I am sorry----
Mr. Denham. Wouldn't you expect to do that before you go
out and spend $400 million on a new building?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify again. The
proposal that we are making to build a 24-courtroom, 32-chamber
new courthouse did include an analysis of how we would go
forward with the Roybal Building.
And we have--this is a very complicated project. And anyone
can say, as you have just asked about the Roybal Building, you
can take a look at square footage in a building and say, can
you get all this square footage in there? Yes. But this is the
problem with building projects in real estate: You have to look
at the building itself. You have to look at the way it is
configured. You have to figure out whether, when all is said
and done and you were to go into the Roybal Building and try do
this, whether having spent probably the same amount of money or
more, whether you would end up with a building that is actually
efficient and meets the security requirements.
In our determination--and this has been going on now for 10
years--is that the best way to do this is to use the Roybal for
certain purposes, which includes some court sharing, and to use
the new L.A. courthouse for other purposes for the district
courts. I mean, that is--I can tell you, this thing has been
studied to death.
Mr. Denham. And, Mr. Peck, I know we do a ton of studies
here. We do study things to death here. My concern is, in this
one area, we have failed to do the final studies on most of
these courthouses and we have moved forward, wasting taxpayer
dollars.
Let's put up slide number 6 again. These are all buildings
that we don't have in our excess property portfolio and yet
they are sitting vacant, costing us millions of dollars every
year.
Mr. Peck. Well, Mr.----
Mr. Denham. And we are going to see the same type of
scenario here in L.A. with the Spring Street Courthouse.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, two things.
One is that--I would like to separate two issues. In almost
every one of these instances, we also built a new courthouse
because we had security issues with the old one or capacity
issues. The question of whether we have taken them out of the
inventory or should take them out of the inventory is a
separate question.
But I would just note the Brooklyn-adjacent courthouse, for
example, if it is the one I am thinking of, it has been vacant
because we have had it under renovation, and I think it is
being reoccupied for the bankruptcy courts. The Seattle
courthouse is being used for the--the old one is being used for
the appellate court, as you note. The other ones I will get you
reports on.
But I have also committed to you that when we finish this
project in Los Angeles, the Spring Street Building is either
going to be fully utilized by the Federal Government or we will
get it out of the inventory.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
And one final question. I am looking forward to seeing the
utilization on all of these buildings, as well as the amount of
lease space that we have in each of those cities.
But the final question I have before I turn it back over to
Ms. Norton: I assume that OMB has signed off on this project,
Mr. Peck?
Mr. Peck. OMB has signed off on our--yes, sir, on our
moving forward with the new courthouse, yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. And you intend to resubmit a new prospectus for
approval to this committee?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, we have an appropriation to move
forward with the project. We intend to submit to you all the
facts that are necessary for you to take a look at it. But, as
I said, you know, this project has already been authorized and
it has been appropriated, and we have been under pressure from
the appropriators to move forward. We will provide you with
information so that you can see exactly what we are doing.
Mr. Denham. So, once again, we started with a discussion of
keeping things within scope and cost or coming back to this
committee. In the last decade, has the scope of this project
changed?
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir, although the square footage is now back
to where it was authorized in--we are proposing less square
footage than was authorized when the project was appropriated
in fiscal 2004-2005. The prospectuses that the committees in
the Senate and the House approved were for a far larger
building. We are proposing less square footage in the building.
Mr. Denham. And in the Roybal Building, are you going to
have to do any renovations?
Mr. Peck. We will be doing renovations at some point in the
Roybal Building, yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. What is the cost associated with that?
Mr. Peck. We don't have the cost estimates on that yet for
the backfill and other renovations in Roybal. That would be a
separate prospectus and a separate authorization.
Mr. Denham. Now, how do we always get cost estimates before
you get cost estimates? Why can't we work together and come up
with these estimates together? I mean, we already have
estimates. We have a pretty good idea of what it is going to
cost to renovate that building.
So, before you come back to Congress, before you come back
to Congress and ask for another appropriation at a time when we
have a $15 trillion debt and we are trying to cut things
everywhere, before you come back to us, you are going to leave
a lot of this area vacant because you don't have money to
renovate it?
Mr. Peck. We are mostly moving--remember, this project is
mostly moving courtrooms out of the Spring Street Building into
the new L.A. courthouse. That is the crux of the project. The
Roybal will be----
Mr. Denham. I understand, but we aren't fully utilizing the
Roybal Building today. We have one floor that was supposed to
be a secure courtroom area that is now office space. We have
another full floor that is full of furniture because we are not
utilizing those courtrooms.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, there is a sequence to the project.
And the first thing we need--so we need to build a building,
move people out of Spring Street. And when we do that, we will
then also be making some changes to the Roybal Building. But
that is quite a number of years from now before we get to that.
And when we do, we will develop detailed cost estimates and a
schedule, and we will submit that to you.
To the extent that you have a cost estimate right now, you
have probably heard the same back-of-the-envelope cost estimate
that I have heard. But I don't have a real program or a real
budget yet.
Mr. Denham. The proposed courthouse, $400 million, that you
are not coming back to this committee for a re-approval even
though we are dealing with something that was appropriated
about a decade ago, you expect to get this project done for
$400 million? I know you are downsizing the building because
there is not enough need.
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir. Actually, we have $365 million to spend
on the project because it cost us some money to acquire the
site and to do a previous design which will no longer work. So
it is $365 million to design and build a new building.
Mr. Denham. To design and build.
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. Haven't we already designed it several times?
Mr. Peck. We designed it once. We only designed it once. We
have thought about it many times, but we only designed it once,
thank goodness.
Mr. Denham. So we have $365 million left to build this new
courthouse. Your plan is to--or at least, under the law, under
Title 14, you can go 10 percent higher than that. At what point
do you plan on coming back to this committee during the
process?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, I don't plan ever to come back to
get an additional authorization or appropriation on this
building.
Mr. Denham. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. So, despite the fact that the project
originally authorized 1 million square feet and, as I
understand it, now you are building 650,000 square feet, leave
aside the appropriation, it is your testimony that you have the
authority to go forward now and that the scope of the project
has not changed?
Mr. Peck. Well, the square footage has not changed.
Ms. Norton. What does ``scope'' mean to you? It was 1
million square feet in the original authorization.
Mr. Peck. Right, and 40-some courtrooms, if I recall
correctly. And we are now proposing about the same square
footage for----
Ms. Norton. 1 million square feet? I thought it was 650,000
square feet.
Mr. Peck. I am sorry. It is about 650,000 square feet is
what we are now proposing to build.
Ms. Norton. And that is not a change in the scope of the
project?
Mr. Peck. It is a decrease in the scope of the project, it
definitely is.
Ms. Norton. Well, just a moment. You said a change in the
scope of the--see, now, this is what----
Mr. Peck. I am not trying to parse words.
Ms. Norton. I am just asking, is it a change in the scope
of the project and aren't you supposed to come back to the
committee when there is a change in the scope of the project,
whether it is a change upward or a downward change?
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, we are----
Ms. Norton. I am just saying--I am asking this----
Mr. Peck. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton [continuing]. For purposes of precedent.
Mr. Peck. We----
Ms. Norton. I don't want the result of this committee
hearing to be that we authorized you, in spite of what looks to
be a change in the scope, to go forward without coming back to
this committee.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, well, we are here at the committee.
We are going to provide you with information on it. I would
note, the committee has already----
Ms. Norton. We have not authorized a 650,000-foot--and, by
the way, I hope we are not talking about cubic feet--a 650,000-
square-foot building. We haven't authorized that.
Now, I am pleased to see----
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton----
Ms. Norton [continuing]. That you are trying to fit within
the appropriation. And you don't have any choice but to fit
within the appropriation. Believe me, you don't have any
choice.
Mr. Peck. Correct.
Ms. Norton. But that doesn't mean that the authorizers
ought to be ignored.
Mr. Peck. And we are anything but ignoring the authorizers,
Ms. Norton. We are here today. We are going to provide you with
more information about the project.
Ms. Norton. Do you know why you are here today, Mr. Peck?
You are here today because this committee called you here
today. You are not here today to seek the committee's
permission for a change in the scope of this project.
Mr. Peck. That is correct.
Ms. Norton. You are here because we got word that you were
thinking of building a different project in L.A., and we said,
well, we had better call the GSA here.
You make it sound as if you have come in the normal course,
as the subcommittee has mandated, to get the permission of the
subcommittee for a change in the scope of the project, when, in
fact, on the basis of rumor, we called you here to hold this
hearing, and you did not ask for this hearing.
Mr. Peck. That is correct. But, Ms. Norton, we were going
to provide, and will provide, a notification to the committee.
That is our practice, and that is what we intend to do.
Ms. Norton. I will leave it to the chairman to decide
whether the notification is sufficient to fit within our
mandate regarding the scope of the project. I will take that no
further, except to say, I want to say on the record that this
project is not an exception to the mandate of this committee
regarding changes in the scope of a project. I do not want this
cited back to us as a precedent for how, if you lower, then of
course you don't have to come back. You have to come back when
the committee says and has already indicated when you come
back.
I have one more question. Now, we have been talking about
sharing. And, by the way, Mr. Peck, we intend to inform the
appropriators, as well, about the reason that the committee
believes that sharing should occur with active judges as well.
We don't think the appropriators, given what they are going
through, are going to take the position that active judges
shouldn't share courtrooms unless Mr. Peck can get the judges
to agree to share courtrooms.
And I think you are going to have that reflected in the way
in which appropriations occur going forward, if you are ever
able to get another appropriation. And I say that advisedly. It
is going to be very hard to get any money from the
appropriators or anybody else in the Congress of the United
States to do anything. If you didn't already have money that
has been lying on the table for more than 10 years, this
project would be dead in the water.
And you know, and you are here, and not only because we
called you here, but you know this money is going to be
rescinded if you do not use this money.
Mr. Peck. I am well aware of that.
Ms. Norton. I would like Mr. Goldstein--we have been
talking about sharing in the ordinary course. And, of course,
the judges have been willing to give away the bankruptcy judges
and the magistrate judges, anybody but themselves.
But I want Mr. Goldstein to describe centralized sharing
and what is the difference between centralized sharing and the
sharing we have been discussing here.
Mr. Goldstein. Ms. Norton, the centralized sharing is where
judges will share based on a scheduling system that is done
across the court, like you do here for, you know, hearing
rooms. If you want to use a hearing room here, Mr. Chairman,
you have whoever is in charge of scheduling schedule your
subcommittee when you want to use the room. And so, that is how
it is done.
The difference between that and what I called ``dedicated
sharing'' earlier is, there isn't any sort of central
scheduling; it is where two judges are paired up. And that is
mainly what has been occurring in Manhattan in the last couple
years while they have been retrofitting the other courthouse.
Ms. Norton. Well, is there any centralized sharing going on
in the United States?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly not among active judges. There is
very little sharing that goes on, because, obviously, any
sharing that does occur is at the margins in new construction
among some senior and some magistrate judges.
But the important thing to note here is that the sharing
policies of the Judicial Conference, while they have gone
certainly further than they had gone from years past, aren't
based on courtroom usage data that the Federal Judicial Center
did. They are simply based on policies that they developed. But
they are not based on the actual usage of courtrooms today.
Ms. Norton. Well, does your report indicate that
centralized sharing would be based on actual use?
Mr. Goldstein. Well, certainly the model that we produced
did exactly that. It uses actual data that was developed by the
judiciary. And that was the basis of the modeling that we did.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Peck, why should this committee, in the
future--I understand this courthouse has its $400 million
dangling out there for a decade--but, in the future, given what
we are going through here in the Congress and that no one sees
that there will be many changes in it--in fact, the
supercommittee has been challenged to go two and three times
what they are aiming for--why should this subcommittee
authorize and why should the appropriators appropriate money
for anything except centralized sharing of the same kind we do
in the Senate and the Congress of the United States?
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, I certainly agree that we should take
another look at the sharing policy. As I have said, I have had
this conversation a number of times with the Judicial
Conference's Space and Facilities Committee, and we will talk
about it again.
I think, again, that, whether or not we can do it--and I
think it is fair for the committee to ask us, should we come
forward with another proposal for a new courthouse, to ask
whether, given the caseload in that area, the number of judges,
the way the facilities rate, whether we can share more than
they currently are, I think it is certainly a fair question and
I think that it is something we all ought to be talking about
as we go forward. I certainly do agree.
Mr. Goldstein. Ms. Norton, I would add just one item to
what Mr. Peck said. I think it is important to note that the
information that the judiciary presented, all of the court
usage data they developed, shows that there was and our model
proved that there is no correlation between caseload and
courtroom usage across the United States based on the
generalizable data that they used. There is no correlation.
Ms. Norton. I believe we should ask the appropriators--and
I know the appropriators in this area--to hold a hearing where
they hear some of what you are saying so that we can match up
what was authorized and we don't have people running back and
saying, give us more money.
Of course, I think this, Mr. Peck. I think that you are
going to be hard-pressed to get anything but authorization and
appropriation for centralized sharing.
And I would like to ask you and Mr. Goldstein, in light of
the meeting you will be having and the report you will be
giving to the chairman within 30 days, to describe how
centralized sharing could occur. You might even--if you doubt
the data, you might even ask the judiciary, which apparently
has had its way at the expense of the taxpayers, whether or not
they would be willing to do a pilot project on centralized
sharing in realtime.
We are asking people in realtime--we have got 45 million
people on food stamps. I have been on the ``challenge diet,''
the ``food stamp diet.'' Glad I am off of it now for a week. I
can tell you that nobody can live on the food stamp diet.
According to the data, it lasts for about 2\1/2\ weeks. So I
think I know what people did. I think they went to the kitchens
that give out food for the rest of the time.
That is what we are confronting here when we decide where
the money should go. And nobody is going to go home and say
that everybody in the United States ought to be sharing except
active judges, and that the GSA and the active judges are
unwilling even to do a pilot project on real-time centralized
sharing.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, I will talk to the judiciary about
it.
And I want to say this. I could not agree more. This is an
unbelievably constrained budget time. Every dollar we spend on
our inventory should be subject to scrutiny. We need to think
about it in ways different, perhaps, than we have thought about
it before. And we will certainly cooperate with you in taking a
look at that.
May I make one final comment, Mr. Chairman? I do want to
note this, just because if I can, sort of, take us from this
topic to the broader one of the health of the Federal Building
Fund, you noted in your opening statement that the Federal
Building Fund is empty and we don't have money to spend on
projects.
The Federal Building Fund is actually not empty. It is
working the way it is supposed to, which is that we are
collecting rents from Federal agencies and managing the
inventory well enough that, at the end of the year--I don't
have my final numbers for fiscal 2011 yet, but we will probably
end up with about $1.5 billion in money that we proposed and
that should be spent mostly on renovating and capital
maintenance on our Federal buildings; we are just not being
allowed to spend it. And I understand why, and so I am not--
some other time, I will make my plea for getting the right to
spend it.
But I just want you to know that the building fund is, in
fact, accumulating the money it is supposed to for capital
investment. We just can't get the approval to spend it on, I
think, necessary projects. And I am not just talking about
court projects; I am talking about something that Ms. Norton
and I talk about a lot, moving forward on the consolidation of
Homeland Security at St. Elizabeth's, which we are not being
allowed to spend our money on even though we have it.
Ms. Norton. This is a point well taken. And, as you know,
we have been working very hard on it.
I do note for the record that the judiciary actually
asked--this takes a lot of gall--to be exempted from the
Federal Building Fund at one point. Of course, the committee
had to laugh in their faces. They are the greatest user of the
Federal Building Fund, and they actually asked. That was their
sense of entitlement, that every other Federal agency ought
to--but the judiciary should not.
And one of the reasons we are impatient with the courts is
they have had an attitude toward taxpayers' money that we have
not seen any Federal agency have the temerity to have, not the
Defense Department, not--and we are just not going to do it
anymore.
Mr. Peck. Ms. Norton, may I say, and Mr. Chairman, to the
extent you hear me--and you do--hear me defending the courts, I
will say that there is new management in the Administrative
Office of the Courts. And there is a different, more open
attitude to discussing these issues than there was when I was
at GSA the last time. And that is why I give them credit for--
--
Ms. Norton. We will understand that when the judges
understand that we are not going to authorize courts where
active judges refuse to share courtrooms.
Mr. Chairman, could I introduce to the record a letter from
Mr. Serrano? He asked me----
Mr. Denham. Without objection.
[The letter follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71099.029

Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I am looking at the prospectus now that--the
committee resolution that came before Chairman Shuster at the
time. It says ``continued use of all existing courtrooms in the
Roybal Federal Building for judicial proceedings.''
We do not have all existing courtrooms utilized today. You
have also testified under oath today that you do not plan on
fully utilizing all of the courtrooms once this building is
done.
Mr. Peck. Say it again, sir? I don't understand the
question.
Mr. Denham. You testified that the Roybal Building will not
be 100 percent utilized, will not be fully utilized, once this
new courthouse is built.
Mr. Peck. I hope I didn't say that. But what I said was----
Mr. Denham. Well, let me ask, do you expect the Roybal
Building to be 100 percent utilized once this new courthouse is
built?
Mr. Peck. I certainly do, yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. Is it 100 percent utilized today?
Mr. Peck. I----
Mr. Denham. The answer is, no, it is not 100 percent
utilized.
Mr. Peck. As far as----
Mr. Denham. You were just there. He was just there. I am
going to be there next week with Ms. Brown. It is not 100
percent utilized. You are not sticking to the resolution that
came before us in the first place.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Denham. Let me ask again, once this courthouse is done,
the new courthouse is fully completed, will you have 100
percent utilization in the Roybal Building?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, we will have a building--I believe
our plan is to have a building that is fully utilized, by which
I mean that every space in the building will be assigned. And
we may have to do some renovation to get there, but, by the
time we finish this project, it will be a fully utilized
billing.
Mr. Denham. So you will have to do renovations to the
Roybal Building?
Mr. Peck. At some point we need to do renovations to the
Roybal Building for lots of reasons----
Mr. Denham. Part of this $365 million?
Mr. Peck. No, sir.
Mr. Denham. So the scope of this project has not only
changed that you are going to use--you are going to get 40
percent less square footage than what was----
Mr. Peck. No----
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Originally proposed to this
committee, but you are also going to have to come back to this
committee and ask for more money for the Roybal renovation.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, when we proposed 1 million square
feet, which was, I think, 7 years ago, you know, there has
been--even though the construction market is now soft, there
was a period of significant inflation. And we are still--we
could not build the same size building for this amount of money
as we did then.
But we are providing for the new courthouse that was the
basis for the proposal in 2004 and, indeed, in 2000. We are
providing a building for the U.S. District Court. That was the
proposal, and that is what we are proposing to build.
There are other things that are going to have to be done to
make this a--as in other courthouse projects that we have
proposed, Mr. Chairman, we propose the work we are doing for
the U.S. District Court and sometimes for magistrate and
bankruptcy as well, but we often have follow-on projects to
make the rest of the Federal inventory work.
Mr. Denham. The project that was approved by this committee
says ``continued use of all existing courtrooms in the Roybal
Federal Building for judicial proceedings.''
Mr. Peck. That was the proposal at that time, yes, sir.
Mr. Denham. Yes. And you are changing that proposal. The
scope of the project has changed. We are going to get 40
percent less courtroom space, and you are going to go over the
budget that you originally came to this committee for.
Mr. Peck. No, we are at the same budget that we came to the
committee for. As I said, we are at $365 million.
Mr. Denham. $365 million, and I am also looking at the
prospectus that came before this committee in 2008 asking for
$700 million. And under that $700 million, you have $50 million
that you would need to renovate Roybal.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, that----
Mr. Denham. So if you have $50 million that you are going
to spend to meet the original prospectus, which says
``continued use of all existing courtrooms in the Roybal
Federal Building,'' under the same prospectus you need an
additional $50 million that you don't have in that $365
million. That is definitely over the 10 percent that you need
to finish the prospectus.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Denham. So if you are going beyond what the original
prospectus said in 2000, where are you going to come up with
the money and when are you coming back to this committee?
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, the prospectus, the 2008
prospectus, was, as I understand it, dead on arrival. It was
never approved.
If you are talking about the 2000--there was a 2000
prospectus, and I believe--give me a moment--there was another
prospectus in 2004.
Mr. Denham. Well, it sounds like you are trying to confuse
everybody here.
Mr. Peck. No, sir, I am not. This is a pretty complex,
confusing issue.
Mr. Denham. OK, so you came to this committee in 2008 with
this new prospectus.
Mr. Peck. Sir, I did not.
Mr. Denham. And under this prospectus----
Mr. Peck. Sir, GSA, under a previous administration, came
up with a proposal. This is not our proposal.
Mr. Denham. Do you refute the numbers in this prospectus on
what the previous administration came up with?
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir. I mean, I am not refuting it; I am just
saying that that is not our proposal anymore. That is----
Mr. Denham. OK. The proposal that you are going by right
now is the 2000 prospectus, yes or no?
Mr. Peck. I believe the prospectus we are going on is the
prospectus approved in 2004.
Mr. Denham. Perfect. The 2004 prospectus says ``continued
use of all existing courtrooms in the Roybal Federal Building
for judicial proceedings.'' Are you going to have 100 percent
utilization in the Roybal Building?
Mr. Peck. We will have----
Mr. Denham. Yes or no?
Mr. Peck. As I said, yes, sir, when this is over, there
also will be 100 percent utilization of the space in the Roybal
Building.
Mr. Denham. OK. So, when this is over. Which means that you
have to renovate the Roybal Building when this is over,
correct?
Mr. Peck. Yes, sir. And we will be back----
Mr. Denham. As part of the original prospectus. So you are
saying you are going to come back at some point and ask for
more money to make sure that you can continue to finalize the
prospectus.
Mr. Peck. We will be back for an authorization to do the
work in the Roybal, but not----
Mr. Denham. It is the same prospectus.
Mr. Peck [continuing]. Not another prospectus to do the
courthouse, no, sir. But we will--yes, sir, for the Roybal
work, we will have to come back for a new prospectus.
Mr. Denham. So you are not only changing the scope but you
are changing the cost of the current prospectus.
Mr. Peck. No, sir, because the----
Mr. Denham. The current prospectus has both buildings in
there. And, again, it says ``continued use of all existing
courtrooms in the Roybal Federal Building.'' If you have to use
all existing courtrooms in the Roybal Federal Building, you
need $50 million to complete the entire prospectus, which means
you that need new authorization from this committee.
Mr. Peck. No. Mr. Chairman, we have an appropriation to
build a new courthouse in Los Angeles, and we are going to
build a new courthouse in Los Angeles.
The work that needs to be done in the Roybal is not a part
of the new courthouse project any more than we will have to go
back and take a look at what we do with the space that is left
over in the North Spring Street Courthouse.
Mr. Denham. Yeah, the only problem is the North Spring
Street Courthouse building is not in this prospectus. The
Roybal Building is. And, again, it says ``continued use of all
existing courtrooms in the Roybal Federal Building for judicial
proceedings'' not only in the 2000 prospectus, but in the 2004
prospectus. No matter which prospectus you go to, you have to
have 100 percent utilization of the Roybal Building.
So if it is going to cost you $50 million to renovate it to
get 100 percent usage, which--we don't have 100 percent usage
today--then you have to come back before this committee to get
a new authorization for the $50 million to complete the
project.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, as I said, we will be back for an
authorization to do the work in the Roybal Building. That is
correct.
Mr. Denham. It was included in the original prospectus----
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Denham [continuing]. And in the 2004 prospectus to make
sure that we would never end up in this position. I mean, I
think that it is egregious that we would do a bait and switch
and change the complete scope of this project that is going to
give the taxpayers 40 percent less square footage than what the
original prospectus said. But I think that it is even more
egregious to say that we are going to just ignore the
prospectus and have to come back at a later date, after the
taxpayers are on the hook for the $365 million, and have to
come up with an additional $50 million to complete the project.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, the language that was in both the
2000 and the 2004 prospectuses--the 2000 was approved by Mr.
Shuster and the 2004 by Mr. Young--said that we should design
for and configure for maximum utilization of courtroom-sharing
model for the courts, ensuring to the maximum extent
practicable continued use of all the existing courtrooms in the
Roybal Federal Building.
So that is our plan, to use to the maximum extent
practicable the existing courtrooms in the Roybal Building. As
I said, we are going to have some 24 courtrooms in the new
building and 25 courtrooms in the Roybal Building. I mean, we
have taken that into account.
The fact that at some later date we are going to have to
renovate so that we can provide additional chambers is really a
separate project. And this is the way we have done this before,
to my knowledge.
Mr. Denham. It is not a separate project. It is the same
prospectus. And in this committee, when it authorized the use
of funds, said ``continued use of all existing courtrooms in
the Roybal Federal Building for judicial proceedings.'' You are
changing not only the scope of the project, but you are
changing the cost of the project.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, the prospectuses that were
submitted in 2000 and 2004, I will go back and check, and I
will get back to you for the record, but I believe that those
prospectuses also contemplated additional work being done on
the Roybal Building in a separate project.
Mr. Denham. Well, you won't have to go back and check. We
will make sure you have a copy of this once again for your
records. But this is what this committee had approved.
Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. I just want to say that we have been following
the prospectuses as you outline, and I associate myself with
your comments. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Peck, to say that we have a disagreement on
the usage of this courthouse would be an understatement. I am
certainly disappointed that--you and I have been able to work
very, very close on the Civilian Property Realignment Act and
look at correcting a lot of the challenges that we have with
our entire inventory. There is so much that is left off. Of the
14,000 excess properties that we have listed today, not only
can we not sell the 14,000 that we don't use, but we have these
courthouses that are amazing courthouses, historic courthouses,
just like the Old Post Office, that we could not only create
hundreds of thousands of jobs in construction and renovation,
but revitalize communities and create hundreds of thousands of
long-term jobs, just like what we are proposing in the Old Post
Office.
I am disappointed that it appears that you are just trying
to get around this committee, whether it is the prospectus that
was passed in 2000, the prospectus in 2004, or the prospectus
that was presented to this committee in 2008 but never acted
upon, all of which suggest that--not suggest, they mandate
continued use of all existing courtrooms in the Roybal Federal
Building as the same prospectus.
You have clearly stated that you are going to spend the
$365 million on changing the scope of this project, will result
in 40 percent less square footage than the original prospectus.
And then, at some later date, you are going to come back, after
ignoring the resolution and prospectus that passed out of this
committee, while ignoring the language in that, then come back
at a later date and ask for an additional $50-million-plus to
continue to fix the Roybal Courthouse.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman, there was an appropriation made in
2004--appropriations made in 2004 and 2005 and, I believe, in
2001 for site and design. An appropriation to a Federal agency
is a directive to do a project. We have the opportunity to
take--we have sat on that money for a long time, and we are not
supposed to do that. We are supposed to do what the Congress
tells us to spend on. We don't have to spend every money; our
goal is to bring in projects for less. But, in essence, we have
not followed a different direction of the Congress to build
this project. We have an opportunity to do it now and to create
thousands of construction jobs in Los Angeles.
Moreover, we have been told in committee report language,
at least from the Appropriations Committees for the past
several years, that we were to get on with it, to figure out
what we could build within the amount of money we have, and
move on with the project. And that is what we have done.
GAO in 2008 took a look at what was going on and said GSA
and the courts were not agreed on this thing at all and weren't
getting anywhere and needed to figure out a way to get this
done within the budget. And, you know, we followed that
mandate, and that is why we are here today, to try present to
you, in your oversight capacity, what we are doing under that
appropriation.
And you are absolutely right, we have been very much
aligned on what we are doing. And I believe that there is a
good story here about finally taking a project that has been
sitting here, that is needed by the courts, and that will help
us align the Federal office inventory in the Los Angeles area
in a better way than it is today.
I am sorry that we disagree about how it should move
forward. I truly am.
Mr. Denham. You have drastically changed the scope of this
project from a 1.1-million-square-foot project. Now the
taxpayers are going to receive 40 percent less than that. It is
not your prerogative to change projects and bait and switch
this Congress into getting something that it--you can't go out
there and do gold-lined walls or change a project so
significantly without coming back for Congress' approval.
Nor can you go out and change a prospectus and just ignore
the fact that the prospectus that was passed out of this
committee says ``continued use of all existing courtrooms in
the Roybal Federal Building for judicial proceedings'' and just
ignore the language in there.
Mr. Peck. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Denham. You, in your own testimony, said that you would
have to come back to this committee for the $50 million that is
in your prospectus to continue to renovate that building. This
committee expected, clearly, in writing, expected that the $400
million that was allocated was going to have two 100 percent
fully utilized courtrooms. The judges aren't there, the need
isn't there. And in the current building you have vacant space,
which I am looking forward to seeing.
I hope that they do their due diligence over the weekend
and pull out all of the old furniture that is in these vacant
courtrooms and actually find some courts to actually see there.
But right now, from what I am hearing from my colleagues, that
does not exist. So you have a partially empty courtroom today,
you are going to build 60 percent of the courtroom that you
said you were going to build when you came before Congress, and
the taxpayers are going to get left holding the bag of one and
a half empty spaces.
My position stands very clear, that this is something that
is not only a waste but something that we need to be looking at
expediting the sale of this Spring Street Building before we
end up in another situation like Miami or New York or many
other areas around the Nation. I will look forward to visiting
some of those courtrooms, as well.
But we need to be doing more with less, not continuing to
go on this spending spree that has gone on in the past. We need
to change our ways. And that is coming, not only with the CPRA
bill that is before Congress and before the supercommittee
today, but we will be further looking at all of these
courthouses.
Mr. Peck, Ranking Member Norton brings up a very good
question. We already have a prospectus here in front of us from
2008 that already has GSA's numbers in it. With the current
scope of the project changing as much as it has, with the
current prospectus out there and the very clear language in
this, this committee would request that a new prospectus come
back from GSA, outlining not only the use of the Roybal
Building but the expense as well.
Since you already understand that the renovations are going
to go outside of this current prospectus, we would request that
you bring that new prospectus in front of us immediately.
Mr. Peck. I understand. I will respond to you with--after I
consult, I will certainly respond to you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. You have a lot of requests to bring
back to us. We also look forward to your meeting with Mr.
Goldstein. But this prospectus we would expect in a timely
manner, especially since you have all of the information
already done from the 2008 prospectus.
With that, I would like to thank each of you for your
testimony and comments today. Certainly they have been helpful
and enlightening in some concerns.
I would ask unanimous consent that the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses have
provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to them
in writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain open
for 15 days for any additional comments and information
submitted by Members or witnesses to be included in the record
of today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to thank our witnesses again for their
testimony.
And if no other Members have anything to add, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

