- RECENT REGULATION OF THE MARITIME INDUSTRY: ENSURING U.S. JOB GROWTH WHILE IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL AND WORKER SAFETY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RECENT REGULATION OF THE MARITIME
INDUSTRY: ENSURING U.S. JOB GROWTH WHILE
IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL AND
WORKER SAFETY

=======================================================================

(112-84)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 26, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-987 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey            Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
------                                7

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
Vice Chair                           (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY
Panel One

Vice Admiral Brian M. Salerno, Deputy Commandant for Operations,
United States Coast Guard, accompanied by Jeffrey G. Lantz,
Director of Commercial Regulations and Standards, United States
Coast Guard....................................................     8
James A. Hanlon, Director, Office of Wastewater Management,
Office of Water, United States Environmental Protection Agency.     8

Panel Two

Hon. Christopher Koch, President and CEO, World Shipping Council.    21
James Gutowski, Chairman, Fisheries Survival Fund, Barnegat
Light, New Jersey..............................................    21
Jimmy Lafont, Callais and Sons, Cut Off, Louisiana...............    21
Don Marcus, Secretary-Treasurer, International Organization of
Masters, Mates, and Pilots.....................................    21
Paul Cozza, President, CSL International.........................    21

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Vice Admiral Brian M. Salerno and Jeffrey G. Lantz, joint
statement......................................................    38
James A. Hanlon..................................................    45
Hon. Christopher Koch............................................    68
James Gutowski...................................................    79
Jimmy Lafont.....................................................    88
Don Marcus.......................................................    90
Paul Cozza.......................................................    95

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Rick Larsen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Washington, request to submit letter from Amy L. Fowler,
Manager, Clean Air Initiatives, Puget Sound Clean Air Agency,
to Hon. Frank A. LoBiondo, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey, April 25, 2012........................     6
James A. Hanlon, Director, Office of Wastewater Management,
Office of Water, United States Environmental Protection Agency,
responses to questions from the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation........................................    61

ADDITION TO THE RECORD

California State Lands Commission, letter to Hon. Frank A.
LoBiondo, a Representative in Congress from the State of New
Jersey, and Hon. Rick Larsen, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington, May 10, 2012..........................   108

RECENT REGULATION OF THE
MARITIME INDUSTRY: ENSURING
U.S. JOB GROWTH WHILE IMPROVING
ENVIRONMENTAL AND WORKER SAFETY

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:05 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank LoBiondo
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to review regulations
affecting the maritime industry. We are interested in how the
implementation of these regulations is impacting vessel safety,
the flow of commerce through our ports, and the ability to grow
jobs in the maritime sector.
The Coast Guard has broad authority to regulate maritime
commerce, including establishing and enforcing rules to ensure
maritime safety and vessel facility security. The Coast Guard
and the EPA share extensive authority to write regulations for
the protection of our environment. With such vast authority
comes great responsibility to regulate industry in a fair and
reasonable way. This hearing will focus on ensuring that these
agencies' rulemakings are just that, fair and reasonable.
Maritime commerce is essential to the U.S. economy. While
regulations must address concerns related to safety, security,
and stewardship, they must also balance the importance of
maintaining the free flow of maritime commerce. Domestic
shipping alone is responsible for over 500,000 American jobs
and $100 billion in annual economic output. In addition, 90
percent of all global trade and over 25 percent of our gross
domestic product moves via the sea.
With the economy still in a fragile state and unemployment
at record levels, it is imperative that the Federal Government
foster an atmosphere where our maritime industry can compete
and expand. To that end, I am concerned about the cost and
impact of several recent and forthcoming rulemakings that will
affect the maritime sector. Specifically, rules requiring
fishing vessel certification and examinations, the installation
of ballast water treatment systems aboard vessels, and the
establishment of methods to reduce air emissions from vessels
could have tremendous impacts on our economy. If these and
other rules are not written and executed in a commonsense
manner, I am concerned they would make it financially
impossible to operate vessels in U.S. waters.
We need to ensure the safety of commercial fishing, but we
need to do so in a way that maintains the economic viability of
the industry for vessel owners and operators. The Coast Guard
has already said on the record that it does not have the
resources to meet the looming October 15th deadline to conduct
a fishing vessel safety examination. If the Service believes
that it cannot meet this deadline, then we need a clear answer
on what the impact will be on the industry on October 16th so
we can take appropriate action to ensure that thousands of
fishermen are not forced out of work.
Ballast water regulations are a major concern for this
subcommittee. Currently, the Coast Guard and the EPA have
developed separate regulations under two different Federal laws
to govern the discharge of ballast water. And although the
agencies have worked together to try to reach uniformity, these
programs still differ in implementation dates, vessels covered,
geographic reach, enforcement, and penalties for noncompliance.
And this will only become less uniform and more confusing and
burdensome for vessel owners as each individual State adds its
own discharge requirements on top of the EPA's program.
Under the EPA's current program, 29 States and tribes have
added their own different discharge standards. I think it is
completely unreasonable to ask vessel operators to comply with
2 Federal standards and as many as 29 different, contradictory
and unachievable, unattainable State and tribal standards.
This situation is out of control. Some of these States plan
to enforce ballast water discharge standards in the next year
for which no treatment technology has yet been invented. Nobody
can explain how they are going to reach standards with
technology that is not there to do it.
The Commercial Vessel Discharge Reform Act, which
originated in this subcommittee and passed in the House, will
correct these issues by creating a uniform national standard
for ballast water. I strongly encourage our colleagues in the
other body to show their understanding of the gravity of this
situation by adopting the bill as soon as possible.
I am also concerned about the implementation of the North
American emissions control area. Beginning August 1st, vessels
transiting the U.S. EEZ will need to burn lower sulphur fuel.
While I understand the critical importance of improving the air
quality in our coastal regions, I am concerned the EPA and
Coast Guard have yet to establish a process on how they will
deal with vessels whose engines cannot burn the lower sulfur
fuels or vessels that cannot acquire the new fuel because it is
not widely available or vessels seeking to achieve the same air
quality improvements through alternate compliance methods and
foreign equivalences.
Finally, I am concerned the agencies did not properly
consider the economic impact this rule will have on smaller
vessels that must travel entirely within the EEZ.
It seems to me that both agencies have a lot of work to do
in the next 3 months if they expect to implement the new rules
in a fair manner when they are expected to be.
Finally, I am concerned over the ongoing delays in the
process of merchant mariner credentials and inefficiencies in
the National Maritime Center's medical certification process.
The issue is especially important to me as these credentials
are essentially a mariner's ticket to work, and bureaucratic
delays have a direct negative impact on those who keep our
economy moving at sea. I hope our witnesses can explain what
steps they are taking to improve this system and knock out some
of these problems.
And, Admiral Salerno, finally, we have all heard the news
about the commandant, and please wish Admiral Papp a very
speedy recovery. We all wish that he is back to full speed
soon. Let him know that our thoughts and prayers are with him
and his family and the Coast Guard family.
And, also, as this will be your last appearance in uniform
before this subcommittee I want to thank you for your over 35
years of outstanding service. The commitment that you have made
to our country, the sacrifices that you and your wife and your
family have made for the United States of America is
extraordinary. We owe you a great debt of gratitude.
Admiral Salerno. Thank you, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. And with that I yield to Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and thank you for
convening today's hearing to assess the status of Federal
rulemaking activities affecting the U.S. Maritime industries.
Regulations issued by the Coast Guard and the EPA are
necessary to provide certainty and stability for our domestic
maritime industries, and I appreciate your commitment to this
oversight task.
Before I start, I do want to just echo your kind words, Mr.
Chairman, regarding Admiral Papp's recent diagnosis and his
successful surgery earlier this week. I want to extend to the
Admiral my admiration for his forthright manner in which he has
handled his very personal matter and express to him my sincere
wishes for a quick and full recovery. The Coast Guard needs him
to return to the helm soon. So if you can pass it on, Admiral
Salerno.
As well as to you, Admiral Salerno, thank you for your
service to the Coast Guard as well. And you know the chairman
said this would be your last time, but you never know with this
subcommittee. And your wife as well, I understand, is here with
you today.
Our domestic maritime industries generate annually over
$100 billion in economic output and $11 billion in tax revenue.
And while these numbers are impressive, more can be done. This
explains why revitalizing and growing our maritime economy
remains a very high priority for me.
Regulations the Coast Guard has issued remain pivotal in
balancing competing stakeholder interests to create a level
playing field across a wide variety of needs, including
maritime safety, port security, efficient and reliable maritime
commerce, and sensible and effective marine environmental
protection.
It is a huge job for a multimission maritime military
service, and I can think of no more elegant statement to convey
the importance of the Coast Guard than when Admiral Papp
reminds us that, quote, ``the Coast Guard protects people on
the sea, it protects our country from threats delivered by the
sea, and even protects the sea itself.''
Few Federal agencies have such an expansive regulatory
scope or the ability to positively affect and enhance virtually
every sector of our domestic maritime economy than does our
U.S. Coast Guard. Accordingly, we have an obligation here to
ensure these regulations that the Coast Guard issues are fair,
are targeted, and support our maritime industries, which, by
extension, will be good for job creation, good for the U.S.
economy, and good for the American people.
Certainly there are some Coast Guard rules that I want to
discuss this morning to better understand their practical
implications. For example, implementation of the Transportation
Worker Identification Credential, or TWIC, remains far behind
schedule and over budget. It is my understanding the Coast
Guard is presently developing a draft rule for electronic TWIC
card readers. I will want to hear from Admiral Salerno when we
can reasonably expect to see a draft rule published in the
Federal Register.
Also, as a co-sponsor of H.R. 3173, legislation to reform
the TWIC administrative processes, I would like to learn what
actions the Coast Guard is considering to eliminate the
requirement for mariners to make more than one visit to a TWIC
enrollment center.
On a related topic, the issuance or reissuance of mariner
credentials, especially the review of medical records, remains
a sore point. Faulty administrative processes have increased
cost, prompted delays, and created confusion in what otherwise
should be a fairly routine paperwork process for seafarers, and
I will want to hear an update from the Coast Guard on what the
agency has done to address those deficiencies. Such
inefficiencies remain unacceptable. Simply because the Coast
Guard has been unable thus far to remedy existing deficiencies
should not justify stranding qualified able-bodied people on
the dock. We have to get this right. We need to do it now.
I also want to get an update on when the Coast Guard
expects to publish a final towing vessel safety rule and
whether the Coast Guard has adequate resources and whether it
can remain on schedule to implement several new requirements
for fishing vessels under the 2010 Authorization Act.
Regarding regulations issued by the EPA to address ballast
water and other incidental discharges from vessels, I will be
very interested in hearing from Mr. Hanlon on what changes the
Agency is considering to address stakeholder comments submitted
regarding EPA's draft vessel general permit, especially
requirements for new-built vessels.
Additionally, I will also seek to be reassured by both the
EPA and the Coast Guard that each agency's ballast water
regulations have been scrubbed and coordinated sufficiently to
avoid overlap in requirements and excessive cost to industry.
Last, I commend EPA for developing regulation to implement
a North American emission control area consistent with MARPOL
Annex VI in order to reduce harmful emissions from ocean-going
commercial vessels transiting through U.S. waters or entering
U.S. ports.
It remains important that we continue to take action to
reduce health risks linked to hazardous air emissions from
vessels. We do need, however, to carefully consider and weigh
options available to meet these environmental and human health
goal with the economic variables facing different commercial
maritime operators.
I was disappointed that we don't have a witness from EPA
here to better explain the Agency's rationale for the ECA rule.
Despite this gap, I look forward to hearing the recommendations
from others in how this rule might be refined.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for scheduling
this important hearing. I hope that you will schedule in the
near future an oversight hearing to review the administration's
plans for releasing reserves from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve and to reaffirm our shared position that oil released
from the SPR be transported in full compliance with the Jones
Act to benefit U.S. carriers and mariners.
Two final points. I understand as well Mr. Hanlon is
retiring soon after service to our country; and I appreciate
your service to our country, Mr. Hanlon.
And, finally, I would ask an unanimous consent request to
enter into the record a letter from the Puget Sound Clean Air
Agency that is actually in support of EPA's regulation to
implement a North American emission control area.
Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
We are going to go to our first panel today; and our first
witness is Coast Guard Vice Admiral Brian Salerno, the deputy
commandant for operations. The admiral is being accompanied by
Mr. Jeffrey Lantz, director of commercial regulations and
standards for the Coast Guard. Welcome you both.
Admiral, the floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF VICE ADMIRAL BRIAN M. SALERNO, DEPUTY COMMANDANT
FOR OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD, ACCOMPANIED BY
JEFFREY G. LANTZ, DIRECTOR OF COMMERCIAL REGULATIONS AND
STANDARDS, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD; AND JAMES A. HANLON,
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT, OFFICE OF WATER,
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Admiral Salerno. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking
Member Larsen, distinguished members of the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Larsen, for your remarks
about Admiral Papp. I will be sure to convey those to him. And
thank you as well for your kind comments about me. I very much
appreciate it.
I am pleased to have this opportunity to be provide you
with an update and to answer any questions that you may have on
the Coast Guard's regulatory development program.
The Coast Guard is very aware of our regulatory
responsibilities, as well as the importance that this
subcommittee places on our ability to develop regulations in a
timely and efficient manner to ensure that statutory
requirements are met.
We are equally aware of your concern that our procedures
properly account for the effects that regulations have on
commercial entities and on maritime workers.
Several years ago, the Coast Guard's regulatory process was
in trouble. We had too many projects with too few people
working on them, resulting in the average time to complete a
project being too long. Congress made investments in 2008 and
2009 to address this situation by increasing the number of
personnel dedicated to the rulemaking process by approximately
50 percent. We now have a total of 82 people dedicated to the
regulatory process, who in turn work with subject matter
experts on the headquarters staff to complete specific
projects.
We are very grateful to the Congress for making this
investment, and I assure you we have put these new resources to
good use, for in conjunction with them the Coast Guard has
undertaken a series of internal process improvements. These
include aligning our regulatory development program with an
internationally recognized quality management framework known
as ISO 9001. We have also invested in information technologies
to streamline our planning and managerial functions, and we
have enhanced training for all personnel who participate in the
regulatory development process.
As a result of these combined investments and process
improvements the Coast Guard has increased the annual rate at
which rules are published by nearly 50 percent. And even though
new regulatory projects have been added by new legislation we
have nevertheless reduced the backlog of projects by 36 percent
between fiscal years 2009 and the beginning of fiscal year
2012.
Just as importantly, we have reduced the average age of
pending requirements--projects from 6.2 years to approximately
3.8 years. Our desire is to drive this down even further to 3.3
years by the end of this fiscal year to ensure that regulations
are produced in an even more timely fashion.
Our goal has not only been to remove the backlog and to
improve timeliness of regulations but also to validate the
proposed regulations are crafted in a way that best serves the
public. As such, we are committed to fully complying with
Executive Order 13563 entitled Improving Regulations and
Regulatory Review by ensuring in all of our rulemaking
proposals that appropriate procedures are followed, that the
benefits outweigh the costs, and that they are easily
understood, reduce uncertainty, and they are enforceable.
In conclusion, I want to assure you that, even though we
can point to significant regulatory achievements over the past
few years, the Coast Guard is making every effort to further
improve timeliness, effectiveness, and efficiency in our
rulemaking process.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Now we are going to go to our second
witness, Mr. James Hanlon, director of the Office of Wastewater
Management at EPA.
Mr. Hanlon, you are recognized.
Mr. Hanlon. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman LoBiondo,
Ranking Member Larsen, and members of the subcommittee.
I am James Hanlon, director of the Office of Wastewater
Management in the Office of Water at EPA. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss EPA's regulation of vessel discharges,
including ballast water, under the Clean Water Act.
Today I will discuss the draft vessel permit that was
published for public comment in December of 2011, highlight
some of the proposed improvements that the draft would make to
the existing vessel permit, and discuss the regulation of
ballast water discharges by EPA's draft and the Coast Guard's
final rule.
I will also provide an overview of the draft small vessel
general permit, which was also published for comment in
December.
The current vessel permit expires in December of 2013. The
December 2011 draft vessel permit continues to cover
approximately 70,000 vessels, would continue to regulate the 26
specific discharge categories that were contained in the 2008
permit, and would include conditions on the discharge of fish
hold effluent from large fishing vessels.
We received approximately 5,500 comments during the public
comment period that ended in February. We are reviewing and
considering these comments and will make changes to the draft
permit as appropriate. We plan to finalize the permit this
November so that vessel owners and operators will have a full
year to comply, to plan for, and implement any new permit
conditions prior to the permit's effective date.
In developing the draft permit we focused on environmental
protection based on sound science, ensuring vessel safety and
minimizing burdens for permittees with commonsense and easy to
implement provisions. In developing ballast water limits for
both the current vessel permit as well as the updated draft
permit we considered limits on both the technology available to
treat the pollutants and limits that are protective of water
quality.
EPA used the results of studies conducted by EPA's Science
Advisory Board and the National Academy of Sciences to inform
ballast water discharge limits in the draft vessel permit which
are generally consistent with those contained in both the
International Maritime Organization's Ballast Water Management
Convention and the final Coast Guard rule. The draft vessel
permit and the Coast Guard's requirements are generally
aligned, a result of the agencies' working relationship.
As EPA works to finalize the draft vessel permit we will
continue to work closely with Admiral Salerno and his
colleagues at the Coast Guard.
In order to fulfill the Clean Water Act requirements, the
draft vessel permit proposes to apply numeric treatment limits
for ballast water discharges to a broader class of vessels than
the Coast Guard's final rule and proposes some provisions that
would prescribe additional management and monitoring
requirements. As we work to finalize the vessel permit we will
consider the information in the record, including public
comments received, as well as the underlying Clean Water Act
requirements.
With regard to the smaller vessels, Public Law 110-299
passed in 2008 provided a 2-year moratorium on Clean Water Act
permitting requirements for incidental discharges from
commercial vessels less than 79 feet. This moratorium was
subsequently extended to December of 2013. EPA proposed the
small vessel permit to provide Clean Water Act authorization
and coverage for commercial vessels less than 79 feet.
Recognizing that these small commercial vessels are
substantially different in how they operate, the draft small
vessel permit is shorter and simpler than the permit for larger
vessels. The draft permit specifies best management practices
for several broad discharge management categories that contain
commonsense practices to reduce environmental impacts from
these discharges, including measures to reduce the risk of
spreading invasive species. As with the draft large vessel
permit, we are currently in the process of considering public
comments received which will inform our development of the
final small vessel permit.
Once again, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss EPA's proposed vessel permit.
Again, thanks for the personal comments extended to me this
morning, and I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much, Mr. Hanlon.
Admiral Salerno, on the ballast water rulemaking the Coast
Guard recently issued a final rule on ballast water essentially
adopting the IMO standard for all ships operating within the
waters of the United States. Why did the Coast Guard push back
the implementation schedule in the final ballast water rule?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, we pushed back the implementation
schedule because of the time it took to complete that
rulemaking process. We felt we needed to give the industry
sufficient time to react to the regulations and to make plans
to acquire and install the necessary equipment.
And I will defer to our director of regulatory standards if
he had any additional comment in that regard. Mr. Lantz.
Mr. Lantz. Thank you, Chairman.
In addition, as Mr. Hanlon mentioned in his statement, the
Coast Guard and EPA are working closely together and consulting
as we did that rule, and we wanted to harmonize the
implementation date with the incoming VGP final rule.
Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Admiral Salerno, on official vessel safety,
now we know that the Authorization Act calls for certain
standards to be met and that vessels that do not receive their
first examination prior to October 15th will not be allowed to
fish until they do so. There are over 30,000 fishing vessels
that have to undergo this. I think we are quite a ways away
from being able to implement that. So I am going to assume that
the Coast Guard is going to be unable to examine all of the
fishing vessels. Now is the Coast Guard going to prevent those
vessels that have not been examined from fishing? I mean, if
not, will the fishermen be held liable if they are caught
without an exam sticker? How is this all going to work?
Admiral Salerno. We will not prevent people from leaving
the dock, Mr. Chairman. Our intention is to have aggressive
outreach with the fishing vessel community, begin conducting
those examinations prior to the October deadline.
But, again, it only applies to fishing vessels that operate
beyond 3 miles. Many will not operate beyond 3 miles. If we
detect a vessel beyond the 3-mile limit operating that does not
have a decal indicating that it has been examined, we will
issue a notice, what we are calling a fix-it ticket--
shorthand--to obtain the necessary examination within 30 days.
Also, if we are constrained by capacity and we cannot
accommodate that within the 30-day period, we will extend that
timeframe.
So our intention is to work with them, not let the fishing
industry suffer because of a lack of capacity within the Coast
Guard. We are watching our resource needs very carefully in
that regard and have added a number of additional people to our
roster for the purpose of conducting those examinations.
Mr. LoBiondo. Also, under the Coast Guard Authorization Act
of 2010--and this is something I am hearing quite a bit about
and getting quite a bit of pushback on--this requires new
commercial fishing vessels built after August 1st of 2012 to be
certified by the American Bureau of Shipping or other Coast
Guard recognized classification societies. There seems to be a
great deal of confusion over how the Coast Guard will interpret
built after August 1st, and concerns about what could be
incredibly increased additional cost has put many in the
industry putting off orders for new vessels which in turn is
affecting our fish yards and I think--our shipyards and I think
defeating the purpose of what we intended, to get newer vessels
out on the water. When will the Coast Guard issue guidance on
the definition of ``built''?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, the definition of built will go out
for clarity quite soon in policy but also be informed or part
of a regulatory project that is currently underway.
But for clarity today, the build definition will align with
the date the keel is laid for a new vessel. Essentially, this
is consistent with other build date determinations in other
regulations. So the date that the keel is laid or similar
states of construction for novel designs, that would be the
date that we would consider the build date.
Mr. LoBiondo. I am going to turn to Mr. Hanlon for just a
minute on ballast water, and this is a huge concern. I think
one of the subcommittee's greatest concerns with the current
situation is the lack of a single uniform national discharge
standard for ballast water. And I know that the EPA and the
Coast Guard have worked closely together to try to be as
uniform as possible, but the draft vessel general permit and
the Coast Guard rules are far from identical. The Coast Guard
rules require that new vessels built after December 2013, to
install treatment technologies. Why has the EPA proposed a
retroactive implementation date of January 1, 2012? And I would
really like to know how that is fair for a vessel owner to be
retroactive that way?
Mr. Hanlon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that question.
First of all, with respect to the proposed Coast Guard rule
back in 2009, they had the same date we did. So we were sort of
on par through our proposal in November of last year.
Again, as Admiral Salerno said, because of the delays in
issuing their final rule they went to a December 2013 date. We
have not issued our final permit yet. We have every intention
of being consistent with the date requirements that were
included in the final Coast Guard rule.
Again, our permit is scheduled to be finalized in November
of this year. As I said in my statement, we are working through
the 5,500 comments. The final decisions on the scope and
details of the permit are made by the administrator's office.
But this is an item that has been in every briefing that we
have had, and we fully intend to have a consistent set of
requirements, as we did with the two proposals, in the final
permit the EPA issues in November to be consistent with the
March 2012, final Coast Guard rule.
Mr. LoBiondo. So we understand that you are going to change
the date to ensure uniformity?
Mr. Hanlon. Those decisions are made above my pay grade.
Basically short of assuring you that that will happen that will
be an issue that will be front and center before the
administrator's office as the final decisions are made, and I
can't imagine we would do anything different.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, I mean, you used a couple of words that
are I think very important to me and especially important to
fishermen who are affected by all of this, and that is common
sense. And somebody really scratches their head when they have
got something that is almost impossible to comply with.
Rick, if you would, just a little bit more and then I will
turn it over to you.
Can the EPA and the Coast Guard guarantee uniformity when
you have two different Federal laws governing ballast water
discharge and 50 States have the ability to put their own
standards in?
Mr. Hanlon. With respect to coordination with the States,
the last iteration, the 2008 permit, was done on a very
compressed schedule, and so the time the States had to assess
the draft permit and then issue their 401 certifications under
the Clean Water Act was in a very short period of time.
This time around, we have given the States 6 months to sort
of look at the draft permit. Their comments or their
certifications are due in June of this year. We met with the
States in January. We had a meeting with 15 to 20 States and
have gone through their concerns with respect to ballast water
management, et cetera. And that----
You know, EPA certainly doesn't have the authority to speak
for the States. They are more understanding of sort of what our
directions are and certainly what the directions in the final
Coast Guard rule are. And we don't--we hope to avoid some of
the issues we had last time as the State 401 certifications
come in in June.
Mr. LoBiondo. So do you have reason to believe that New
York and California are going to conform?
Mr. Hanlon. We are working very closely with those States,
Mr. Chairman. I can't sit here and say--I can't speak for the
Governors in those States, but they understand where we are
going and what the objectives are of both the EPA vessel
permit, as well as the Coast Guard rule.
Mr. LoBiondo. The small vessel general permit proposes to
regulate 27 discharges from commercial vessels less than 79
feet, including fishing vessels. Vessel owners will have to
ensure they comply with best management practices to reduce or
eliminate such discharges as air conditioner condensation,
bilge water, rainwater runoff, ice from fish holds, and if they
do not meet they could be liable for civil penalties totaling
more than $36,000 per violation.
Many of the proposed management practices, in my view, and
I think most of the members of the committee, are impossible to
comply with, especially on fishing vessels. For example, the
EPA prohibits the discharge of unused bait unless that bait has
been caught in the same water body, but the water body is not
defined. I mean, would this prohibit fishermen in the Gulf of
Mexico from using bait mackerel or herring caught in New
Jersey? I don't understand.
And the second part to this is, another proposed management
practice prohibits the discharge of seawater cooling water
while at port. Without constant circulation of seawater through
the cooling system the catch will go bad. It will spoil before
it can be offloaded at the port. How does the EPA intend to
address how this is basically impossible to comply with? It is
not feasible, these and some of the other management practices,
which I have to tell you are starting to make our hair catch
fire as we look at these things.
Mr. Hanlon. Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for that
question.
With respect to the smaller class of vessels, again, this
is the first time that we are including those within the scope
of the permit. So, basically, we proposed a path forward in the
small vessel permit that was issued in November. Many of the
5,500 comments that we received speak to the small vessels.
The requirements for small vessels are not numeric limits,
as is the case with large vessels. They are all good
housekeeping best management practices, and our best estimate
for the range of costs for an average small vessel ranges
between $17 and $98 per year. The paperwork requirements for a
small vessel is on one page. Basically, this would be sort of
the documentation that a small vessel operator would have to
have with them on the vessel for the full 5-year period with an
update that they have sort of gone through a checklist
basically on a quarterly basis. And we would be happy to submit
this for the record.
The bait issue is one that we have received some comments
on. And with respect to fish hold issues, approximately 30 of
the 5,500 comments dealt with that. But on the other side of
that issue, you know, we are aware of contaminants such as
viral hemorrhagic septicemia, a viral infection that has caused
adverse effects of fish populations in different ecosystems
around the United States. Since 2005, it has been identified in
the Great Lakes.
And so there is always a balancing issue in terms of how do
you deploy common sense in terms of moving potentially
contaminated--contamination from outside a watershed into a
watershed through either live bait sources or boat holes, et
cetera. And so that is the balancing act we are sort of in the
process of doing now, and those issues will all be considered
prior to our issuing the final permit in November.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, I sure hope so. Because while I
appreciate and I think the operators appreciate the sort of
reduced level of burden, so to speak, on what they are expected
to do, it still appears to me that many of these best
management practices are going to be impossible to meet or
attain. And if that is the case, these folks are going to be
subject to some pretty large fines.
And it is not a great deal of comfort to a boat operator to
say that, well, you know, here the green visors folks in
Washington are going to try to figure all this out and make
sure it works. It has got to work out on the water.
Now, they all want to accomplish the same thing. But what
they are being told has to be attainable, it has to be
reasonable, and it can't put them out of business if they are
going to comply here.
So there is an awful lot of work to be done. I really want
to be optimistic about the Agency's ability to get this under
control, but I have to tell you I am pretty skeptical at this
point.
Mr. Larsen, I will turn to you.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You asked many of the questions I had on 401 certification.
So, for instance, the coordination and cooperation between the
EPA and the Coast Guard with regards to vessel general permit.
So I won't replow that ground, perhaps only for their
clarification. But I want to move to a few other issues, if I
may.
This is for Admiral Salerno with regards to fishing vessel
examinations. Has the Coast Guard hired the full complement of
examiners in order to conduct the examinations?
Admiral Salerno. Well, we have a number of qualified
examiners already in our workforce. We have 62 full-time
examiners, plus other marine inspectors which have the
qualification to conduct fishing vessel exams, about 198 in
total. The additional that are coming on this year in fiscal
year 2012, an additional 23 examiners will be coming on.
Now in addition to our full-time cadre we make use of our
volunteer force, the Coast Guard auxiliary, many of them who
are qualified. Plus there is provision for third-party
examinations of these vessels as well. So we are watching this
very closely.
The full population, quite honestly, sir, is a little bit
hard to nail down. There are a number of State registered
vessels that we don't have complete visibility on. So we are
watching this closely, and it may very well be that we come
back with a need for more resources in this regard, but we are
not at the point where we are ready to ask for that.
Mr. Larsen. So you have not yet made a decision on whether
you intend to shift funds from other accounts in order to
maintain this examination program?
Admiral Salerno. Well, sir, our inspection force can shift
very easily from one inspection type to another. As I
mentioned, we have quite a few marine inspectors in our active
workforce which have this qualification. They can be moved
around as needed based on the needs of the day to accommodate
this need.
Now, we anticipate a surge in fishing vessel examinations.
We are preparing for that. We are confident that we can get
through this initial tranche, but again with the caveat that we
may find that we need additional resources in the future.
I do want to reiterate we will not allow the industry to
suffer if we have a shortfall in capacity. We will work with
the industry to get through this. We will continue to allow
them to fish and not make them suffer if we don't have enough
people to do the job.
Mr. Larsen. With regard to the TWIC reader rule, can you
let us know when the Coast Guard expects to publish its draft
rule for public comment?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, I can tell you that is absolutely
highest priority, not only within the Coast Guard. It has been
very clear within DHS. It is high priority from the Secretary
herself.
We are moving out very aggressively on this. As you know,
we were obligated to wait for the results of the TSA pilot
program. We received that study in February of this year, and
since that time have been working very hard to get that reader
rule out as quickly as possible. We are making progress. We are
finalizing it now. We anticipate being able to go out with a
proposed rule this summer.
Mr. Larsen. Well, you probably heard from the Secretary. I
have heard from a lot of other folks and am very concerned
about this card reader rule not being ready and yet
reenrollment is coming up for a lot of TWIC holders. It is a
serious concern for these folks.
The other issue with regard to TWIC brought up I think H.R.
3173, the issue of going back for a second trip to the
enrollment center. We are pursuing this legislation. It is
sponsored by Mr. Scalise from Louisiana. Because there is a lot
of concern about mariners having to make two trips. Can we get
around that or work through that by having the Coast Guard and
DHS as a whole move forward on it so we can avoid two trips?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, we hear the same concern expressed
multiple times. I would have to defer to TSA on that particular
question. That is a process that they control.
From a Coast Guard perspective, we are obviously in the
enforcement side of it. You know, do the mariners and yard
workers have the required TWIC? The actual production and
issuance of a TWIC is a TSA function. We work very closely with
TSA in this, but I would defer to them as to whether or not
they can reduce that down to one trip.
Mr. Larsen. So, last May, I asked Admiral Cook for a status
update on two provisions that were in the Coast Guard
Authorization Act regarding modification to oil spill emergency
response activities to expand the definition of a higher volume
port area for the Straits of Juan de Fuca and the encouragement
for the Coast Guard to initiate negotiations with Canada for
enhanced maritime traffic management and spill response in the
North Puget Sound region of Washington State. Do you have an
update on those efforts to implement those provisions?
Admiral Salerno. Yes, sir.
Regarding the high-volume port area, we did issue a notice
of intent in the Federal Register to expand the definition of
the high-volume port area as indicated in the Authorization
Act. We had it still an active project within our rulemaking.
However, we are also aware that there is a provision in Senate
bill 1665 which would make that change legislatively. If that
were to occur, it would obviously become effective upon
enactment. If that does not become law, we will continue with
that regulatory process. It does require, of course, all of the
typical things you do with the rulemaking, the cost benefit
analysis and so forth. So if it happens legislatively it will
be much quicker.
Mr. Larsen. I asked in my testimony with regards to towing
vessel regulation. Section 701 of the Authorization Act of 2010
requires publication by the Coast Guard of a final rule for
towing vessel inspection by one year after the date of the
enactment. While you have published a draft rule, there is
still no final rule. Can you explain to us the cause of the
delay in implementing the final rule?
Admiral Salerno. Yes, sir. We are very mindful we missed
the deadline that was in the Authorization Act. But, as you
point out, we did get the proposed rule on the street. We have
received about 3,000 comments from the affected industry. And,
again, the industry itself is very complex. It ranges from
large corporations to mom and pops.
So we are very diligently going through those comments.
Some of them are quite difficult to answer. It is going to
require some thinking to make sure that we are fair to that
full spectrum within the affected industry.
We are working on that very aggressively, and I don't have
an actual timeframe. I can tell you it is very high on our
priority list to get that reg out. In the meantime, we are
working with the industry in our bridging program. So we are
putting Coast Guard inspectors on towing vessels as part of a
pre-inspection phase, if you will, to make sure that they
comply with the existing requirements for uninspected vessels
and bring them up to speed to ease that transition for those
vessels and to inspect its status. That is going very, very
well.
Mr. Larsen. And, finally, Mr. Chairman, one more question
and then I will yield back.
A witness on the second panel, Admiral, will raise concerns
the Coast Guard has adopted IMO regulatory standards for watch
keeping that do not adequately account for fatigue among
officers and crew, which in their testimony it says creates
persistent safety liabilities. Has the Coast Guard ever used
independent human factor professionals to review the work
hours, workload, and fatigue aboard U.S. flight vessels and
should it? And a 91-hour workweek seems excessive on a
transportation mode with so much potential for damage and loss
of life. What has the Coast Guard done to address the fatigue
issue?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, fatigue is of great interest to the
Coast Guard. There are mandatory hours of rest within the
international convention STCW.
And if you permit me, sir, I would like to ask Mr. Lantz,
Director of Standards. He has been working this issue directly
and I think can get into some of the details.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Mr. Lantz. Thank you, sir.
You are correct in the workweek. But I think it is
important to note that in amending STCW, which the Coast Guard
did through IMO, we actually increased the numbers of mandated
hours of rest on a weekly basis for our crewmembers from 70 to
77. We also ensured that they had 10 hours of rest each day.
And for the Coast Guard to implement this we don't consider
mealtime or short breaks as contributing to that risk. We are
looking at uninterrupted rest.
Mr. Larsen. You do not consider breaks and meals as part of
that in that 10 hours?
Mr. Lantz. No, sir.
In response to the first part of your question, yes, we
have consulted professionals with regard to fatigue issues. We
do have an active crew endurance management system which is a
voluntary program which we are trying to leverage throughout
the industry. We have had some success in the towing industry.
But we do use that as a way to help the industry implement
voluntary standards to reduce the impact of fatigue on their
crew.
Thank you.
Mr. Larsen. And just as a note, Mr. Chairman, although Mr.
Hanlon I think in his testimony said he could be nominally
available to answer questions on ECA, I understand it is not in
your purview. I won't put you on the spot for that for those.
Mr. Hanlon. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Larsen. You are welcome.
Mr. LoBiondo. The gentleman from coastal Louisiana, Mr.
Landry.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, thank you. Thank the Coast Guard for their service
to this country.
The Coast Guard's reputation in my district and their
approval rating is, I can promise you, better than EPA's; and I
want to help you keep that approval rating. I would like to see
you all take it up a notch.
I am just curious. Do you all ever sit around and work on
deregulating things or looking at regulations that maybe are
not working or are over burdensome to the industry and say, do
you know what, we applied this way back when and maybe it is
not applicable today and we should take those things off of the
books?
Or do we--and it is not just--you know, I am not pointing
it at the Coast Guard, but it just seems like all our agencies
do come up with ways to continue to add regulation after
regulation after regulation.
Admiral Salerno. Yes, sir. In fact, we not only do that, we
are directed to do so in the Executive Order 13563, the
retrospective review of regulations, and in fact have
identified a number of regulations that are undergoing scrutiny
to see if maybe they need to be revised or removed. So I take
your point, yes, sir.
Mr. Landry. You know, 100 years ago, 90 percent of all of
the cargo brought into the United States traveled on an
American-flag vessel. Today, 95 percent of the cargo coming
into this country comes in on a foreign-flag vessel. Any idea
why?
Admiral Salerno. Well, I think the reasons are quite
complex. I am not sure I could give a satisfactory answer in
just a few seconds. But it obviously relates to international
competitiveness, competitive advantages internationally. As an
American, of course I would love to see that all be on U.S.
ships.
Mr. Landry. And I believe you. I am just wondering if the
regulatory environment that we create--and again I am not just
singling out the Coast Guard, but I think it starts all the way
from EPA to OSHA to the impact they have in our shipbuilders
and then putting that burden on the mariners themselves. If all
of these mounds of regulations that other foreign-flag vessels
are not subjected to, if that doesn't have anything to do with
causing our maritime industry to be less competitive in the
world, I mean, do you think there is any correlation?
Admiral Salerno. Well, let me assure you, sir, we make
every effort to make sure that U.S. regulations are consistent
with international regulations; and for foreign ships that come
into U.S. ports we are very diligent in making sure they comply
with those same standards. There is not an easier path from a
regulatory standpoint for a foreign ship to conduct business in
the United States then for a U.S. ship. We do everything we can
to level that playing field.
Mr. Landry. And I just want to touch on two things, and I
appreciate the ranking member bringing this up.
These TWIC visits. You know, I get my passport in the mail,
and I know you said it is to the Department of Homeland
Security, but is it possible for you all to help us garner the
support necessary? I mean, would the Coast Guard be willing to
step out with other Members of Congress in supporting a
position that will eliminate this second visit?
Admiral Salerno. I am not sure I am competent to speak to
that, sir. I know there are some technical reasons that TSA has
cited as far as validating the biometrics on the card.
Mr. Landry. Well, I mean, we could come up with an excuse--
they can come up with an excuse for just about anything. And I
guess I am looking for an agency such as the Coast Guard which
utilizes a lot more common sense than anyone else, if they
could look at DHS and say I don't believe that you are using
any common sense.
Admiral Salerno. But what we have tried to do, and I think
successfully, is, given the fact that TSA has their system, is
make it as easy as possible for mariners who also have to
receive a merchant mariner credential so that we don't add to
the burden of having to go in to collect biometrics in addition
to what TSA is requiring.
Mr. Landry. Well, what amazes me is the fact that we are
going to have a constituent of mine on the second panel who TSA
wouldn't even allow in an airport using his TWIC card. I mean,
you know, it is amazing. Here we have a card issued by them.
They make a demand to go to two different visits. We are
talking about this, you know, biometric excuse. He goes up to
the TSA counter to get into the airport, you know, to go
through security. He hands them their card, and they say it is
not a valid ID. Do you see what I am saying?
So, anyhow, I just would appreciate if you all could lend
us some support on that.
In the ballast water, a little more Clorox? You know, I am
serious, sir. Does it have to be that complicated? I am just--
--
Admiral Salerno. Well, sir, again, we rely on the
scientific input from EPA as to what works. And even as we look
at ballast water management systems and different types of
systems that may use chemicals, there are concerns that, OK,
what do you do after you have killed all the bugs in the tank?
Can you then discharge that water? Because it may in fact
create other environmental damage, and I would defer to the
scientific experts on that.
Mr. Landry. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Admiral Salerno, there have been--over the
past decade, there have been several incidents where vessels
suffered casualties and the safety of workers on vessels and at
ports was jeopardized by incorrectly declared cargo container
weights. Would the Coast Guard support the proposal before the
IMO to amend a SOLAS requirement, the weighing of cargo
containers before they are loaded on ships which would
establish kind of a regimen for this?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, we are aware of that concern. We
share that concern with the industry. It does create safety
hazards.
Again, let me ask Mr. Lantz, who leads the U.S. Delegation
to the IMO Maritime Safety Committee, to comment on that.
Mr. Lantz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, we do support the IMO taking that issue up to ensure
that containers--the weights of containers are fully declared
and understood when they are loaded on ships. That is an issue
that was brought forward. We supported that issue being
considered at IMO.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Hanlon, one last question. I mentioned in my opening
statements about some of the things that we are trying to work
through with these mission control areas. The United States and
Canada recently petitioned the IMO for an emissions control
area surrounding North America to 200 miles offshore. Can you
tell us whether the EPA or how they are going to evaluate
approved flag State equivalencies, what standard will be used,
how this is going to start working out?
Mr. Hanlon. I am not in a position to respond to that this
morning. We would be happy to get back to you on the record for
that.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thank you.
[Please see the response to question 2.e. on page 65 for
this information.]
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Larsen?
OK. Admiral Salerno, Mr. Lantz, Mr. Hanlon, thank you very
much. And, once again, Admiral Salerno, thank you for your
service to our country and God speed.
We will now take a brief break for the second panel to get
set up.
[Recess.]
Mr. LoBiondo. Thanks to our second panel. We will get back
underway again.
For our second panel we have the Honorable Chris Koch, who
is the former chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission and
current president and CEO of the World Shipping Council. We
have Mr. James Gutowski, a scalloper out of Barnegat Light, New
Jersey, who is representing the Fisheries Survival Fund, and is
here with a fellow fisherman and the mayor of Barnegat Light,
Mr. Kirk Larson.
And now I would like to yield to Mr. Landry for an
introduction.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Jimmy Lafont. He is a
constituent of mine. And we call him ``T. Jim.''
You know, often, T. Jim, this chamber has said that the
committee needs a translator so the Members and the
stenographer know what I am saying. And I don't know where they
get that. Do you understand me?
Mr. Lafont. Fullheartedly.
Mr. Landry. Then I don't see what the problem is, Mr.
Chairman. I guess we don't have----
Mr. LoBiondo. I am not going to say what I am thinking.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
Our last two witnesses are Mr. Don Marcus, who is the
secretary-treasurer of the International Organization of
Masters, Mates, and Pilots; and Mr. Paul Cozza, who is the
president of CSL International.
With that, we will get started. Mr. Koch, you are now
recognized.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE CHRISTOPHER KOCH, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
WORLD SHIPPING COUNCIL; JAMES GUTOWSKI, CHAIRMAN, FISHERIES
SURVIVAL FUND, BARNEGAT LIGHT, NEW JERSEY; JIMMY LAFONT,
CALLAIS AND SONS, CUT OFF, LOUISIANA; DON MARCUS, SECRETARY-
TREASURER, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF MASTERS, MATES, AND
PILOTS; AND PAUL COZZA, PRESIDENT, CSL INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Koch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to you and
Congressman Larsen for the subcommittee's interest in what is
going on in terms of maritime environmental and safety
regulations.
The written testimony I have submitted to the committee
addresses four issues. The first is ballast water technology
regulations; the second, dealing with emissions, is the North
American ECA, which deals with NO
X
, SO
X
,
and particulate matter emissions from ships; the third issue
being the CO
2
discussions which are going on at the
IMO; and, lastly, the maritime safety issue of overweight
containers or those that have misdeclared container weights.
Briefly, with respect to ballast water regulations, we
commend the Coast Guard and the EPA for coordinating their
efforts in trying to come up with a single, uniform national
standard. Our testimony points out that further effort is
necessary to coordinate the two agencies' efforts. We were
encouraged this morning to hear EPA indicate that they
hopefully will coordinate and match the Coast Guard's approach,
particularly with respect to new builds, where there is still
some difficulty in the EPA draft VGP.
The industry is going to have to make a massive capital
investment to comply with these regulations. And we think the
proposition speaks for itself, but that massive investment
should be reasonably required of the industry once. We need to
be able to have the Governments come up with a standard that we
can reliably use no matter what port we come into in the U.S.
We hope that the schedule set up for existing vessels is
workable. We think, with a tweaking on the new builds by EPA,
it could be workable as well.
But when the administration talks about the industry
needing some time, the only thing I would like to point out in
addition is, it is the vendors, the technology vendors, that
need time too. There are thousands and thousands of vessels
that are going to have to install this technology, and it is
expensive. They will have to ramp up to commercial production
levels.
But they also have to have their technology approved by
very rigorous Coast Guard standards. And that is highly
appropriate, because the IMO testing methodologies have already
been used by some reputable States to approve technology
systems which had to be pulled from the market because they
could not reliably meet the IMO treatment standard. So what the
Coast Guard put in its rules about how it is going to test that
technology, we think, is worthwhile and appropriate. And we are
hopeful that in the end this regime can be implemented in a
smooth manner.
As to the ECA, obviously the MARPOL Annex VI agreement
reached at the IMO was a big step forward for how to deal with
the NO
X
, SO
X
, and particulate matter
issues. The U.S. and Canada jointly proceeded with the North
American ECA, which comes into effect August 1. So long as the
1 percent sulfur fuel is reasonably available, our members
certainly intend to comply with that regime effective August 1.
And then we also note, in 2015, the sulfur fuel level drops
down even further to 0.1 percent sulfur in 2015.
As to CO
2
emissions, it is an ongoing issue at
the IMO. My testimony provides greater detail of what the
various issues are there. We would note the success of the IMO
in coming up with mandatory new efficiency design index
standards for new-build ships. That is a successful step
forward. It means those ships will be more efficient, which
means they will produce less in the way of carbon emissions.
The rest of the carbon emission agenda at the IMO is a
complicated one, as our testimony talks about. And I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have with respect to
that.
Finally, on maritime safety, our testimony notes we have an
ongoing issue that has been of concern to carriers, to the
crews on the ships, and to longshore workers about containers
that show up that have misdeclared container weights. Shippers
are required by the Safety of Life at Sea Convention to provide
an accurate container weight, but oftentimes that doesn't
happen. That can produce serious operational and safety issues.
We have taken the view, along with the International
Chamber of Shipping and BIMCO, that the convention should be
amended to require loaded containers to be weighed before they
are put on a ship. In the U.S., that is the law under OSHA
regulations, but it doesn't apply to the boxes coming into the
U.S. or other foreign-to-foreign commerce. So we are hopeful
that initiative can gain some ground, and we do hope that the
U.S. Government will be supportive of that at the IMO.
That concludes my summary, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy
to answer any questions at the appropriate time.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Jimmy, you are recognized.
Mr. Gutowski. Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this
important hearing and giving me the opportunity to testify.
My names is James Gutowski, and I am part-owner of a
scallop vessel, Kathy Ann, and other vessels in Barnegat Light,
New Jersey. I am accompanied here today by the town's mayor and
fellow scalloper, Mr. Kirk Larson.
I am the chairman of the board of the Fisheries Survival
Fund, which represents full-time Atlantic sea scallop
fishermen. I am also a member of the Garden State Seafood
Association, which shares the concerns discussed.
My full statement has been submitted for the record.
This hearing touches upon two important issues to
fishermen: safety in our profession and the health of the
marine environment on which our livelihoods depend. There is
really no one more vested in these issues than we are. I
appreciate the subcommittee's work to improve fishing industry
safety and the support you provide commercial fishermen more
generally.
I would like to discuss certain issues in the Coast Guard
Authorization Act of 2010 that have the potential to seriously
disrupt our businesses and actually jeopardize our fishing
vessels' safe operation. I also want to address issues related
to the Environmental Protection Agency's proposed Vessel
General Permit, or VGP. The EPA has no particular experience or
expertise about fishing vessels. That lack of knowledge shows
in the proposed VGP.
H.R. 2838, the Coast Guard and Marine Transportation Act of
2011, addresses some issues. We hope the subcommittee can
address our initial concerns and the Senate follows suit in
recognizing the need for commonsense solutions.
Briefly on the authorization act issues, the timing
requirements for mandatory vessel inspections and the
particularly burdensome load-line and vessel classification
requirements are not workable.
Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, we appreciate
your efforts to include in H.R. 2838 a provision to extend the
start of the dockside inspection until 2015 and require
inspection of vessels to occur every 5 years rather than every
2 years. As a practical and safety matter, these changes will
make the inspection program more effective and provide the
Coast Guard time to develop an implementation plan.
As to classing and load-line requirements, we strongly
believe that these have never received a fair, clear-eyed
review of the total economic costs. These costs could lock
fishermen into older, less efficient vessels. Experts within
the industry estimate these requirements will increase the
price of a new scallop vessel by about 25 percent, adding $1
million to a $3 million price tag for a new scallop vessel.
Those costs will put new-build out of reach for many fishermen
who need them and will discourage major refits to make vessels
safer and more efficient.
In short, the unintended consequences of these mandates may
decrease safety and lost shipyard jobs. Our suggestion is to
direct the Coast Guard to develop, in conjunction with the
fishing industry, an alternative program to load-line
requirements and repeal requirements to class vessels. At the
very least, there needs to be a rigorous investigation of the
costs and the benefits of those requirements and delay an
implementation while these issues are studied.
On the VGP, my written testimony details a number of
problems with the proposed permit, many of which would be
resolved with the H.R. 2838. Again, Fisheries Survival Fund and
the Garden State Seafood Association and I thank you for your
leadership in this regard.
The proposed VGP shows that EPA is the wrong entity to
regulate fishing vessels. The 79-foot dividing line splits the
scallop fleet right down the middle. Some vessels would be
subject to VGP requirements, while others would not. The VGP
also forces fishermen to choose which regulatory requirement,
those of National Marine Fisheries Service or those of the EPA,
it will have to violate. The VGP would disallow seawater
cooling when a vessel is in port and not underway. However,
many times we must run our generator in port to provide
electricity to our vessels' mandatory monitoring systems, which
we run at the dock.
If the Senate does not follow suit and adopt the changes
contained in H.R. 2838, our primary recommendation would be to
eliminate the VGP and allow all commercial fishing vessels to
operate under the terms of the proposed Small Vessel General
Permit, which more appropriately balances environment concerns
and regulatory burdens. At a minimum, the dividing line should
be 165 feet, which puts the vast majority of fishing vessels
under a more sensible regime.
We share the concerns for a clean marine environment, but
truly believe that a better balance can be struck.
Thank you for your time, and I will be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lafont, you are recognized.
Mr. Lafont. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of the
subcommittee. My name is Jimmy Paul Lafont. I am appearing here
today on behalf of Callais and Sons from Cut Off, Louisiana. I
appreciate the opportunity to come and speak in front of the
subcommittee. And I am glad you all have my statement, because
if I got to read it, you all probably won't understand it.
The main issue we are here today is the regulations and the
problem we are having in the merchant mariners to renew their
license through the United States Coast Guard. And this is in
no way any black eye against the Coast Guard, because I think
they are trying to do their job. But we are getting regulated
to death with the restrictions and the medical reviews.
A mariner can start 1 year before his 5 years are up. And
if it his last year and they all apply and if they have any
kind of medical problems, it is tough, you know. And we are
talking, like, very simple problems. In a nutshell, what is
happening is the Coast Guard is asking the doctors to make a
square peg for a round hole, and they don't talk in the same
language.
And I want to thank our Congressman, Jeff Landry, for
helping us a whole lot on some of these issues. But it all
boils down to regulations, and we are getting hit by them more
and more, and all these medical issues. I mean, you are talking
about, these are the safest mariners in the country, people
that have licenses 50, 60 years. Unfortunately, they have some
medical issues. And, really, the appeal process on the medical
side is pretty bad.
And as you know, I want to thank everybody for letting me
speak here. I will answer any questions needed. You all have my
testimony in front of you all. And thank you very much.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Marcus, you are now recognized.
Capt. Marcus. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo and Ranking
Member Larsen.
Mr. LoBiondo. Could you try to put your mike on?
Capt. Marcus. Good morning, Mr. LoBiondo, Ranking Member
Larsen, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak here this morning.
My name is Donald Marcus. I am a licensed master and
secretary-treasurer of Masters, Mates, and Pilots. I am
speaking on behalf of our members, as well as the Marine
Engineers Beneficial Association and the American Maritime
Officers. Together, we represent substantially all of the
licensed masters, marine engineering officers, and licensed
deck officers who work aboard U.S.-flagged merchant ships in
international trade.
We have chosen to focus this morning on an issue that has
not received the serious attention that it deserves. That is
fatigue. Fatigue is a widespread problem that puts safety at
risk in an industry that operates 24/7 and that has duty
assignments that extend for 4 months or more.
The problem is compounded by reduced crewing levels and
ever-increasing regulatory tasks. Complying with these tasks
creates more workload, and there are less personnel available
than necessary to complete the tasks. The choice is often
between attending to traditional duties that affect the safety
of the vessel or documenting compliance with a multitude of
regulations that are subject to internal and external audits.
Regrettably, paperwork and perfunctory reporting requirements
are often prioritized over the simple safety of the vessel.
The regulatory burden falls principally on the ship's
master. In the past, staff officers, such as pursers and radio
officers, assisted the master in meeting his responsibilities.
These officers have been removed in the current crewing levels.
Also, in order to remove a licensed deck officer, the chief
officer, who was previously a non-watch-standing officer, now
stands an 8-hour navigation watch in addition to his or her
traditional operational and administrative duties.
While the number of crew are being reduced, the number of
international, Federal, and, as we heard here today, even State
regulations that must be complied with and documented have
grown exponentially. To make matters worse, ships' masters,
chief engineers, and other officers often face criminal
liability and de facto presumption of guilt when marine
incidents or casualties occur. This can, and has, led to the
imprisonment of many ships' officers around the world.
The criminalization of simple professional errors, often
the result of fatigue or overwork, is without justification
when there is no oversight regarding the sufficiency of the
personnel available to carry out shipboard responsibilities.
The drive for reduced crewing levels has been fueled by the
flag-of-convenience system that dominates international
shipping. Ships are registered under the flags of countries
that have the least taxation and regulation. Flags-of-
convenience registries compete in offering the lowest crewing
levels in order to generate revenue.
The abuses of the flag-of-convenience system has led to a
greater international regulation of shipping through the
International Maritime Organization, IMO. Unfortunately, flag-
of-convenience countries and shipowners participate in the IMO
process of setting international standards. Accordingly, this
has resulted in standards being set at dangerously low minimum
levels.
Here in the United States, the U.S. Coast Guard routinely
accepts the compromised international standards as the basis
for U.S. Federal regulation. This is a matter of rulemaking
convenience. When it comes to vessel crewing levels and
mandatory rest requirements, there is no necessity that U.S.
standards match the lowest international requirements. Rubber-
stamping minimum international standards simply permits the
U.S. Coast Guard to avoid an independent assessment of fatigue
and crewing levels that could be complicated and contentious.
The complexity of the problem has been reduced by the,
quote, ``principles of minimum safe manning,'' unquote. This
was recently adopted by the IMO. These principles outline many
factors that should be used in setting, but not in enforcing,
adequate crewing levels. What is needed is a mandate for an
independent study by human-factors professionals on shipboard
fatigue and crewing. Recommendations by independent
professionals experienced in workplace fatigue should be used
by the U.S. Coast Guard in setting safe manning levels.
Particular attention needs to be focused on the management-
level officers whose impaired cognitive ability has the
greatest potential for severe consequences to safety and the
environment. A recently adopted amendment to the SOLAS, Safety
of Life at Sea, Convention requires that all ships in
international trade establish crewing levels in a transparent
procedure.
We believe it is essential that U.S. regulations require
all ships, U.S. and foreign, calling at U.S. ports to carry
safe manning documentation. This documentation must record the
methodology used and the procedures and conditions taken into
consideration in establishing the ship's crewing level. The
documentation must meet the requirement for transparency by
being available to crew and port State control officers.
These issues are more fully explained in my written
submission. Time constraints prevent us from addressing our
concerns about the lowering of training and licensing standards
for ships' officers by the U.S. Coast Guard under the
International Convention on Standards of Training,
Certification, and Watchkeeping for Seafarers code.
I applaud Mr. Lafont for his comments about medical issues.
We also have serious concerns regarding the need to establish a
more rational U.S. Coast Guard process for medical/physical
fitness examinations and appeals. We would be grateful if the
record could be held open for a period of time to permit us to
submit written comments on these issues.
Thank you, and I will gladly answer any questions that you
may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Marcus.
Mr. Cozza.
Mr. Cozza. Thank you, sir.
Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here today to testify.
I am Paul Cozza, president of CSL International. We are
headquartered in Massachusetts and are a subsidiary of Canada
Steamship Lines, based in Montreal, concentrating on
international short sea shipping routes.
CSL International specializes in the marine transportation
and handling of dry bulk cargo. We own and operate the largest
fleet of self-unloading vessels in the world, serving clients
in industries ranking from building and construction to
agriculture. Self-unloading vessels serve a special sector of
the dry bulk shipping industry, with their self-contained and
automated discharge equipment offering high levels of speed,
efficiency, and environmental advantages.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear here today with you.
Short sea shipping is the coastal movement of cargo on the
water that does not cross an ocean and could also in some
instances be served by rail or truck. We are able to transport
cargo more efficiently and with far lower environmental impacts
than trucks or trains.
Secondly, I would like to bring to the subcommittee's
attention the impact the North America Emission Control Area,
or ECA, will have on our industry and offer a solution that
achieves equivalent environmental goals without sacrificing the
environmental benefits that short sea shipping provides.
Implemented under the International Convention to Prevent
Pollution from Ships, the ECA establishes sea-going vessel air-
quality standards for a 200-mile radius around the coastline of
the U.S. and Canada and sets limits on the sulfur limits of
fuel used within the ECA. The ECA standards are far stricter
than will be imposed elsewhere in the world, both in terms of
the distance the ECA extends from the shore and the level of
permitted fuel sulfur content. We are concerned the 200-mile
ECA is too stringent for some vessels and may not provide any
appreciable environmental benefits beyond 50 miles for lower
horsepower ships, such as CSLs.
On August 1st, 2012, vessels operating in the ECA must use
fuel with no more than 1 percent sulfur content. We at CSL are
prepared to meet and support that standard despite resulting in
not-insignificant cost increases to our business, in millions
of dollars. By August 1st, 2015, however, vessels operating
within the ECA will be required to use an ultra-low 0.1 percent
sulfur fuel, which is a marine diesel. Prices for this ultra-
low-sulfur fuel, to the extent the fuel is even available, will
raise their costs and, more importantly, the resulting costs to
the customers that we serve.
Because we trade in routes typically not beyond 100 miles
from the coast, our vessels must use the reduced-sulfur fuel
for the majority of their voyage, as opposed to transocean
vessels, which only need to use the fuel when transiting the
ECA, which in many instances is less than 10 percent of their
voyage. Outside the ECA, ships may use sulfer at 3.5 percent
sulfur.
Although well-intended, flaws in current ECA regulations
will jeopardize the short sea shipping sector. Based on supply
issues, we are also concerned that the compliant North American
marine fuel prices could nearly double in 2015 to meet this
regulation. This anticipated increase in 2015 fuel costs will
hamper marine competition. It could cause a modal shift from
energy-efficient short sea ships to higher emitting shore-based
rail and truck, with the unintended consequence of creating
more landside congestion as well as increased air pollution
closer to population areas.
CSL, working in concert with our customers, also forecasts
that the resulting high transportation costs in 2015 will
negatively affect their business. Approximately two-thirds of
the cargo that we ship is in support of the construction
industry in the United States. Therefore, this mandated cost
increase has strong potential to negatively impact both
commercial and residential development in the U.S.
CSL fully recognizes and supports the value of reducing its
carbon footprint. We commissioned a study to analyze our ships'
emissions using the modeling approach that the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency itself used in their ECA
developmental process. The study indicated that air quality
impacts from lower horsepower ships diminished significantly as
the ships moved further away from the coast, with a sharp drop
in impact about 39 miles offshore.
Accordingly, we urge policymakers, namely Congress and the
EPA, in consultation with the U.S. Coast Guard and the Maritime
Administration, to revisit the ECA boundary and reduce the 200-
mile ECA to 50 miles for 0.1 percent sulfur in 2015 for ships
of 20,000 horsepower or less. This revision will move away from
the current one-size-fits-all regulation and align with a
scientifically based approach which achieves the same
environmental protection goals.
In summary, CSL supports and endorses environmental
initiatives in maritime transportation. For over 150 years, the
CSL Group has pioneered technologies that make seaborne dry
bulk transportation more environmentally efficient. We are
investing millions of dollars in a fleet renewal program that
will significantly reduce our environmental footprint.
Through scientific testing, our proposal does not have a
negative impact on the coast and will not contribute to modal
shift impacts or negative impacts to the building and
construction industry. If you would like further information, I
have left our full report and additional details in a longer
written testimony.
Thank you very much today for this opportunity to make this
presentation.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much, Mr. Cozza.
Mr. Koch, I would like you to comment on, when we are
talking about ballast water regulations, what would the impact
be if the 401 certifications in California and New York were to
be enforced? Can you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Koch. I believe New York has signaled, at least in the
current VGP, that it recognizes the standards it has proposed
are not realistic. We are having a little bit more difficult
time getting California to recognize that what they have
proposed is not realistic.
A ship can install one set of equipment to treat ballast
water; it can't put on two. So what ship operators will be
faced with is a choice of what technology they are going to
install. My expectation would be that any ship operator would
install what the U.S. Coast Guard says should be put on and EPA
says should be put on and which meets Coast Guard and EPA
testing requirements.
If it doesn't meet California requirements, then the vessel
operator has various choices. It could not discharge ballast
water in California, it could choose not to call California
ports, or it could sit down with the California State
authorities and see if it can get them to see reason. The
latter is what we are certainly hoping will be the outcome and
is what we are working on.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Gutowski, can you talk a little bit about whether you
believe or how the Coast Guard has been proactive in informing
the fishing industry of the new vessel safety exam requirement?
Have they been coming to you? Have they been proactive in
talking about the need to do this?
Mr. Gutowski. To be candid, I am not sure.
I can tell you that, from my perspective, the fishing
industry as a whole is not really prepared for this. We have
our boats inspected every 2 years voluntarily because we are
mandated to carry observers. And if we do not have that sticker
on our vessel, we will not be able to leave the dock. But all
vessels are not. So those that are not required to carry
observers, I do not think that the majority of those would
understand that this is coming.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
I next want to ask you about on the classing of vessels.
The Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2010 mandated that all
fishing vessels greater than 50 feet in length be designed,
built, and maintained to specifications outlined by the
classification society.
Can you talk a little bit about why this requirement is
going to increase the costs? I think we were talking about
something by 25 percent, construction costs. What is behind
that?
Mr. Gutowski. Well, depending on what that class is, Mr.
Chairman--and I am sure not--I don't have the answer to that. I
would like to try to get to that, if it is ABS or what type of
class this is. But we consider those cost increases to be in
certain types of steel, miking shafts, piping, a large range of
upgrades to a normal commercial fishing vessel that will add
those costs.
But more disturbing to me as a boat owner that has a vessel
that has been taken care of pretty well over a 15-, 20-year
period, this alternate compliance program that would begin in
2020 would make all vessels over 50 feet come up to the same
standard on a refit by that time, which would be, I would
think, equally as costly. And with some vessels in our industry
not doing well, I think that it will literally cripple some of
the larger fisheries and coastal communities.
Not to mention the infrastructure. I am not sure that our
shipyards in the United States will be able to achieve all that
work within that period of time.
So there are a few points. I hope I have answered your
question.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mayor Larson, you were pretty articulate
about this in some private conversations. Do you want to add
anything to Jimmy's comments?
Mr. Larson. Just, Jimmy had a great comment there on--I
never even thought about that--the 2020 thing, that there isn't
enough shipyards to handle all the upgrades for all the boats.
Because I am sure everybody would wait until the last year.
But my concerns to Mr. LoBiondo a few weeks ago was, I
wanted to build a new boat, and I had just found out that I
can't build a new boat after July 1st, 2012, without complying
with all the new standards, what standards or what class they
are going to go by. From what I understand, maybe I shouldn't
say, but the Coast Guard really hasn't come up with those
standards yet on what it is.
And I am in the middle here. I would love to build a new
boat. We are catching a lot of scallops right now. I could
probably afford it. But if I don't get my keel laid by July
1st, 2012, I probably won't do it. And there will be some jobs
that were lost.
I don't know if you read the papers, but New Bedford, they
just built a brand-new scalloper for a guy last winter. And
they pretty much did it to make sure the town stayed employed,
to make sure the riggers all got a little bit of work putting
stays together, building--the painters, you know, the small-
town stuff. I mean, Fairhaven Shipyard is a fairly small--it is
a fairly small town, and every little bit helps. And I am sure
in Louisiana and Alabama and Florida they are all looking for
the same thing, to pick up a boat or two to build. I am sure it
would help.
But my concern is with the July 1st, 2012, date. I am
concerned about it, and I will be putting my brain in gear here
the next couple weeks after this hearing and put something
together, I think. Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Sure. We want to continue to keep working on
this.
Mr. Gutowski, I have one more question on the ballast water
and incidental discharge standards. The EPA recently announced
its new Small Vessel General Permit, which would apply to most
commercial fishing vessels.
I believe you noted in your testimony that the VGP may
require unsafe practices or require the master to violate
fishing regulations. Could you talk a little bit about that?
Mr. Gutowski. Sure.
As far as ballast water, typically our vessels don't take
ballast water on and then discharge that at some point. We
fuel, and we catch scallops, and typically there is a tradeoff
for fuel consumption and scallop production. So the load of the
vessel stays pretty constant throughout the trip.
However, water discharge--a lot of our vessels are cooling
their generator systems with seawater. So that discharge, if
that now becomes an issue, is a problem.
I mean, if you look at fleets, if you look at what has
happened to the industry with very stringent guidelines, cut
days at sea, rotational areas, we have lots of steel tied up to
docks. So they are 2, 3, 4, 5, sometimes 10 deep. To get to
your boat, you have to cross 10 scallopers in certain ports.
So you need to have electric. In the winter, you need to
heat your boat so it doesn't freeze. But more importantly, we
are required to have a vessel monitoring system. So that is the
piece of equipment that speaks with our Government agency,
National Marine Fisheries, 24/7. If my vessel monitoring system
goes out for a period of more than 20 minutes, I get a
telephone call, no matter what time of day, to get that back
online or find out what the problem is.
So if we are not able to keep that electric going, I don't
know how we are going to be able to keep these vessel
monitoring systems going in between trips. And I think there
would be violations.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thanks.
Mayor Larson, do you have anything you wanted to add to
that?
Mr. Larson. On the small vessel permit, yes, I find that
all my boats, personally, are under 79 feet. And I don't
believe I would be able to hold the greywater they require. I
don't believe I would be able to, at this point, unload my
fishing boat with a fishhold full of fish juice and not pump it
overboard, at this point. I am sure, you know, in the future
years that the marinas and the docks would have setups where
you could flip a switch and pump into the sewer system of the
town.
But there is also the issue of large volumes of ice, maybe
10, 15, 20 tons of ice, that is all used up on a boat. I don't
know what we would do with that, whether we would put it in
containers and let it melt and then pump it down the sewer
system.
I think there are a lot of things that the EPA did not
think of when they were thinking of the fishing industry. They
might have needed a couple more experts in there to be, like
Mr. Landry said, to be practical and--just to be practical
about the whole thing. You know what I mean?
So thank you for letting me speak.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Koch, with regards to the misdeclared container
weights, I agree it presents some serious safety concerns. It
appears it has been a problem for many years. And while it has
not gone unnoticed, it has not drawn any concerted effort by
IMO, it seems, to address the problem.
So what factors have inhibited IMO from gaining any
traction on pushing through a practical universal regulatory
requirement?
Mr. Koch. The complexities with the problem are that the
majority of containers have correctly declared weights, or at
least they are not significantly off. So what you are dealing
with is a subset of the containers that are tendered to the
carrier that are the problem.
And the present law--the SOLAS Convention--requires only
the shipper's cargo declaration to deal with the issue, period.
Our approach has been to recommend that the IMO amend SOLAS so
that there is a regulatory obligation on the terminal operator
handling the box to make sure that it has a verified weight
before loading onto a ship.
Mr. Larsen. So, on the outgoing.
Mr. Koch. Yeah. That has been shown to work in the U.S.
under the applicable OSHA regs. It hasn't impaired efficiency.
We think that that ought to be looked at as an international
rule, as well.
The terminal operator industry has some concerns about
that, and we hope they can be worked out in the IMO
discussions.
Mr. Larsen. Are there discussions at IMO on this issue?
Mr. Koch. There are lots of discussions going on with
Governments, with other industries----
Mr. Larsen. Is there any action taking place?
Mr. Koch. Not yet.
Mr. Larsen. OK. All right.
Mr. Marcus, talk a little bit more about watch standards.
We heard from the Coast Guard with regards to the STCW Code for
seafarers, that there are training requirements, there is
certification, there are all these standards that are supposed
to be in place to deal with watch standards, to deal with
fatigue, to deal with all the issues you brought up. What is
not going on?
Capt. Marcus. Well, I think it gets down to what Chairman
LoBiondo said a little earlier: common sense.
And it is one thing to establish rest requirements, where
you limit, in theory, operations to a 91-hour workweek, and
possibly in certain situations for up to 2 weeks allow a 98-
hour workweek. But the Coast Guard has given us no guidance on
the implementation of these rules.
To say that there is a 10-hour required period of rest that
is required every day and to say that it can be split into two
different periods, one that must be 6 hours, and that these two
periods of rest must be within 14 hours of each other, is not
realistic. The problem with setting these standards is that the
duties of getting a ship from A to B exceed the number of hours
available to do the work, number one. And, number two, there
literally are not enough responsible officers and crew who are
charged with these duties and held to criminal standards to do
these duties. You need enough people to do the work.
So to have rest hours and not have enough people to do the
work and expect the ship to get from A to B within these rules
is incongruous. It doesn't make sense.
Mr. Larsen. So in your testimony--I believe in your
testimony you have called for Congress to study this, to do a
study, to bring in--how did you put it? Have an objective study
be done of this issue?
Capt. Marcus. We are looking for Congress to task the
United States Coast Guard to review the manning levels on board
merchant ships that come in and out of U.S. ports. Because we
believe, number one, even if there are logs of hours worked,
the real test of efficiency and whether the crew are getting
rest is determining how many crewmembers are there.
And we think the Coast Guard needs to do the study using
independent human-factor specialists, to verify and set manning
levels and to audit safe manning documents on U.S. and foreign
vessels that come into the States to see that, in fact, the
crew can do the job within the rest periods that they say they
are honoring.
Mr. Larsen. Has anything like that been done before by the
Coast Guard?
Capt. Marcus. To my knowledge, not by the Coast Guard.
There are certificates of inspections currently on the ship
that set absolute minimum manning. These levels have been set
for 40 years, during a period of time when regulatory tasks and
duties have doubled or tripled.
Mr. Larsen. OK.
Mr. Cozza, with regards to the recommendation to pull the
ECA back to 50 miles based upon a certain size of vessel, the
obvious question I have is, in your view, how many vessels or
how much volume of traffic would be impacted by that?
Mr. Cozza. In our view, sir, we think it would be quite a
substantial amount of volume, especially on the basis of what
is going to be coastwise shipping or short sea shipping. We
know for us alone, we are a small portion of it, but it would
be about 40 million tons of cargo would be affected as well.
And, again, this is mostly in construction-industry-type of
work that we do.
Mr. Larsen. OK. So your standard of vessel would be at
20,000 tons? No, I am sorry, the----
Mr. Cozza. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Could you just review it for me, please?
Mr. Cozza. What we are requesting is that, for 2015, that
it would be, from the distance from 50 miles to 200 miles,
vessels less than 20,000 horsepower would have this
modification.
As part of it, sir, is we believe that what happened is
that the EPA did one-size-fits-all approach when they set the
standard in place that might make sense for the total
population, but when you look at smaller vessels and the
emissions that we have on our ships, it does not as much apply.
Mr. Larsen. I just reviewed the study, and I know you
looked at emissions of SO
X
and NO
X
and
CO
2
. Did you look at any relationship between the
diesel engine standards that are going into place, the 1
percent and the 0.1 percent, and how that plays into, you know,
if it is a 0.1 percent standard, it can be 50 miles, if it is 1
percent, it can be 51 miles, or whatever it is. Did you look at
that relationship at all?
Mr. Cozza. We did, sir. Actually, interesting enough, we
found when you go away from the coast in even the current
standard, beyond 50 miles there is really not an appreciable
effect. So even taking it to more stringent on fuel, that would
not change. That would not change.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. All right. Thanks.
That is what I have right now, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Landry. [presiding.] Thank you.
Mr. Harris, the gentleman from Maryland?
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just follow on, Mr. Cozza, with the questions about
the Emissions Control Area. Because, you know, we have seen
this from the EPA before. I mean, in their testimony--I am
sorry I wasn't hear for the EPA testimony, but, you know, they
say you could save $270 billion if all do you is this thing.
And I think they can eliminate all our healthcare costs at the
EPA, actually, if you extrapolate all their figures. You know,
30,000 deaths in 2030 alone. I mean, we hear this every time
from the EPA. It is usually based on pretty unscientific
evidence. And I am glad that you have a study here.
There was a comment in the testimony from the EPA that
various other ideas about how to work around this ECA
requirement, because it is financially burdensome, might
include the idea of, for instance, taking into account how
close to a population area you are. Because I take it, for
instance, the current recommendation is that when you are 39
miles off of New York with 15 million people in the
metropolitan area, you have the same standard as 39 miles off
rural South Carolina.
Mr. Cozza. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Dr. Harris. OK, so--which makes no scientific sense
whatsoever. I mean, if there is some mile limit beyond which or
within which you ought to be operating at a low-sulfur fuel, I
don't understand why you wouldn't take population into account
at all.
But let me just get into some of the mechanics. So I take
it your vessels would have two different fuel tanks, and you
would be switching from one to the other as you crossed the
boundary.
Mr. Cozza. Yes, sir.
Dr. Harris. Give me the idea of the cost difference between
the 2.6 percent sulfur now, the 1 percent, and the 0.1 percent.
Mr. Cozza. To give you an idea, Congressman, I will give
you a real basis. We carry gypsum rock from Halifax down into
Savannah. This is for National Gypsum. This is to go into the
wallboard industry for construction. The costs for them at the
0.1 percent in 2015--and this is conservative--will increase
their transportation costs, total transportation costs, by 29
percent. This is a very low-margin business. This is a very
low-margin type of commodity. So it is huge.
In actual costs for the fuel itself, we are forecasting it
could be about a 40 to 50 percent increase in fuel price.
Again, this is on the 0.1 percent sulfur side. On the 1 percent
sulfur, it is not quite as extreme.
Dr. Harris. And is there--because I know in vehicles the
concern is that, as you go to low sulfur, there is actually an
effect on the engine itself. Is that true in the engines that
you are----
Mr. Cozza. There is some. We run these very low-speed
diesel engines. We are doing this right now on the west coast,
off the State of California. We do feel it is not onerous. We
do have to make some changes, but we are ready to take that on
on the basis of foreign environmental guidelines.
Dr. Harris. So 0.1 would be all right in terms of that.
Just to give me an idea, if we changed it to 50 miles,
let's say, you know, someone at the EPA realized one size
really doesn't fit all and that you really should look
scientifically at what the value of that falloff is--because to
say, you know, well, we saved $270 billion in health care,
well, about if we changed it to 50 miles? I mean, do we save
only $269 billion in health care? And, you know, that billion
is the most expensive?
What percent of your company's journeys are in that 50- to
200-mile range?
Mr. Cozza. For the routes that we do right now, sir, we are
about 80 to 90 percent of our journeys are within that 200-mile
range.
Dr. Harris. But how much within 50?
Mr. Cozza. Within 50 it would be much less. It would be
somewhere about 10 to 15 percent.
Dr. Harris. Because you are just basically getting out of
port and then coming into port with it.
So, overall--and, again, getting to this population-based
idea, you know--because your testimony points it out, if you
discourage short sea shipping, you are going to replace it with
something.
Mr. Cozza. True.
Dr. Harris. Trucks might be the most logical. And I can
just imagine, you know, increasing truck traffic in and out of
New York because you have done something to short sea shipping
certainly wouldn't be good for the environment. Because this
will really be a disincentive to short sea shipping if you are
now at a 29 percent price differential because of the
transportation costs.
Mr. Cozza. Yes. That is not a question.
Dr. Harris. What do you think--and I take it from your
testimony, the best way to relieve this issue is go to the 50-
mile differentiation.
Mr. Cozza. Well, our recommendation is, Congressman, is
that it would be from the 50 to 200 miles for the 20,000-
horsepower or less ships.
Dr. Harris. OK.
Mr. Cozza. Because that is what we see as the basis of what
makes sense. And, again, on the study that we have provided is
that beyond--it is actually 39 miles, there is not an
appreciable benefit.
Dr. Harris. And why is this differentiation for the 20,000
horsepower?
Mr. Cozza. It is really the size of the engine, actually,
makes this, as you can imagine, is the amount of the emissions.
Dr. Harris. Right. But why would that make a difference as
to--you know, why should we differentiate in the size of the
engine? I mean, this pollution travels or it doesn't. If you
are saying it is 39 miles, just because it is a little bigger
engine, you know, then it is----
Mr. Cozza. Honestly, Congressman, if it was 50 miles, we
would be very fine with that. That would work, if it was in
total.
Dr. Harris. OK.
Mr. Cozza. We were trying to present something that was a
little bit of a balance with the current regulations.
Dr. Harris. OK. No, thank you very much.
And thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Those are all the
questions I have.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Harris.
Mr. Lafont, you mentioned that Callais and Sons experienced
a great deal of difficulty securing some medical credentials
for two of your captains. What is the status of those
applications?
Mr. Lafont. Thank you, Mr. Landry. Thanks to you and your
office, they both have their licenses now.
Mr. Landry. So, at the end of the day, they were declared
medically fit to work in a wheelhouse.
Mr. Lafont. About 9 months after they went to renew.
Mr. Landry. And so how long did it take?
Mr. Lafont. You see, your license is good for 5 years. And
your last year of your 5, after the 1 year left you can start
applying. And both of those individuals started with the 1 year
left. Their license expired. They lost their home, their car,
all the goodies. And then they end up getting their license,
fortunately, thanks to your office.
Mr. Landry. And so, again, the process took them how many
months?
Mr. Lafont. About 13 months.
Mr. Landry. And you said in your testimony that you
believed that there is, I guess, a breakdown in the
communication, that the doctors and the Coast Guard aren't
speaking on the same language.
Mr. Lafont. That is correct.
Mr. Landry. Could you just elaborate on that for us?
Mr. Lafont. It is so bad right now that Terrebonne General,
who is known to be about the second-best heart place in the
country--they got a pretty good reputation--the heart doctors
are refusing to write medical letters to the Coast Guard
because they claim they just don't even listen to them.
Mr. Landry. So, in other words, we have doctors in the
district--and then that would go for the rest of the country,
in districts all around the country----
Mr. Lafont. Correct.
Mr. Landry [continuing]. Who specialize in cardiology,
and----
Mr. Lafont. That is correct.
Mr. Landry [continuing]. The Coast Guard is basically not
adhering to their recommendations?
Mr. Lafont. It seems like the doctors from, I guess it is
Louisiana--that is where most of my people are--are putting too
many verbs in their letters. Because if they be honest--it
don't look good, the letter, but in the Coast Guard's eyes,
they spit them all back.
And this guy, Dr. Stagg, who I virtually almost threatened
to write me a decent letter without some of these verbs, and it
still didn't work. But then we end up, thanks to your office
again--and I am not trying to promote you here, but you really
did help us--you know, we got it done. But it is not good. It
is, like, really bad.
Mr. Landry. Could you maybe just take a moment and explain
to some of the Members that are here what you see as the
overall problem? The type of burden that this particular issue
is placing not only on you, but I am guessing it is affecting
all of the boat owners up and down the bayou in Louisiana.
Mr. Lafont. Well, first of all, most of your good mariners,
you know, they are all on their fourth, fifth, and sixth
renewal, and they all are going to have medical. Right now it
is popping up color blindness. Sleep apnea, for heaven's sake,
that is all over the place. Don't say you have diabetes
because, you know, they are going to mark you. You know, people
that never had color blindness in their life, it is coming up
now.
And it is a 3-year process now to get a license to run a
boat, with the time, and if you go from apprentice mate on and
then all the stages. You know, the good guys, we need these,
that is the safe operators, and they are just--the only, I
guess, criticism I would have with the Coast Guard is on the
medical side. It is bad. It ain't good.
Mr. Landry. So we basically have experienced mariners out
there----
Mr. Lafont. That is correct.
Mr. Landry [continuing]. Who are being denied for--either
denied or the ability for them to renew their license is being
dragged out, which takes them, our experienced mariners, out of
the wheelhouse.
Mr. Lafont. That is correct.
Mr. Landry. And these are good-paying jobs.
Mr. Lafont. Yes. All our people at the wheel average a
little better than $100,000 a year.
Mr. Landry. And you don't have to have a college degree for
this job.
Mr. Lafont. We hope you don't. We would rather have
experience.
Mr. Landry. And I guess that is the point, is that out
there we have the ability to give Americans good-paying jobs,
jobs that put them in the top 25 percent of wage earners in
this country. And we don't have to send them to college to
guarantee them these kind of jobs. We just have to ensure that
the process that has been going on--I mean, how long have you
been in the business?
Mr. Lafont. My father-in-law has owned this company 50
years.
Mr. Landry. OK. And so, in that timeframe, would you say
that the ability to achieve a mariner certificate, to get
behind the wheelhouse, has only become more complicated or less
complicated?
Mr. Lafont. Oh, Lord, like night and day difference,
harder.
You know, I am not no economist, but if you listen to every
one of these gentlemen at this table over here, it is all about
the regs. I mean, we are getting regulated to death. I mean,
you know, all I haven't seen yet is a toenail on the medical
side, and that is coming. But it is, like, really unfair.
And you hear subchapter M that is coming down. That is
going to be a killer for our industry. I don't want to--heaven
knows what is going to come down there. But, you know, it is
almost like the guy who was fishing the scallops; you know, you
got to lay the keel now, because in 5 years from now you can't
build nothing new no more. If you build anything new by regs,
you can't go out and earn it. You are not going to pay it back,
you are going to go bankrupt. The regulations are killing us.
Mr. Landry. One final question. What impact does that have
on the ability for you to create jobs?
Mr. Lafont. It is tough. I mean, you know, you got to go,
you got to fight, you got to be there every day. And thanks to
you again, you know, and your office--and, you know, there is
no mariner that has a valid license that should have to go
through a Congressman or a Senator to get his license back
unless it is really bad.
But, you know, like this one particular mariner who had
three bypasses 20 years ago and they pulled it finally this
last time, and he had seen a doctor once a year, and he was on
no medication for the last 5 years, and they held up his
license for 13 months. It is kind of ridiculous.
Mr. Landry. Well, I agree with you. I want you to know that
I don't think you should have to go through the congressional
offices to get this process going.
I appreciate your time.
Mr. Lafont. Thank you.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. No more.
Mr. Landry. This committee hearing is now adjourned. Thank
you all.
[Whereupon, at 10:58 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

