- IMPROVING AND REFORMING OUR NATION'S SURFACE TRANSPORATION PROGRAMS: COLUMBUS, OHIO, FIELD HEARING

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING AND REFORMING OUR NATION'S
SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS:
COLUMBUS, OHIO, FIELD HEARING

=======================================================================

(112-8)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 19, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-736 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
TOM REED, New York                   MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      LAURA RICHARDSON, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Burgett, Brian, President and CEO, Kokosing Construction Company.     8
Fromm, Barry, Chairman, US Railcar Company.......................     8
Gattozzi, Nick, Vice President of Government Advocacy, Greater
Cleveland Partnership..........................................     8
Lozier, Bill, Deputy County Engineer, Licking County, Ohio.......     8
Policinski, Mark, Executive Director, Ohio-Kentucky-Indiana
Regional Council of Governments................................     8
Schmenk, Hon. Christiane W., Mayor, city of Marysville, Ohio.....     8
Tuttle, Keith, President, Motor Carrier Service, Inc.............     8
Wray, Hon. Jerry, Director, Ohio Department of Transportation....     8

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Burgett, Brian...................................................    32
Fromm, Barry.....................................................    35
Gattozzi, Nick...................................................    37
Lozier, Bill.....................................................    40
Policinski, Mark.................................................    53
Schmenk, Hon. Christiane W.......................................    59
Tuttle, Keith....................................................    63
Wray, Hon. Jerry.................................................    74

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Greyhound Lines, Inc., Theodore Knappen, Government Affairs
Representative, statement on the role of intercity buses in
providing cost-effective improvements to our national
transportation system..........................................    77
Mark S. Miller, letter expressing opinions about necessary
changes to the Federal processes for prioritizing and funding
transportation and infrastructure improvements.................    82
Michigan Department of Transportation, Kirk T. Steudle, P.E.,
Director, written testimony....................................    84
Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, the Columbus Partnership,
the Columbus Chamber, the Columbus Regional Airport Authority,
and the Central Ohio Transit Authority, written comments.......    89
Ohio Environmental Council, David R. Celebrezze, Director of Air
and Water Special Projects, comments regarding the
transportation reauthorization bill listening tour.............    99
Statement for the record from: The Ability Center of Greater
Toledo; The AMOS Project; The Arc of Greater Cleveland; Autism
Society of Ohio; AXIS Center for Public Awareness; The Kirwan
Institute for Race and Ethnicity, The Ohio State University;
The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights; Mid Ohio
Board for an Independent Living Environment (MOBILE); The Ohio
Higher Education Rail Network (OHERN); The Ohio Olmstead
Taskforce; Ohio Statewide Independent Living Council; Policy
Matters Ohio; PolicyLink; SEIU Local 1; Southeastern Ohio
Center for Independent Living; Transport Workers Union of
America, AFL-CIO; Tri-County Independent Living Center, Inc.;
and Western Reserve Independent Living Center..................   102
Terry Asphalt Materials, Inc., Dan Koeninger, President,
testimony on behalf of FP
2
, Inc....................   110

IMPROVING AND REFORMING OUR
NATION'S SURFACE TRANSPORATION
PROGRAMS: COLUMBUS, OHIO,
FIELD HEARING

----------

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2011

House of Representatives
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in the
Senate Finance Hearing Room, Ohio State House at 1 Capitol
Square, Columbus, Ohio, Hon. John L. Mica (Chairman of the
committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Mica, Shuster, Schmidt and Gibbs.
Also Present: Representative Stivers.
Mr. Mica. Good morning. I'm Congressman John Mica, chairman
of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee of the
United States House of Representatives, and I would like to
call this hearing of the Committee to order.
We are very pleased to be in the State capital of Ohio
today. Today is a hearing of the Committee, the second in a
series of a number of hearings, and also Committee listening
sessions, that we we will be conducting across the United
States of America.
We started out in West Virginia at the beginning of this
week, which was the home of the ranking member, Mr. Rahall. He
is unable to be with us, but we started in his district, and I
thought that was a good bipartisan effort to launch hearings on
formulating our Nation's transportation policy and major
legislation.
We will meet across the country. This afternoon we're in
Indianapolis, and from there Chicago. We're going out to
Washington, the State of Washington. We have several sessions
in California, including an unusual joint session with the
United States Senate Public Works and Environment Committee,
chaired by Ms. Boxer from California. And that will be a joint
Senate/House Committee hearing on the same topic we're here
today, again drafting our Nation's legislative policy.
And we have a number of other stops, including Tennessee,
Arkansas, Oklahoma, back to Florida, and then going back,
because of the extended session this week, we are going back to
New York and Pennsylvania, several other locations before we
finish.
The purpose of these hearings and these listening sessions
is to solicit ideas, recommendations, how we can change Federal
laws or procedures relating to anything the Federal Government
is doing in regard to our transportation projects. And this
will be a transportation bill, as opposed to just a highway
bill, and we hope to cover, to have multi-modes in the bill.
And I think that these hearings, again, are helpful to
bring the best ideas from some of you who have had to deal with
the Federal Government. And it's fitting that we have this
hearing today in the Ohio Statehouse. I can't come here without
remembering my good friend Paul Gillmor and his services here.
I think about him, and his wife and family.
But we're here on a wonderful occasion today, again,
soliciting your ideas. If we seem a little bit groggy, every
Member of Congress here today--and most of the staff--we were
on the floor of the House voting at 4:30 this morning, and
through the grace of American transportation, here we are at
Columbus.
We're only an hour late, but it is a second miracle that we
are here, given that we probably had all the amendments--the
number of amendments in the past three days, we had in the last
session of Congress. And Members, I thank you for being here.
And let me just say also that this week has been a busy
week for the Committee. We passed a historic Federal Aviation
Administration legislation. I happened to chair the Aviation
Subcommittee from 2001 to 2007, and we passed the last FAA
reauthorization in 2003, which expired--it was a four year
bill. It expired in 2007.
We've done 17 extensions, and the current extension runs
out the 31st of March. The second miracle--well, maybe the
third miracle, other than our being here this morning--is that
the Senate, the United States Senate, actually passed the FAA
bill.
Now, it took them about four weeks. It's been on the floor
of the Senate. But they passed it this week, so hopefully as
soon as we get back we'll be doing two things. The other piece
of legislation you may be interested in that relates to this
hearing is, we have had six extensions since the expiration of
our current authorization of Federal transportation policy. Its
acronym is TLU.
That expired in September of 2009. Unfortunately, we will
do--and we passed out of committee--the next extension, at the
request of many of the States, to go to September 30th. And we
anticipate that that will be on the floor immediately upon
return, the week we return, because the current extension
expires with the CR on March 4th.
So those are just some informational points for those who
may be interested in seeing our progress in transportation. So
we again have, unfortunately, a formal process. Not all of our
sessions are this formal. This is a hearing, and we will take
testimony. We want to also express to those that are not at the
witness table, that you are just as welcome as any of the
witnesses to submit to the committee your recommendations.
And usually I find when we go out in the field, we get
recommendations handed to us on the way out, or in the time
shortly after our hearing. And many folks come up with great
ideas. In our West Virginia hearing, actually I think some of
the best ideas didn't come from the panel, it came from folks
who chose to attend.
And actually, several of them will get possible inclusion
into the legislation if I have any say. So with your
permission, we'll leave the record open for two weeks.
Without objection, I move that we leave the record open for
a period of two weeks for your submitting to the Committee your
recommendations.
So those are a couple of the points that I thought we'd
make. What I'd like to do is, first--ordinarily we only
recognize members of our panel, but we are pleased, actually,
the be in the home district of one of the members. Steve
Stivers, I'd like to recognize you first.
And we'll go through the panel of Members of Congress for
any opening statements or comments. We are delighted to be here
at your request, and also Mr. Gibbs' request. Two of the new
members are actually responsible for our being here today.
So with that, if you wanted to comment, we will recognize.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
welcome the Committee to Ohio's 15th Congressional District
that we're sitting in now. And on behalf of Congressman Tiberi
and Congressman Austria, I'd like to welcome the Committee to
central Ohio.
Obviously, transportation and infrastructure are very
important to central Ohio. I'd like to thank the Chairman for
bringing the Committee here. I'd like to thank all of the
Committee members for coming, and I'd also like to thank them
for allowing me to sit in. This is not my committee of
jurisdiction, but I'm honored to be able to be here, and be
sitting in on the hearing.
I would like to make a few introductions, if that's all
right, Mr. Chairman. I know that Mr. Gibbs and I drew straws,
so he gets to introduce a few witnesses and I get to introduce
a few folks. But I know he's going to introduce Mr. Wray, Mr.
Burgett, and Mr. Lozier. And I believe that Congresswoman
Schmidt is going to introduce Mr. Policinski. But I would like
to introduce a few witnesses.
Chris Schmenk, the mayor of Marysville is here to talk
about a very important project for economic development for not
only her county, and her town of Marysville, but for the whole
region. And she'll talk a little bit about that. And it's great
to have her here.
I know that Mr. Gattozzi's here from the Greater Cleveland
Partnership. It's good to have him here. And Barry Fromm, a
good friend from here in central Ohio, is here to talk about US
Railcar. It's good to have him here, and it's good to be
talking about inter-modal and lots of different types of
transportation.
I'd also like to acknowledge a few folks in the audience,
most notably our host in the back, President of the Senate, Tom
Neihaus. I had the honor to serve with Tom here in the State
Senate for six years. Spent a lot of long nights in this
hearing room.
So I've moved my long nights to another hearing room in
another place, but thank you, Mr. President, for allowing us to
use the people's house here, and the Senate hearing room, the
finance hearing room, for this very important hearing. And it's
great to see you again, and great to have you as President of
the Senate. You're doing a great job.
Chester Jordan from the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning
Commission, very important for transportation projects. They do
a lot of great planning work. He's here in the back.
Jeff Stauts with the Union County Engineers here, and our
friends from Consider Biking in the bike shirts over here. My
good friend Doug Morgan, whom I consider the ambassador of
biking, is not here today. But a lot of folks are, and I've had
a chance to bike with him on Bike To Work Days, and other
things. So it's good to have them in the room as part of the
conversation.
Now, obviously, transportation and infrastructure equal
jobs, Mr. Chairman. That's why it's important to have you here,
and we really appreciate having you here. I've talked with
Director Wray about several ideas that I know he's working on
to really leverage what goes on more, including working to cut
the red tape between the work and coordination between the
Federal Government and the State government.
And I think there's a great example in my district of that.
The 665/71 interchange was done where they actually shortened
the time periods measurably, and made things happen. And I hope
you'll talk about that as an example, and hold it out.
I've also talked with the director a little bit about how
we need to leverage funds by reducing the local match. And I
assume he may talk about that. That's a project I'm working
with him on as well, and I think it's something that will allow
us to leverage funds and complete projects that are important
to the community, not just projects where the local match is
there and easy to find.
So I'm happy to be here. I appreciate the opportunity. And
I really appreciate you bringing the Committee to central Ohio,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Mica. Thank you so much. Again, we are very grateful
for the accommodation. As I said, we're also here at the
request of one of the members of our Committee, which is Mr.
Gibbs. Now, Mr. Gibbs and Mr. Stivers, they both have great
experience in the legislative body here, and distinguished
records of service.
And I had to choose two new Members of Congress who are
serving on our Committee to chair subcommittees. And I
interviewed a number of them and looked at their backgrounds,
and I could tell you how pleased I am with the decision to
select Mr. Gibbs as the subcommittee chair, one of the few
entering Members of Congress, probably in the history of
Congress, to come in and chair a subcommittee.
The Water Resources Subcommittee is one of the most
important in Congress and has broad jurisdiction. But we are
pleased to be close to your district, and I'm even more pleased
to have your leadership on the Committee. And I recognize you
at this time.
Ms. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
coming to Ohio. And thank you, Congressman Stivers and
Congresswoman--I forgot her name for a second--Jean Schmidt,
for being with us today.
Ms. Schmidt. How quickly you forget, Bob.
Mr. Mica. It could be your sister.
Ms. Schmidt. We were up all night, I guess. But it was
mentioned that Congressman Stiver was serving recently in the
Senate, and I was too. Not quite two months. And by the way,
gentlemen, my office was right on the other side of that wall.
Right underneath the mezzanine there.
But anyway, it's great to be here as we work on the
challenges facing our infrastructure and transportation in the
United States and Ohio. Just a couple of key points I just
wanted to mention.
Iowa's transportation system supports an about $472 billion
economy. Its 5 million jobs Interstate system ranks fourth in
the Nation, with over 6,700 miles, and we're committed to
improve and build on that.
One of the major problems--and that's one reason I'm so
excited that the chairman's holding these hearings--is recent
studies have determined that sometimes the Federal project
delivery process can take up to 15 years to complete a project
of simple construction
And you know, when you take that long to do things, it adds
to the costs and delays. And one thing we're trying to find is
ways to change the policy and the process so that we can
streamline and get those projects done faster and improve the
infrastructure for our citizens.
I think it's exciting, the panel we've got here today,
because they deal with these issues on a daily basis, Mr.
Chairman. And I look forward to hearing from them, and hearing
how we can make things more efficient and help them do their
job better.
So I hope it cuts through that red tape and streamlines the
project process, with--as I always like to say--a common sense
approach. And I think if we can do that, we'll do a lot to
improve the costs and help move commerce and people in the most
efficient way possible.
I do want to introduce some of the panelists. On the far
end here is the Honorable Jerry Wray, the new Director of the
Ohio Department of Transportation. I think he's the first and
only in the history of the State of Ohio to have come back, Mr.
Chairman. He was the director under Governor Voinovich. And
Governor Kasich asked him to come back, so we're really looking
forward to working with him.
Next to him is Mr. Brian Burgett, up in Knox County. He's
the CEO of Kokosing Company. They are a large highway
contractor, and they do a lot of commercial work too. But I
think what's also interesting, they do a lot of work in the
maritime infrastructure, with locks.
And that's a keen interest for me, especially being the
chairman of that subcommittee that has the jurisdiction over
the Army Corps of Engineers, and also the Clean Water Act with
the EPA.
To his left is Mr. Lozier, who is the Deputy Engineer at
Licking County. I share that county--it's just east of here--
with Congressman Pat Tiberi. And I think he's going to soon be
the engineer. But we've talked, and I think he's got a good
perspective on what things we could do to help streamline those
Federal dollars to help the county at the county level.
So anyway, I'm looking forward to getting the testimony and
the discussion, and I also do want to thank everybody for
coming out today. This is how our system's supposed to work. We
represent you, and get a chance to hear from you and try to
make the best policy for the people of Ohio and the United
States, and use your tax dollars wisely.
Because resources are limited, and we all know that. And
we've got to make things more efficient, and prioritize, and
get the job done. So I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you again for also hosting and requesting
us to come to this part of Ohio.
Now, the next member of the panel--and she is on our
panel--there's no question, when Jean Schmidt serves on any
panel, that she's on the panel and makes herself heard. She's
an Energizer bunny.
And it's just hard to believe she's already becoming a
senior member of the Committee, but we have so many new members
in Congress--we have 19 on the Committee, new members. And
almost 90 in the House of Representative. And she chairs an
important subcommittee on the Agriculture Committee, and we are
pleased to have her on our panel.
She also asked me to come to her district again. I've
already been there, and she dragged me there almost
immediately. And I'm very familiar with some of her projects,
because she reminds me every day. But again, let me recognize
the gentlelady--and the very aggressive lady--from Ohio, Jean
Schmidt.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is just two
little projects, and then I'll be happy. But before I go into
them, I would like to introduce the final two panelists.
One is Mr. Keith Tuttle, who owns Motor Carrier Services
Incorporated. And Mr. Tuttle is from Northwood Ohio, which is
in the northeast section of the State. And he might know a
little bit about the infrastructure needed for improvements,
since his company has 90 tractors and 220 trailers. And we do
look forward to hearing your testimony, sir.
And the final one is Mr. Mark Policinski. And Mark is from
my district, and he serves as the Director of the Ohio-
Kentucky-Indiana Regional Council of Governments, or OKI, since
November of 2003.
So I knew Mark in my past life as a State representative,
and my current life in the Congress. He has held senior level
positions in the private sector, and in government service on
Capitol Hill and in the Reagan administration. And I have known
him for a very long time.
And before I turn it back, Mr. Chairman, I just want to
mention that I really am grateful for you for bringing this
committee to Ohio. Because as my good friend Mr. Gibbs
mentioned, we have the sixth-most used roads in the country,
and more importantly--or the fifth-most used highway system in
the country.
But more importantly, we have a little bridge in
Cincinnati, Mr. Chairman, which I pointed out to you, called
the Brent Spence Bridge, which is the sixth-most used bridge in
the country. And while structurally it has about a B rating,
capacity-wise it has an F -. And we really need to have a new
bridge.
And when my good friend Mr. Gibbs talked about delay in
transportation, each and every month that we wait for this
bridge to get built adds about another $1 million in costs for
the bridge.
So it's really important that we look at structural needs
like this, and have a way to cut through the red tape so that
we can save the taxpayers money. And along with that, I've been
working with Mark on the eastern corridor project. And so Mr.
Chairman, if you could just let me have those two projects, I'd
be really nice. I'll turn it back to you.
Mr. Mica. I told you she never misses an opportunity. We
are delighted to have her leadership also on the committee.
Now, this is sort of a star-studded cast. We also have, from
the State of Pennsylvania--and you've probably heard the name
before--Shuster.
His dad was the chairman of the committee, and probably one
of the most successful chairs that we've ever had of the full
committee in Congress. But Bill Shuster has chaired one of our
subcommittees, a different subcommittee: Economic Development,
Public Buildings, and Emergency Managment. And he now chairs
the Rail Subcommittee, covering rail, hazardous pipelines, I
think a whole bunch of things like that.
But we are delighted that he would join us today, and let
me recognize him for an opening statement.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And for me, this is a
return to Ohio. I worked for a company and covered southern
Ohio for three years back in the late 1980s, so it's been 20
years since I've been in Columbus. It's good to be back. I
obviously have fond memories of Ohio, and I'm glad to be here
today, and in many places across the country.
As the Chairman said, we'll be taking the John Mica road
show across the country, or the Mica Magical Mystery Tour. And
as we're going to find out, some of these places we're going
to--we hope everything is going to work out well, and we're
sure that it will, but when we get there we'll really find out.
It's great to do this. This is extremely important, for us
to be out across the country, talking to people that live in
places that have needs, so that we can hear them firsthand. I
would like to take the opportunity to introduce somebody that's
not on the panel, but is hear today: Rich Martinko.
Rich, why don't you raise your hand over there? See, Mr.
Chairman, that's Steve's father. Rich is now the Director of
the University of Toledo's Inter-Modal Transportation
Institute, and the university's transportation center, which is
one of 60 designated by the Federal Department of
Transportation.
He served 22 years at ODOT. His career culminated as the
assistant director of highway operations for ODOT. So we're
pleased that he's here today, and most importantly he's the
father of my deputy chief of staff, and my principal
transportation advisor.
So Steve, coming from a father who has transportation in
his blood, myself--so Shuster/Martinko would make a pretty good
team, I think. Steve is definitely the smarter of the two of
us, so I'm pleased that he calls his father occasionally, or
his father calls him occasionally and tells him what Shuster's
doing wrong, or what the Committee's doing wrong. I get the
same from my father, so that's OK. We like that.
But again, it's a pleasure to be here with my colleagues,
and I'm looking forward to hearing the testimony today. So
thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I wasn't going to tease Mr. Shuster at all, but
he gave you that commentary on my road show, so I have to say
it's good to see him today with his coat off but his shirt on.
You have to keep a sense of humor with this job. But we are
delighted to be here. And I want to also thank Jim Kolb, who is
the staff director on the Democrats' side of the aisle, for
being here. And I think he has some family in the area, so
we're pleased to have his leadership. And my co-partner, who
isn't with us today, Mr. Rahall, the gentleman from West
Virginia.
So with those introductions, we're pleased to go ahead, and
now we'll recognize those on our panel. They've already been
introduced. What I'd like you to do now--I know you're not
going to like this. But if you have a written statement and you
start reading it, I have a staffer and I see the Ohio--is it
the highway patrol over there? And I would like the staffers
and the patrol to come over and just take away your written
statement.
Now, what I want you to do is summarize your key points
that are in there that you want this committee to take back.
What we need to do in changing the law. What we need to do in
changing the procedures that can make us do a better job for
you.
Without objection, all of your written testimony will be
made part--this is an official hearing, and it will be made
part of our hearing. It will be submitted.
So what I want you to do is, again, have an exchange. That
will be much more productive than you just sitting there
reading a written statement. And I see poor Mr. Wray is
shuffling through his papers.
Really, the purpose of this is to elicit from you your top
ideas and suggestions, recommendations to this committee. And
don't tell me how bad things are. We know how bad things are as
far as infrastructure. If you've got some,what we want are your
specific suggestions on how we can do better.
Poor Mr. Wray. But listen, this guy has been in the service
of Ohio, and he's come back for another round. And I know he
can tell us.
The other thing too is, we brought on board an immediate
past Secretary of Transportation from Florida, who I've worked
with, and who's helped us craft some other legislation,
Stephanie Kopelousos. And she's going to be working with a
different, progressive secretary to have innovative ideas that
can help us go through the law, go through the rules and
regulations that don't make sense, and come up with innovative
ideas.
Mr. Wray, you are recognized. And just tell us, again, what
you would change. And you can submit the rest of that for the
record. You are recognized, sir.

TESTIMONY OF HON. JERRY WRAY, DIRECTOR, OHIO DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION; BRIAN BURGETT, PRESIDENT AND CEO, KOKOSING
CONSTRUCTION CO.; BILL LOZIER, DEPUTY COUNTY ENGINEER, LICKING
COUNTY, OHIO; HON. CHRISTIANE W. SCHMENK, MAYOR, CITY OF
MARYSVILLE, OHIO; MARK POLICINSKI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OHIO-
KENTUCKY-INDIANA REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS; NICK
GATTOZZI, VICE PRESIDENT OF GOVERNMENT ADVOCACY, GREATER
CLEVELAND PARTNERSHIP; KEITH TUTTLE, PRESIDENT, MOTOR CARRIER
SERVICE, INC.; AND BARRY FROMM, CHAIRMAN, US RAILCAR COMPANY

Mr. Wray. Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Members, thank you
and welcome to the great State of Ohio. My testimony just got a
lot shorter. What would you like to see? First of all, we have
problems in Ohio--and I'm sure that's true of lots of the
Nation--in that we are fast approaching a time when we will not
have enough State funds to match our allotted Federal funds.
And the first thing that you can do to help us with that is
change the Federal match from an 80/20 match, 80 percent
Federal and 20 percent local, to 90 percent Federal and 10
percent local. That would be our number one suggestion, number
one recommendation.
And that would not only help us, but it would help our
local partners a great deal. In Ohio, we have home rule. We
have elected county engineers. We're the only State in the
Nation that has that.
We have a lot of rural counties, and they have small staff.
It is very difficult for them to use Federal money, even with
the help of the Department of Transportation. There are
counties in Ohio who have never replaced a bridge using Federal
money, simply because of the onerous and complicated and
bureaucratic process that it takes. This would go a long way to
helping them match, number one, and I'm----
Mr. Mica. Can you--I'm going to interrupt a little bit
here. Can you outline for the committee, or do you have in your
testimony, some of the onerous provisions that are at the
Federal level that we could change? Any percentage. And if you
don't want to do it publicly, could you provide it to the
committee?
Mr. Wray. The answer is I don't have it in my testimony,
but yes we can provide it to the committee. And I suspect that
others on this panel, including Mr. Lozier----
Mr. Mica. You have two weeks to submit that. Any examples
you can give us of what you can do. Because again, I don't know
if we can get you the 90 percent. But what else can we do to
get some of the unnecessary regulations, rules and things that
you just talked about, particularly the small communities that
don't have the institutional capability of dealing with the
Federal bureaucracy?
Mr. Wray. And I hope you can get us the 90 percent. I
understand if you can't, and 89 percent would be fine. I don't
have the details of the process outlined in my testimony, but
we can certainly get that to you easily within two weeks.
Mr. Mica. Just give us a few examples of this, or
something.
Mr. Wray. And basically, and in very understandable terms,
this is why it's difficult for Morrow County, Ohio to take
advantage of any Federal funds.
And I should note, Mr. Chairman, that this Department of
Transportation is committed to helping them. We have made it
one of the centerpieces of our administration that we are going
to try to help local governments make better use of the
available dollars that are there. And we're committed that ODOT
is not going to be a barrier, and we want you to help us make
sure that these the Federal Government and USDOT is not a
barrier.
Another thing that would help us a lot and that we're
interested in is innovative financing, and the ability, for
example, for us to use our longitudinal right of way, and
perhaps use that with private partners to create revenue for
the State.
As it is now, there are restrictions that are long and deep
that prevent us from using our own right of way for revenue
enhancement. And if there was a way that we could find to free
us up to do that, we'd love to be able to do that. Another
aspect of that is----
Mr. Shuster. I'm going to interject, Mr. Wray. What would
you do? What kinds of things would you do?
Mr. Wray. Fibers, cell towers, advertising, whatever.
Again, we're not going to compromise our transportation system
in terms of safety, efficiency, and effectiveness. But to agree
that we own property that can be leveraged, we'd like the
freedom to do that.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. That's the kind of stuff we're looking for. Keep
going, you're getting there. Anything else?
Mr. Wray. Or rest areas, in Ohio and all over the country,
were originally built through the interstate system, and we
built the rest areas. We believe that those are properties that
we could leverage also for revenue, for advertising. Or lease
them out, allow them to become a private/public partnership.
We don't have the freedom to do that now. We'd like to be
given the freedom to deal with our rest areas and the property
that we own, and to be able to try to leverage that property.
A bigger picture concern is that, essentially across the
country, in Ohio and nationally, we have funded our
transportation system through the gas tax. And that has been a
remarkable success story. It helped build the wealth that
exists in this Nation, without a doubt.
But that system is now out of date, and we need to be
looking at innovative or new ways to fund transportation. In
Ohio, consumption is leveling off. We are anticipating a little
increase this year, but with the sluggish economy, essentially,
consumption has provided us with level revenue. Construction
inflation, on the other hand, is growing. So the cost of steel
and concrete and asphalt is going up each year.
We estimate in 2011 it will go up by 5.7 percent. You can
see as those two lines converge that there's coming a time--and
in our case, that time is very near, probably 2018 or sooner--
that we not only will not be able to match Federal funds, we
will have a difficult time maintaining and preserving our
existing system.
And that is a must. It's a tremendous, enormous investment
that we have made in Ohio--and that States have made across the
country--in this system. It would be a crime to let it fall
into disrepair even more than it already is.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Wray, we're going to get back to you. Let's
pick on Mr. Burgett next. And he has a big construction
company. We'll save all the questions until we get through, or
if somebody has something they have to pop in, they'll do that.
But Mr. Burgett, you're next.
Mr. Burgett. Thank you Chairman Mica, Honorable Members of
the Congress. As Congressman Gibbs mentioned, our company is
involved in all modes of transportation, from maritime through
rail, bike paths and highways. But this morning I want to
narrow my comments to highway-type construction.
And I'm going to propose a couple of things that just kind
of turn the whole apple cart upside-down. The first of those,
it becomes apparent to most of us that there's not an appetite
in Washington to provide the funding necessary to take care of
our whole highway system out here, from what we've looked at in
the past. And I think the approach needs to be changed.
And I'm proposing that we narrow the Federal Government's
role to the national highway system, and that their funding be
limited to that, and that we turn the funding of the State
highways and stuff back to the States. And the importance of
this, even though the States right now say ``We don't have the
funding,'' if they understand the division of responsibility--
which is unclear at this point, because we don't know how much
funding will be able to come out of Washington from any one
time--then they can take that, and focus on it, and move
forward.
The second apple cart that I would like to upset is the
Federal Highway Administration. And I would propose that we
change the role of the Federal Highway Administration to not be
involved in the day-to-day business of the highway projects,
but to give us the safety requirements, the overall concept of
what they want in our national highway system. Stay out of the
State, the county jurisdictions.
And that we eliminate the offices in each State, and that
we move to a regional national highway organization, similar to
EPA. And that their role be of auditing the States on a
periodic basis, such as maybe every three years. I think that
we could eliminate a lot of overhead, and I think we can also
shorten the process for construction projects.
The third area that I'd like to touch on is that of 3Ps. I
believe that 3Ps have a place, but it's a very limited role.
And I believe it's the most expensive way of funding our
infrastructure, our transportation system, and that if there's
any other way of doing it, we should take that approach.
The example I'd like to throw out is the Ohio Turnpike. In
the Ohio Turnpike, you pay 6.2 cents a mile to travel on the
Turnpike, plus you pay 2 and a half cents a mile in gas tax.
And on any other highway in the State, we're paying 2 and a
half cents for the gas tax. So consequently, it's more than 300
percent, the cost per mile to travel on the Turnpike versus an
Interstate highway. And I think we need to find other
approaches, other than 3Ps, where we can.
Mr. Mica. Excellent comments. Thank you for those comments.
Mr. Lozier?
Mr. Lozier. Thank you, Chairman Mica. I do have sample
projects, that you asked----
Mr. Mica. Just a clarification on public/private
partnerships for members of the audience who may not be
familiar with it so much. Public/private are what he's
referring to, just for clarification. Mr. Lozier?
Mr. Lozier. Thank you, Chairman Mica. I'm going to start by
tagging onto Director Wray's testimony. And you did ask the
question if we had specific examples. I assume that you have my
testimony and the attachments to it, because I want to draw
your attention to the photo that's shown in exhibit 1.
I spared everybody the drama from actually bringing the
paper in here, but I have a photo of this. We see two projects
on my drafting board, back in my office. The project on the
left side of the straight edge there represents the paper we
generated for a Federal project.
We've been after this project since '03. We've spent design
costs of $1.4 million so far. We expect to spend another $1
million, and the construction costs estimate of this project is
$12.2 million.
The project that is similar, on the right side of the
straight edge there, is funded through a program called the
Ohio Public Works Commission. We're freed up from a lot of the
regulation and a lot of the design standards. We
conceptualized, designed, and constructed this project in a
year, and we did it for under $600,000.
Now, the argument that I hear when I bring this example up
is I'm trying to compare apples to oranges.
Ms. Schmidt. Excuse me. We don't have the attachments.
Mr. Lozier. You don't. There was a packet of attachments. I
can present them to you, if you'd like. It's on page two of
that packet.
I can continue before you see the photo. I think you get
the idea that what has driven this, in my opinion, are the
AASHTO design standards, which are utilized by the FHWA and the
DOTs. This project is requiring 120 foot roadway width, and we
think all we need is a 60 to 80 foot roadway width.
This is creating the usual suspect cost drivers, like
environmental, excessive right of way due to technical
requirements, utility relocations. And that's ironically all
the things that we're instructed to avoid by the FHWA.
Again, there's another argument that I hear all the time:
``If we're going to do a project, let's do it the right way.''
Unfortunately, that's a recipe for immobility. We have a
little local road widening project that we've been after for
eight years here. We can't--our roads have evolved from wagon
paths, and now we're trying to improve them all at one time
with these successive design standards.
How'd it get this way? I believe that FHWA and ODOT
oversight has led to those two agencies managing risk the same
for local projects as they do for their own projects. I don't
think that local governments have the same exposure to risk.
And what can we do about it? We have several suggestions.
I'm representing today the National Association of County
Engineers and County Officials, as well as the County
Engineers' Association of Ohio.
In the testimony that I've provided, they have specific
language. They are in agreement with what my testimony is
today. But basically, the big two things are that we need to
make an allowance for local public agencies, governing
authorities like the County Engineers' Association, to have
their own design standards.
They need to be turned over to us. These projects need to
be turned over to us, and let us take responsibility for the
risk. We aren't scared of the risk. We can manage the risk.
I think that if this happens, it could lead to an infusion
of construction projects like never before imagined. And this
would be good for contractors, consultants, and suppliers of
all sizes. And it could happen very quickly.
I guess that's the end of my testimony.
Mr. Mica. Do you have the specific language you're
recommending?
Mr. Lozier. I do. In my testimony there, there are five
specific things. The first two, essentially, are handing down
oversight authority to local governments, or to their managing
authorities like the County Engineers' Association.
I also think, as you go through the Federal bill--we know
there's inconsistencies in other States, and that we should
identify them. And during the course of the bill, there should
be continual improvement measures taken, and the DOTs and local
agencies should be a part of that.
I happen to know that there are design standards that are
different than the way that Ohio's FHWA offices interpret the
design standards for projects. I also think we need to
strengthen technology transfer and other training programs.
In the long term, we need regulatory reform. A lot of what
we have presented to you is assistance in getting through the
process. I don't think that's good enough. I think that's a
temporary fix. I think, in the end, we need regulatory reform.
And that concludes my testimony.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. We'll turn next to Ms. Schmenk.
Ms. Schmenk. Thank you, and thank you for allowing me to be
here today. I would first beg indulgence. I promise I will not
read, but I would like to kind of set the stage for my
testimony, because I'm talking from a different capacity than
others on the panel.
I'm talking as a small town mayor. A small town of about
20,000 located northwest of here, about 30 miles. And I want to
lay the groundwork for really how everything that our panel is
talking about today affects us as users of the system.
Marysville is in Union County, and that has been the third-
fastest growing county in Ohio since 1990. For a small town,
Marysville has a very rich employment base. We're very lucky to
have great employers, like the Scotts Miracle-Gro company.
I'm a part time mayor, but I have also worked for Scotts
Miracle-Gro for 17 years. And Scotts is there in Marysville
because of good transportation and good infrastructure. We're
also home to many other good industries, like Nestle R&D, and
other great companies. But the big one that we all hear about,
just beyond our borders, is Honda, Honda R&D, Honda of America
Manufacturing.
And Honda is key to Ohio's future. I think Honda is key to
our Nation's future, because it has done such great things in
our country. Honda alone employs about 13,000 employees near
Marysville. And when you factor in all of its suppliers, it's
responsible for probably 130,000 employees in Ohio.
The history of Marysville and the history of Honda. One of
the main reasons Honda has been successful has been the good
infrastructure that was built. 30 years ago, our State invested
close to about $75 million to widen US Route 33, which leads
from Columbus out to Honda.
The payback has been tremendous. Honda has conservatively
put back over $7 billion into Ohio since 1979, and that doesn't
count the millions of dollars that have helped communities like
mine in payroll taxes and other taxes returned to our local
economy.
So when we think of the impact of good infrastructure, it's
key to my town's success. It's key to our county's success. I
think it's key to Ohio's success. Honda, Scotts, and other
manufacturers rely on a lot of logistics systems. One is called
Just In Time delivery. If infrastructure is not working well,
it delays everything for them, costs them millions of dollars,
costs our economy millions of dollars.
We have a little project right now, which my Congressman,
Senator Stivers, referred to. And that is the intersection of
US Route 33 and I-270, which circles Columbus. It is a highly
congested interchange, and it is failing right now.
And every day when there is backup, it causes problems for
Scotts, for Honda, for all of those thousands of employees.
Right now, we've requested both Federal and State funding.
Conservatively, it looks like if we're lucky--and it's in
jeopardy. But if we're lucky, we won't be able to even start
that project until 2017. That will cost jobs. That will cost
our economy, I think, in the millions of dollars.
So I will jump to what I think, as a user of a small town,
and as a person who sees the direct connection between good
infrastructure and jobs, are some practical suggestions.
First--I'll probably get some boos on this--I'm a firm believer
that not all earmarks are bad. I think if you can show a direct
connection between jobs and the project, it can really be a
good use of our tax dollars.
What I would love to see, though, is a streamlining of the
request forms, the appropriations request forms. Director Wray
mentioned that small communities don't have the bureaucracies
to do those kinds of applications. We don't have a grant writer
in our small town, so when our different Members of Congress
request different forms, different attachments, it really is a
detriment to us.
I would love to see a direct nexus between any kind of
funding and jobs. We need to see that economic difference that
it can make. Timing needs to be addressed. Somehow, we need to
shorten the project. Because my little project, if it doesn't
start until 2017, we're going to lose jobs in the State of
Ohio.
Someone has already mentioned the 3Ps. I'd like to see
collaboration rewarded. My work in the private sector over the
years--I know how public/private partnerships can get things
done, and I'd like to see rewards given for those.
And I think Director Wray also mentioned more creative
funding techniques. We definitely need to see something
creative, like transportation tax credit bonds, or other ways
to get funding.
Thank you very much for listening. Again, just to
summarize, I think good infrastructure needs jobs. And it's
critical to our State and our Nation.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Mr. Policinski?
Mr. Policinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
Congresswoman Schmidt for your kind remarks. I want to thank
the people who preceded me in the panel for bringing up so many
good ideas on streamlining.
I agree with them, particularly on the idea of letting
States and locals have more authority over their projects that
don't fall on Interstates, and also the idea that FHA should be
in an oversight role in that regard.
I'm also very happy to hear, Mr. Chairman, that you state
that the idea of streamlining is so ingrained as you put
together the new bill. To me, streamlining is probably the most
important thing we can do, even as important as funding.
I think a couple of things that I'd just like to mention
when it comes to streamlining is, in the planning process, we
go through environmental review. We identify the environmental
problems that could exist and impacts. Once that's done, I
don't think it's absolutely necessary to revisit them. And that
would reduce, I think, I lot of the delay that takes place.
As far as my testimony goes, having gone down to a place
taken by others, when it comes to getting money into the
system, OKI has been pushing for four years an idea called
regional infrastructure improvement zones. This is a change in
the tax law, which would allow private corporations and
individuals who make contributions to build public goods a tax
deduction.
Under current law, such a tax deduction is allowed, but
only if there is no benefit to the individual or the
corporation. The establishment of a RIIZ would take away that
distinction, which we find totally arbitrary. What RIIZes would
do is, they woud unlock private dollars to put into local
match.
It's already been mentioned, rural communities, many
communities even in metropolitan areas like Cincinnati, good
projects, already approved by the jurisdictions, already in
these steps, cannot go forward because there is not a local
match.
Here we would have an opportunity where the private sector
could step forward and say ``Listen, this project, which has
already been approved by you, which is already part of the
community's effort to develop economically, is also important
to us as business votes. And we're willing to put money into
it.''
That would give them the local match, and that would allow
the project to go forward. I think that it's amazing, as we've
been pushing this idea for four years and we hope to have it
introduced on the House side in the spring, that a number of
businesspeople have come up and said ``I'm very interested in
doing this.''
When we talked to government and elected officials, they
had a number of examples where they think that this would be
beneficial. So when we look at this problem, where you don't
have enough money and you have too much need, we have to find
new sources of funding. And I think RIIZes provide one of those
sources. It's a way to tap into the private sector dollars.
Again, Mr. Chairman, much of what I have to say on
streamlining has been covered by others. It's also in the
written testimony, and so I will yield the rest of my time to
my distinguished colleague from Cleveland.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. I will recognize Mr. Gattozzi.
Mr. Gattozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name's Nick
Gattozzi. I represent the Greater Cleveland Partnership, a
regional chamber of commerce in Cleveland. I've been asked to
talk about a little variation on the public/private
partnership.
We work with a group called BUGC, Build Up Greater
Cleveland. It's an organization founded back in 1983. The idea
was to prioritize transportation infrastructure projects in
northeast Ohio. Obviously, back then we had challenges in the
Cleveland area, and as the community came together with various
projects, the idea was how do you prioritize those in a way
that's--weigh those projects against economic development.
So that we weren't just repaving roads, but those roads
were going to places where jobs were being created, economic
development. I think you've heard very similar comments,
especially from the mayor, how important transportation
infrastructure is.
It creates jobs. It's the key driver to economic group.
With Build Up Greater Cleveland, the city of Cleveland is
involved. The county engineer, the port authority, our regional
sewer district, the regional transit authority. So all the
stakeholders are there. ODOT is a stakeholder as well.
And so we make the case of why projects are important,
because of the development that connects to the rest of the
community and the region. And we actually rate and prioritize
those projects.
So our folks come in, they make presentations on their
individual projects, and then we as a group take off our
individual hats and say ``How does this impact the region?
Where are we going to get the best economic bang for our
buck?''
We've extended that model to a twelve-state coalition, the
Great Lakes Metro Chambers Coalition. It includes the States of
New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky,
Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, and
Minnesota.
When you combine those twelve States plus Ontario and
Quebec, you're looking at the third-largest economy in the
world in terms of GDP. It's significant. Our friends in
Cincinnati are involved, and when you see how things like the
Brent Spence Bridge impact our manufacturers--the mayor talked
about Just In Time in Marysville.
We have those same things. We need to get our goods through
the system internally, so that we can get them exported out.
When you look at this region, we are 33 percent of the Nation's
population, 32 percent of the Nation's GDP, 30 percent of our
merchandise exports, and 28 percent of those patents.
And in order to make the things that we do so well in the
midwest, we need to move those little parts to make bigger
parts, and then be able to get them outside the region. Not
only to the rest of the country, but to the world.
And so the Metro Chambers is focused on those trade
corridors, as we call them. Because the Brent Spence Bridge
matters. Because the Crossings at Detroit and Buffalo matter.
And those road miles in between, so that the trucks can carry
that equipment, those supplies, those purchases, efficiently,
safely, through the system. Because that makes us more
competitive as a region.
From a recommendation, I think all we have to do is look at
your report, when you talk about your national strategic
transportation plan, Mr. Chairman, and getting that regional
input. Looking at regional zones. How can the regions impact to
make the case that we're not just paving roads, but there are
jobs associated with those investments of Federal dollars, when
combined with the local and with the State dollars?
Because that's what creates jobs. That's what drives the
economy. If we can't get the goods and services in and out,
we're going to strangle the economy. I yield back my time.
Mr. Mica. I'd like to thank the gentleman. And let me
recognize Mr. Tuttle now.
Mr. Tuttle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I come to you as the
owner of a small business in Northwood, just on the east side
of Toledo. We're just north of the Ohio Turnpike, and at the
intersection of 80 and 90, around 75. We have about 125 proud
employees, and we run 90 over-the-road trucks, and a couple
hundred trailers.
We've had a somewhat brutal economy in the last three to
four years, and yes I did have a prepared talk. I'm here
representing my drivers, my employees, and also the American
Trucking Association.
Let's talk about congestion. And I deeply respect what the
mayor of Marysville said. We have an operation that's not big,
but our trucks run a lot between northwest Ohio and Chicago,
going west. And our trucks operate a lot into eastern
Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
And specifically congestion--I will tell you that when I
got into this business and I started with just a couple trucks
after getting out of college, and when I got started in this
business 25 or 30 years ago, every one of our customers, from
General Motors to American National Cans, to Campbell's Soup,
they'd always carry weeks of inventory.
And that has gone from weeks, to days, to in most cases
hours. The mayor eloquently pointed that out at Honda, and at
these plants, it's not only down to hours' worth of inventory.
If you deliver late, you as a carrier are penalized, in some
cases severely, for not getting there.
Our trucks, if you realize, Mr. Chairman, right now we can
operate 11 hours in a 24 hour cycle, then they have to take a
break, and so forth. When we go to Chicago, we are limited to
the south side of Chicago, the eastern suburbs of Chicago, and
northwest Ohio.
Because of congestion, we cannot deliver towards the
airport and get back to northwest Ohio in the same day. With
congestion, we cannot deliver any farther than the eastern part
of Philadelphia or just into New Jersey under the current hours
of service regulations.
I'm asking that--and most of you in this room might think
this is a crazy idea--but as an industry we support a diesel
fuel tax increase, if it is directed to efficient projects that
help eliminate congestion.
And 80 percent of all goods in this country are moved by
truck. Yes, there is a need for a good inter-modal system.
Almost all freight is eventually by truck. And in most cases--
80 percent of the communities in this country are exclusively
served by truck.
We are willing to pay more for a diesel fuel tax increase.
And I realize, I absolutely realize that that's something that
we're probably not going to get to happen in this environment
right now. But I'm not sure that we can afford luxuries like
museums and other extravagant items that take away from the
efficient movement of goods and services in this country.
So I'm not going to talk about much else. You have my
testimony. But we do support that. We do support anything that
eliminates congestion, as the economic recovery--and these are
just a couple notes that I've taken this morning--it moves on
trucks.
And as I said about the inventory levels, increased
congestion means less productivity, less efficiency, and higher
costs that are basically forwarded on to consumers. Thank you
very much for allowing me to speak.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And I'll recognize Mr. Fromm next.
Mr. Fromm. Good morning, Chairman Mica and Members of the
Committee. I also want to recognize Congressman Stivers, who
I'm proud to have as our district representative.
I run a company called US Railcar Company that's based
right here in Columbus, Ohio. And I have several messages I
want to make, after several years of working very hard to try
to accomplish the American dream, starting a business in an
area that is highly dominated by foreign manufacturers.
That's why this next transportation authorization bill is
so important to us, and is so important to the citizens of this
country. I am an entrepeneur. I'm a risk taker. I put many
millions into this enterprise.
And I'm a concerned American citizen who pays a lot of
attention to the advancements in transportation, and all the
benefits that can come from passenger rail, insisting on doing
the right sizing, the right type of equipment. Not necessarily
high-speed for every corridor, but low-speed and medium-speed,
different types of vehicles on different types of corridors.
I think it's critical that we have opportunities to
increase American manufacturing jobs, so that we get a return
on the investment, and we see mobility provided to the greatest
extent to our workforce. And then we'll see economic
development. It's all possible with the growth of a passenger
rail system in this country.
Did you know that Ohio has the third-largest concentration
of rail tracks in America? Illinois has the largest
concentration. Did you know that you could connect every
college and every university in this State, somehow, to a
passenger rail system that already exists?
First, the key to the success of the program, as with any
other public/private partnership program, is that you have to
draw entrepeneurs to take these kinds of risks and enter into
these types of partnerships, and to drive transportation
investment. It represents anywhere between 24 and 28 percent of
our total spending. That's how critical transportation is.
In 2009, I led a group of investors, friends and family,
who put up capital and acquired the only American manufacturer
of passenger railcars known as Diesel Multiple Units. It's a
special type of car that runs back and forth. It's a self-
propelled vehicle that has coaches and power cars.
And it was invented by a gentleman in Colorado, who created
all that technology, and kept it alive, and who has proven to
the Federal Railroad Administration so as to be operating on
three railroads, so it's safe and sound.
And to bring this back into service in North America, there
are presently three districts where these DMUs are in service
in the United States today. We invested this money because we
feel that passenger rail is a critical part of America's
transportation system.
But Americans and American know-how must be a part of this.
You can't have this all dominated by foreign manufacturers. And
they're huge. The barriers to entry in this are incredibly
high. And we need to compete against--and we are competing
against these well funded organizations.
The bill must find a way to support our ability, all
Amercian companies that are suppliers and manufacturers in this
industry, to re-enter and build opportunities in America, for
Americans. Our company is ready to contribute to the growth of
that, and we recognize that there's an opportunity, if this is
addressed properly.
The second issue is having the necessary resources and
incentives at the Federal, State, and local levels to change
the way the deals get done. I'm thinking of concepts like value
capture here, where you can obtain value from development and
incremental values from real estate appreciation, and tax those
things in transportation districts.
It can't be all done in a fare box. It has to be done
through other means. And we all know studies show on
transportation-oriented development districts that use value
capture are incredible. We should capture that.
We need to determine the goals and find ways to erase,
rather than create, obstacles in the path. Because time is
money. The private sector's good at getting things done, and
the public sector's good at protecting the public sector and
the taxpayer dollars. Together, we can get this accomplished.
That's why we work together. We have an efficient, a
timely, and a legal way to get this all accomplished. We need
to reduce the risk, but we need to be market-driven. This
economy has to be, not just in transportation but in all
aspects of our economy.
We have to seize upon economic development opportunities,
and to allow them not to grow stale because of strong
regulations that clamp things down, being preoccupied with the
process rather than the goal.
The third concept I have is that investment in passenger
rail, and U.S.-based and U.S.-owned railcar producers will
provide multiple benefits to this country. We have a mobile
workforce. We have job growth. Those are accepted goals for all
of us.
Our vehicle, that Diesel Multiple Unit, has been designed
to go on freight tracks today. And they are on freight tracks
today. It doesn't have to be on a high-speed rail system that
costs substantially more money. We can efficiently move people
from spot to spot throughout the United States. Our next
generation of cars will be going beyond 70 miles per hour, to
the 110 category.
For those of us that invest and risk our own money in
America, I'm asking you to please recognize how important this
is for America's future. We could foster the rebirth of this
once-proud U.S. industry. We dominated the world in this field,
and we don't today.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Let's go right into questions. And I'm
going to ask Ms. Schmidt if she would like to do the first
round of questions.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I have questions
for Mr. Wray separately from Mr. Lozier, Mr. Policinski, Mr.
Tuttle, and if I get time, Mr. Fromm.
Mr. Wray, when you talked about revenue enhancements and
rest stops--and we all know that the rest stops throughout the
country, but especially in Ohio are at or greater than
capacity.
Mr. Tuttle talked about drive time for drivers, they have
to have so much time off the road. And as I drive down 71 or 75
I see the trucks bleeding off onto the highway. When you talk
about leasing, would you then use that as an opportunity to
build better road stops for the truckers? I mean, what was your
vision of that?
Mr. Wray. As a revenue enhancement, sure. But obviously--
when I was here before, this was an issue. And what they
determined was that we couldn't build them big enough, that no
matter how large they were, they were full of trucks in the
evening.
And it's a real problem, because people are pulling off the
road to sleep. If they get on the side of the road and not in
the rest area, the patrol comes along and says ``You've got to
move.''
Well, you're telling a guy who says ``I need to sleep''
that he's got to drive. So it's a very difficult issue. I would
hope that we would be able to address that at the same time
that we were providing the revenue enhancement. I understand
the difficulty of the issue.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you. And Mr. Lozier, when you talked
about, and when you showed us in your testimony, your graph,
one of the things I wanted to point out to you was that a few
years ago, when I first got this job, I inherited a project
called Fog Road in Pike and Scioto Counties that my good
predecessor, Rob Portman, got funding for.
But the Federal Highway Administration was bogging it down
to the point that we actually found a way to take money that
was given and move it over to ODOT, and have the road built in
a year. Because it needed less capacity than what the FHA
wanted.
And what I would like from you is if you could give this
committee specifics of what that cost is in your case on these
projects, that will really help us when we craft this bill.
Mr. Lozier. For this?
Ms. Schmidt. This or any other project. Or anyone else.
Mr. Lozier. I have boiled this down to design standards.
Because the roadway, the footprint of the project drives all
these other effects. We're instructed to avoid environmental
impacts, but on the design side the shoulder widths, the lane
widths, slopes--and we have a new environmental commitment to
make our ditches, the bottoms of them five feet wide so as to
slow the water down in accordance with NPDES, the Clean Water
Act, basically.
In every case, on these roadway widening projects, it's the
width. It's the footprint. When we did all of our own projects
with our own money, we used our common sense to avoid these
things as best we can. If we see that we're going to impact
utilities, for example, which are very costly--they control
timeline like nobody's business, because we have to coordinate
with private utility companies--it's a very difficult thing.
We avoid it. Our instincts tell us to avoid it. Again, I
appreciate the fact that these design standards are tested by
the AASHTO. There's a lot of data telling us why we do this.
But on the other hand, I had one particular project in
Licking County where we were trying to use Federal money. It
has 1500 ADT. And the typical section, again, is 120 feet wide.
Now, as elected officials, we have people saying ``What? What
are you doing? Why are you making this so wide? All we need is
a little bit of recovery width on our shoulders.''
Well, we wave the design standards in front of them. We
can't really do that. People don't understand that it's not a
common sense approach.
Ms. Schmidt. People like common sense. If you could send us
any and all information on that, that would be really helpful.
Mr. Lozier. Can I make one point? I want to say that we are
very optimistic with Jerry Wray. Since Jerry Wray's arrived,
I'm very confident that they're going to help us through this.
But there needs to be enabling language in the Federal bill, to
free them up to free us up.
Ms. Schmidt. And that's what I'd like you to help us with,
sir. Thank you very much.
Mr. Policinski, I love your idea about regional government
improvement zones. You actually came to my office with that
suggestion, and you said that you were working on it. Have you
worked with any Member of Congress for some language, probably
in Ways and Means, regarding this? And where are you now?
Mr. Policinski. First of all, Congresswoman, could I just
say, Chairman Mica, will you please make sure that the Brent
Spence Bridge moves forward? Because if you think that she's
tough on you, Mr. Chairman, how do you think she is when it
comes to the little old director of little old OKI? Yes, we're
working with Geoff Davis. Very closely with Jeff.
We've also had interest from Mr. Tiberi's office. Actually,
Mr. Blumenauer has expressed interest. So we're working very
closely. We look for introduction. We had a little hiccup at
the end of last session. We were planning to introduce then,
but we're working very closely and we anticipate that there'll
be introduction in the spring.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you very much. And Mr. Tuttle, when you
talked about the 11 hour road rule for trucks, one of the
things that I wanted to ask you was, did you think that there
should be some flexibility in those hours of service?
I know sometimes when the person is sitting in the cab and
they're waiting and waiting and waiting to pick up a delivery,
that that counts against them. And so if they're two or three
hours waiting for the delivery, that counts as road time.
And should we find a way to make sure that they're still
safe on the road, but look at time on the road in a different
way? Your thoughts, because you want to make sure they're safe.
Mr. Tuttle. It's very ironic that you bring that up, and I
appreciate your bringing that up. In fact, there is rulemaking
before the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration right
now that would actually reduce our allowable time to 10 hours
per day.
And we consider that----
Ms. Schmidt. More draconian.
Mr. Tuttle. Thank you very much. As an industry, our safety
record in the last couple of years has been better--we are now
as safe as it has been since it's been recorded in the last 50
years. Clearly 80 percent of accidents involving cars and
trucks are the fault of the car driver.
Without getting into all the statistics, it is very
inflexible right now. We do not have a way to reach out to
those shippers and say ``You're going to have to wait for two
or three hours.'' We do not have flexible sleeper berth times.
And that's reducing it from 11 hours to 10 hours, which is
rulemaking that's in the process right now, and they're also
talking about--it's also ironic we talked about the lack of
parking spaces. In that rulemaking, there's also a rule that
instead of 34 hour reset, which our drivers have to take
approximately once a week, without getting into too much
detail, the new rulemaking says that you have to take
consecutive breaks between midnight and 8:00 in the morning.
If two of my trucks, one gets in at 11:00 on Friday night,
the other one gets in at 2:00 on Saturday morning, three hours
difference, the one driver can return to service on Sunday
morning, as it is right now, with a very safe industry. The
other driver, who gets in three hours later, if the rules that
are in rulemaking right now go into effect, that driver cannot
return to service until Monday morning. So we're going from a
system that appears to be working, that we have very
flexibility, to an even worse system. But thank you very much
for the question.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you very much, and I see that my time is
out.
Mr. Mica. We'll get back to you. Mr. Shuster?
Mr. Shuster. I'll continue along this line of questioning.
I was going to ask the same types of questions Ms. Schmidt was.
I had a trucking company tell me that it's about $5,000,
$5,500 per driver. That's what this will cost if they change
those hours of service. I was just wondering if you had any--if
you could give that to us today, that would be great.
Mr. Tuttle. I try to run our own trucking company. This
issue is so important to us that I was actually--I took a
couple of days of my time two weeks ago, and when I was in
Washington, DC, it is a huge issue that will hurt productivity,
and will hurt my drivers in their pocketbooks. I appreciate
both of you bringing this up.
Mr. Shuster. If you could come up with a number, that would
be helpful.
Mr. Tuttle. I can see about a 20 percent loss in
productivity for our drivers.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, gentlemen. Let me yield to another
member of our committee, the gentleman also from Ohio, Mr.
Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to start with
Director Wray. I'm really intrigued by your terms about the
innovative financing, and the first question that I think
through that--with broadband or whatever, I think you mentioned
something about that.
My first thought is that mostly it might be State laws. I
might be wrong about that, but it's my first thought. Or is
there Federal restrictions when you use Federal money to do
improvements to highways and stuff? When it's used to do that?
Or is it State laws.
Mr. Wray. The start of the problem is that if you use
Federal or if you have used Federal money, then it's the
Federal regulations that control it.
There may be some considerations with the State law, but
I'm sure we can deal with those much easier than we can with
the Federal regulations. As it is now, there's a lot of
restrictions, but the basic answer is no.
Mr. Gibbs. So I guess I would look for specific examples of
how you would want to change that. What would give you the
optimal flexibility, especially when we're trying to get some
more broadband or fiber laid, I think that makes a lot of
sense.
Mr. Lozier, a question Congresswoman Schmidt touched on a
little bit, but I know in our discussions we talked about the
right of way issue, and this project in Licking County. I guess
we've got a choice before the panel, where the restrictions
that came to you, but they didn't come from the State as much.
Because if you look at State Road 37, it has very little
shoulder. And the road you're talking about, you have to put in
a shoulder similar to what's on your State highway system, I
belive. And yet by the right of way, the Federal dollars really
become diluted to such a point there----
Mr. Lozier. Congressman Gibbs, I believe you're talking an
example where I put my friends at ODOT on the spot. And when we
have these projects using Federal funds, where we're trying to
widen the local road, that we have to increase the local roads
to 10 foot shoulders and flat slopes, and all that sort of
thing.
And my question to them is, we have State routes in Licking
County with traffic counts that well exceed that amount, and
the crash rates are much higher. Why have they not been
improved to these standards?
And tongue in cheek, I know the answer to that is, I
believe that when they do improvement and maintenance projects,
they're also using State money, I think, that avoids the
triggers of the Federal money.
And this is another issue, that Federal funds--and I'm
going to speak in general terms--aren't allowed for maintenance
projects. And this is another issue that we've addressed in our
written testimony, and perhaps ODOT would be bettter to address
this.
But if the Federal money was made more flexible for use by
ODOT in maintenance activities, it might free up more of the
State money for local governments. It would have a domino
effect that we could possibly be the benefactor. Again, I'm way
out there, speaking for them. But in general, I see that if--to
answer your question, I believe the reason that that happens is
because improvement projects on State routes have been done
with State money, where----
Mr. Gibbs. I'm going to throw that back to the director and
have him respond to that.
Mr. Wray. Congressman Gibbs, he's exactly right. And we are
aware of it. We actually have to have a legislative change in
Ohio to allow us to spend State-only dollars on the system. And
there are a lot of complications going with that, but we are
prepared to pursue that, and we will be dealing with that with
our Ohio legislature.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Burgett, I want to open up to you. You
dropped some out of box ideas, and like the chairman said,
that's what we're looking for, on how to streamline the process
and get things done.
When I found out, 15 years ago, projects were going, and I
know some projects were going on maybe a third of that 15 years
before the first shovel of dirt got turned over, because of all
the environmental impact studies, environmental studies.
And the information sounded a little bit like what you
actually go through when you start doing a real construction
project, and the sound of that. So maybe we could figure out,
see if we can paint a picture.
Mr. Burgett. Actually, the issues that you're addressing
there are taken care of before we typically get involved with
the project. The biggest hang-ups that we end up facing ends up
usually being utility relocations that aren't done timely.
And one of the points that I didn't make that's in my
written testimony is, I think we need some laws that would give
the State and municipalities a little more power over utility
relocations.
We quite often see delay claims and additional costs
associated with utilities not being relocated. We actually
asphalt paved around an electric pole here in Franklin County,
because it took over a year to get that pole moved. And then we
had to come back, of course, and fill the hole when they
finally moved the pole.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, gentlemen. And let me recognize Mr.
Shuster, also of the committee.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fromm, if you
could just--the three communities that you are operating your
equipment in. Could you just tell us where they are?
Mr. Fromm. Chairman Mica, Representative Shuster, we are--
the vehicles that are in service are, I believe, five double
decker DMUs in Miami, running between there and West Palm
Beach, very active. Chairman Mica was very instrumental in
supporting that, and I appreciate it.
Portland, Oregon, a very highly progressive transportation
city. We have four single level cars running on the west line.
And Alaska, which takes passengers to Denali mountain, where
the transportation by rail is so critical.
Mr. Shuster. And are you able to provide us with
information on the operation costs, and how that site's going,
so that we can----
Mr. Fromm. It's interesting that you would bring that up.
That's the reason we were so interested in it. It's one third
more efficient from the standpoint of fuel, and about half as
noisy, or not nearly as noisy as a traditional locomotive would
be. So it's our conclusion that this unit is far less pollutive
than a traditional locomotive would be.
Mr. Shuster. Anything you could provide us with hard data
on, that would be helpful to me. And I've ridden on your route
into western Pennsylvania, and we went from Pittsburgh to
Harrisburg, I believe it was. Or vice versa. Very comfortable
ride, also, so I appreciate that.
And when it comes again to the data, Mr. Tuttle, any way
you can--you say 20 percent, but if we could see hard numbers--
because a couple of my trucking companies have come to me and
said ``A decrease in hours of service is,'' and I got 5,000
from one, 5,500 from another.
And in Washington, those kinds of numbers are powerful, so
that I can do the math for other Members of Congress and they
can see what kind of dollars it's going to cost a small
trucking company with 50 or 100 drivers, or a significant chunk
of----
Mr. Tuttle. I can tell you that a typical week for one of
our drivers is 2,200 to 2,400 miles a week. And they make
between $50,000 and $60,000 a year. It would be an $8,000 to
$10,000 pay decrease.
Mr. Shuster. How many drivers do you have, by the way?
Mr. Tuttle. I employ 92 drivers, presently.
Mr. Shuster. All right. Thank you. And Mr. Wray and Mr.
Burgett, two questions came up that both of you were talking
about.
One, Mr. Wray was talking about utilizing the right of way
to raise an issue of funds. One of the very difficult debates
that occurs in Congress is billboards and advertising on
roadways, you've got a pretty significant and powerful
coalition that has limited that over the years. So when you say
``adverstising dollars,'' what are you looking at? What ideas
do you have?
I know I've talked to a couple of firms that are--the idea
of taking and beautifying landscaping along the highways with
companies' logos to raise dollars. And I don't know if you know
anything about that.
Mr. Wray. Congressman Shuster, it could be what you just
mentioned. Some sort of a public/private partnership to
beautify the area, or to increase capacity. I mean, we're
looking at all options.
Mr. Tuttle. And the other thing Mr. Burgett brought up, and
this is something I hear a lot, about focusing the dollars to
highways. The grand compromise, in probably the 1970s or the
1980s, was the transit/highway compromise in the urban/suburban
areas.
And I just wonder, what kind of debate would happen here in
Ohio, with Cleveland and Cincinnati and Columbus saying ``Hold
it a second.'' You could make the argument, and I think it's a
valid argument, that if you put money into transit, you take
cars off the roadway. So what kind of debate would occur here
in Ohio between the urban, suburban, and rural areas?
Mr. Burgett. Let me clarify. I'm talking about the portion
of Federal dollars that presently go to highways, that those be
focused only on the national highway system, which would bring
clarity and let the rest of us know that we need, in our State
or municipality, to find a budget for the others.
As it is right now, we don't know what kind of a trickle we
are going to get from the Federal Government. So I'm not
talking about taking transit dollars for the national highway
system. I'm only talking about eliminating which roads those
funds go to. And that would also take care of Director Wray's
90/10 deal.
Mr. Wray. Congressman Shuster, if I may, and you probably
know this, particularly with your background and your father's
background. I used to quote him in speeches, often. If you go
back far enough, there was a time when the highway system and
the transportation system was funded at the State level with
supplement from the feds.
That has completely switched to the point now that the
Federal Government is the driving factor and most of the money,
and that's why I mentioned what I said. If Secretary LaHood's
proposed budget that came out earlier this week becomes
reality, Ohio will not have enough funds to match it at an 80/
20 match.
So what Brian is talking about is providing more clarity.
``This road is going to be financed by this fund by the Federal
Government, not the State government. And the other is going to
be financed the other way.'' So that we can get more clarity.
And maybe it should be that some of our Interstate should
be 100 percent Federal, with the understanding that we are not
going to do all US routes, that we are not going to use Federal
money on all US routes. So just providing more clarity would be
very desirable in the reauthorization bill.
Relative to the modal aspect of what happens in Ohio, if
you're asking me would there be a debate, there would be a
robust debate. And that would be a healthy thing. And the idea
is for us to come up with a system that provides the most value
for the investment of the people of Ohio.
Mr. Shuster. I see my time is up. And I think it's going to
be imperative in this new bill that we have clarity, and I'm
sure the chairman is going to take it in that direction. But
thank you very much.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, gentlemen. I will recognize the
Gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank you for
including me even though I don't sit on the committee of
jurisdiction. I was really taken by something that Director
Wray said, as well as something that Mr. Fromm said, about
economic development.
One of my favorite movies is Blazing Saddles, and in that
one of the characters says--the character named Mongo says it's
all about ``where the choo-choo go.'' And the point of that is,
economic development is driven by where our roads and our rails
go.
And Director Wray and Mr. Fromm both talked about how you
can leverage those destinations and the change in economic
value of those destinations. And I would like both of you to
maybe expound upon that, and how that could be used to help
finance our roads and bridges.
Mr. Wray. Congressman Stivers, you are asking regarding
public/private partnerships, or just the impact of
transportation?
Mr. Stivers. You talked about your rest areas. Obviously
there's food at those rest areas. You can use those franchise
things there like they do on the Turnpike, but I think you're
not allowed to today because of Federal rules.
You hopefully will be able to use your right of way for--
whether it's fiber or cell towers or other things you could put
on that land. Land has value. Except the Federal Government
tells you you can't use that land.
Same thing with Mr. Fromm. Where the rails go, people go.
And it changes the economic value of those destinations or
those depots where the trains end up. And can we leverage that
change of value through economic partnerships?
I guess that's what I'm trying to get at. And if you could
expound on how the Federal Government is actually not allowing
you to leverage the value of both that land, your right of way,
and the land of the rest stops--and frankly, where you take new
interchanges and where you take new roads, there becomes a
change in value, and you can leverage some of that.
Mr. Wray. Congressman Stivers, obviously there is a
partnership between the Federal Government, USDOT, and the
State DOTs. And in a couple weeks I'm going to be going to a
national meeting that's going to last two days, and that will
be the topic of the full two days.
So certainly we need a strong partner with the Federal
Government in terms of what we provide in terms of
transportation. Where we tend to part ways is that the State
DOTs are typically looking for economic development and jobs,
and looking for speed and value.
FHWA tends to have a more--and I'm talking specifically
here about highways, more of a national perspective. They talk
a lot about the integrity of the main line, and the throughput
of the traffic.
And they will actually say to you, ``We are not really
interested in economic development. That's your issue. Our job
is to take care of the system.'' So at that level, we need more
flexibility.
Mr. Stivers. OK. There's about a minute and a half left.
Mr. Wray. We need more flexibility. And at the same level,
obviously, every project that comes to the DOT--and I mean
every project that comes, whether it's transit, rail, highway,
bridge, whatever it is--the sponsors and the people who want
that project say that it's imperative for economic development.
It is our job to decide.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. Mr. Fromm?
Mr. Fromm. I guess I can't speak to this from
transportation. I have never done this before in terms of
economic development. But I have the largest land developments
in Columbus and Cleveland, and they're both public/private
partnerships. They're both on sites where the public could not
solve these problems. They were inactive properties. Latent
property.
But with the private sector putting in their capital, and
with us putting in our professional skills and labor--we're not
looking for handouts. We're looking for public/private
partnerships that are equal.
And we were able to get Federal funds, and State funds, and
county funds, and local funds, to where we had approximately 10
different public and private parties investing in the Columbus
project. It went from a negative asset that nobody would touch,
a community that wouldn't develop at all, into one where it's
now valued at over $20 million.
Mr. Stivers. That's great. Thank you. And I only have about
30 seconds left, and I want to get to--so that I think that
really does illustrate that it works.
Director Wray, you know, we talked about expedited
timelines. And it's my understanding that timelines can go from
about 15 years to about four years if you actually focus and
the Federal Government gives you some flexibility. Just a yes
or no, is that correct?
Mr. Wray. Correct.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. Also on flexibility for Mr. Tuttle,
because I'm really almost out of time, would it be helpful if
you got more flexibility on defining what your drive time/road
time was, that would allow your drivers--even if it was 11
hours, if they were sitting in the cab or not in the cab
because of the delivery, that made the time more flexible.
Would that be helpful?
Mr. Tuttle. Absolutely.
Mr. Stivers. Thank you. And I think I'm out of time. Thank
you for all the panelists. I'm sorry I didn't get to ask all
the questions I wanted, but I appreciate you all being here
today, and I'd like to thank the chairman for holding this
hearing in Columbus, Ohio. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Let me yield, if I may now, to the
counsel for the minority side of the committee, to see if he
has any questions.
And if any of the Members have additional questions, or the
minority side, everyone, of course, is welcome to submit
questions to the panel. And the responses, if you cooperate
with us, will also be made part of the record.
Let me just ask a couple of closing questions. Mr. Burgett
had some interesting proposals in terms of narrowing some of
the highway programs and just focusing on the Interstate. Of
course, it would probably get a lot of push-back. Everybody
wants us to do every program. I think we started out with four
core programs, and we're up to 100-plus.
How do you think that's achievable? And again, how would
you put that together? What are you thinking?
Mr. Burgett. I appreciate the question. I think it has to
be phased in over a multi-year timeframe. And one of my
thoughts on that, with the recently proposed funding by
Secretary LaHood, if that money could be spread out over a two
to three year phase-in to allow us to give the States an
opportunity to legislate how they're going to come up with this
funding gap in the future--I think the whole key to this is the
importance of certainty.
And we have not been able to get certainty out of the
Federal Government. If we just let people know, ``This is what
we're going to take care of, the rest is your responsibility,''
then I have faith in our State governments that they will take
that responsibility and come up with a method of funding. But
we need to have that phase-in time.
Mr. Mica. Let me say also that I like your idea about
utilizing as much of the right of way, giving as much
discretion as possible.
Mr. Wray had suggestions--and let me just comment. You
don't have to respond. But I think the chances of going to 90
are slim to none. It's actually been headed in the opposite
direction, as I'm sure you know.
But I think several of you raised the question of
stability. One reason I acquiesced to have the next extension
was since there was no way I could do, just having taken the
committee over, have a completed bill by March 4th. So while
I'd like a shorter term piece of legislation to put pressure on
Congress to move with the reauthorization, I did acquiesce to
go to the end of the fiscal year, which was the request for
some stability.
Now, this will be our seventh extension, and each of those
causes a period of uncertainty, inability to plan, and
certainly inability to do any long-term commitment from the
Federal Government, or initiation of significant projects.
Mr. Lozier, great ideas. I'm going to take your language
back. When we start crafting this, if you would also monitor
the language that we're doing about, again, this whole process.
Sometimes the staff on both sides of the aisle think of the way
things are done now, and think we have to do this and that. I
want to try to get them outside the box.
We had reached an agreement with Mr. Oberstar, moving
forward with this on expediting projects and speeding up
projects, but I think we only reached the tip of the iceberg.
And I think there are innovative ways--we'll look at your
language and hopefully adopt some of that.
Mayor, you cite a great example of a small community trying
to dog it with the Federal Government, in just the last eight
years since I got shafted in redistricting. My wife will be out
here in a few minutes with soap and water.
But I never had small, rural communities, and I got a whole
new understanding of the institutional challenge that you all
face. And it's really ironic that the small communities, rural
or disadvantaged communities, are the least likely to be able
to participate. We're going to try to improve that. And again,
we want you to be with us in that process.
Burgett wasn't as hot to trot on the PPPs, and I think we
had some disagreement there. Do you want to tell me again what
your problem was, and then a couple of you might have a
solution.
Mr. Burgett. We've looked at five different triple P
projects over the last few years, none of which have been able
to go forward because the dollars didn't work.
Mr. Mica. Is there anything that we could have done to
sweeten the pot, like maybe backed----
Mr. Burgett. Let me give you an example here of how far the
numbers are. A current project that exists out there--I won't
name the State, but it's not Ohio. And we were the low bidder
on a $200 million pricing.
And the State had initially set that project up as 3P,
couldn't get the finance on it. Decided to take it back and
handle it through their toll authority----
Mr. Mica. This is financing?
Mr. Burgett. Yes. They decided to make a toll road through
their existing turnpike. They did the numbers on it, and when
they would sell the bonds, what they would cost and all this,
they could get $50 million out of the bonds that would be paid
back from the tolls over a 30-year period of time.
Mr. Mica. And that leaves $150 million?
Mr. Burgett. Right. They say they can start with bonds, but
the numbers get worse. To put the tolling equipment in, the
facilities to do the tolls, will cost $20 million. So now you
get a net $30 million.
And the numbers get worse. The tolls that would be charged
to the traveling public across that amount to $10 million a
year. So over 30 years, we're charging $300 million. We're
going to have $30 million available to actually do construction
with
Mr. Mica. So the numbers don't work.
Mr. Burgett. And that's on the US Highway.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Policinski.
Mr. Policinski. With this idea of RIIZes, regional
infrastructure improvement zones, these are in fact public/
private partnerships. And you put in, instead of the local
money, you're going to be putting private sector dollars.
I think it's important that we recognize, as I'm sure you
do, that the private sector might be more attuned to economic
development projects than the government. Consequently, those
projects that would move most quickly would have the biggest
bang for the buck. So as far as this idea of RIIZes, they are
public/private partnership. And we think they're a good one.
Mr. Mica. Did you have something, Mr. Gattozzi?
Mr. Gattozzi. I think our definition of public/private
partnership is slightly different, but I think it's important.
Our point is that there are projects of local significance, but
that also have national or regional impact as well.
And making those investments so that you get a return on
investment model, to look at what are the jobs going to be
created? What is the money going into the project? Does it make
it worthwhile to make that transportation investment, put those
dollars into it?
So not only from the highway, so we can have the smoothest
highway, but if you don't have the feeder into the project,
you're not going to be able to move those goods and services
through.
And so I think getting that input from the local community
on a regional basis is critically important to understand the
prioritization, because we realize that those dollars are
limited. So let's prioritize those projects that are going to
result in economic development and private investment in
facilities and job creation.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Tuttle, you represent an incredible part of
our economy. And if anyone wants to see what makes the country
grow and grow, it is the masterful private sector trucking
industry that is the backbone of our economy.
Sometimes I get criticized when I'm trying to get as many
trucks off the road as possible, but I don't mean that in a
derogatory sense. I mean that I'm trying to save you fuel.
And when it gets to four or five bucks, you'll be
supporting some of the proposals that I would champion, and try
to get more on rail, even drive-on. Whatever we can do. I'm
trying to get you to maximize that great service that you
provide, and hopefully make even better profits. We're looking
at solutions, and we welcome your suggestions. We'll look at
the hour thing as we go along.
Finally, Mr. Fromm is a businessman who has invested in and
bought the assets of Colorado Railcar. And his predecessor, Mr.
Rader, I think, was an incredible entrepeneur in developing a
diesel motorized unit--those are self-propelled railcars--at
his own expense. No Federal development money.
Then he went further than anyone in the United States in
getting the vehicle crash tested at his own expense, and put it
all together. It is doing fairly well, and we actually acquired
some for Florida that run in the TRI-RAIL system. We're on our
way to Portland tomorrow, and I haven't seen those, but we'll
look at those.
On the fourth of March, what I highly recommend to those
folks in Ohio coming down to Miami is that we're going to have
a display of his vehicles that have been running for years with
great fuel efficiency, very low emissions, cost-competitive to
other options.
But unfortunately, Mr. Rader got involved in some other
investments, and then got hit by the economy and went bankrupt,
I believe it was. And Mr. Fromm made a very wise investment in
securing all of that technology and the ability to produce
those vehicles.
I am sold on them. I think that the problem he's had is
that he's had to deal with the Federal bureaucracy to put a
self-propelled passenger vehicle on some existing or semi-
abandoned routes that run through the hearts of cities, and
that could provide an essential service at the lowest possible
cost.
And God help us, the process is just so cumbersome, it's
amazing that anything can be done. But we're going to see if we
can't get something done to get that kind of technology that
has been developed in the United States back here, and he's
looking, I think, at manufacturing and activities located here
in this area. So we're pleased to see you, and thank you for
coming.
I have spoken too long. And what I want to do is again
thank our hosts. Mr. Gibbs, Mr. Stivers, this is your hometown.
Ms. Schmidt, you're close by. Ohio is well-represented. If I
had more Members like this on the Committee and in Congress, we
would do incredible things for the country.
But the problem is, I have to deal with people like Mr.
Shuster. Thanks again, Bill. But all kidding aside, we do have
a great working team. We're pleased to be here, in the
Statehouse of all places.
We are a little bit behind schedule, so we don't mean to be
rude, but Mr. Shuster and I are supposed to do a similar
session in Indianapolis very shortly. We'll leave the Ohio
members to your pleasure, and thank you so much to our
witnesses and those in the audience. If you're in the audience
and you heard something that you want to comment on, let us
know.
If you have suggestions, positive things that you want to
see in the bill, we want you to get them to one of these
Members that are on the Committee. We'll even take some from
Mr. Stivers, who is not on. But get them to us. We're going to
move forward with this so we can provide the stability over the
long term.
And I've threatened to take anyone else that says anything
less than a six year bill, that sets forth the policy, the
projects, the funding formula, lays out the whole landscape so
we can be good Federal partners--I've promised to take anyone
outside and beat him up that says that we're going to do a
shorter term bill, or not do a bill. So we're going to be able
to do that, with your help.
There being no further business to come before the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee of the United
States House of Representatives, this field hearing in
Columbus, Ohio, is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

