- NEXTGEN: LEVERAGING PUBLIC, PRIVATE, AND ACADEMIC RESOURCES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

,
NEXTGEN: LEVERAGING PUBLIC,

PRIVATE, AND ACADEMIC RESOURCES

=======================================================================

(112-60)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 7, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-101                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Babbitt, Hon. J. Randolph, Administrator, Federal Aviation
Administration.................................................     5
Blakey, Hon. Marion C., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Aerospace Industries Association...............................     5
Bunce, Peter J., President and Chief Executive Officer, General
Aviation Manufacturers Association.............................     5
Caslavka, Alan, President, GE Aviation Systems-Avionics..........     5
Dillingham, Gerald L., Ph.D., Director, Physical Infrastructure
Issues, Government Accountability Office.......................     5
Johnson, John P., Ph.D., President, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University.....................................................     5

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Babbitt, Hon. J. Randolph........................................    34
Blakey, Hon. Marion C............................................    50
Bunce, Peter J...................................................    56
Caslavka, Alan...................................................    62
Dillingham, Gerald L., Ph.D......................................    67
Johnson, John P., Ph.D...........................................    80
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 71101.007

NEXTGEN: LEVERAGING PUBLIC,

PRIVATE, AND ACADEMIC RESOURCES

----------

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in Room
101 of the Willie Miller Instructional Center Auditorium,
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, 600 S. Clyde Morris
Boulevard, Daytona Beach, Florida, Hon. John L. Mica (Chairman
of the committee) presiding.
Mr. Mica. I would like to call this hearing of the House
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee to order. Today we
have a field hearing here in Daytona Beach, Florida. I thank
Members for attending and our witnesses for being with us, and
we will get to some introductions in just a minute.
But we are pleased that this probably one of the first
congressional hearings I believe we have held at Embry-Riddle.
We are delighted to have them host us. We are going to hear
from Dr. Johnson, one of our witnesses, in a few minutes. But
thank you for your hospitality and allowing us to come here,
particularly when Congress' reputation lately--to host us and
have us as your guests.
But this is an important hearing, and the title of it deals
with, of course, our next generation air traffic control
systems. And the title is ``Leveraging Public, Private, and
Academic Resources.''
Today's hearing is being held in conjunction with a ribbon
cutting, which will be really open expansion of a next
generation air traffic control Test Bed facility, and the
public is invited to that, I believe, at 2:00 today. It is just
next to the airport terminal facing the airport terminal that
is on the left. And that will begin promptly at 2:00 today.
I want to welcome again our Members of Congress. We are
joined today by the chairman of the House Aviation
Subcommittee. Mr. Petri, the gentleman from Wisconsin, chairs
the subcommittee. We have another chair of one of our
subcommittees, the distinguished gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Bill Shuster, who chairs the--I always say the railway--the
Rail Subcommittee, but it is Rails, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials--did I get it wrong--including responsibility in both
the committee and in Congress.
We are pleased also to be joined by another Transportation
Committee member, the gentleman from Texas. He is part of that
powerful group of 89 freshmen. We have 19 Republican freshmen
on this committee, and he is one of our new members, Blake
Farenthold from the State of Texas. And we are pleased to have
him join us today.
And we are also pleased to have minority counsel. Thank you
so much for joining us and being with us today. We have the
staff director also as part of our committee staff with us. So,
that is the makeup of our panel. We have got Mary acting as
counsel for me this morning--welcome, Mark--of the majority
staff.
On the panel of witnesses, first of all, I have to welcome
probably one of the most important people in aviation in the
United States and a great leader, who helped us move in some
difficult times under some difficult circumstances in aviation
policy and programs, Randy Babbitt, who is the Administrator.
We are pleased to have Dr. Johnson, who is the president here
of the Embry-Riddle University. General Johnson does a great
job of leading the premiere aeronautical institute and
university not only in the United States, but the world. And we
are pleased to have, again, you host us here today.
We have got Gerald Dillingham. He's from the General
Accountability Office, GAO, as we affectionately refer to them.
They have testified many times before our committee, and they
do an outstanding job on oversight, some investigations, and
give an important view of Federal programs. We are pleased to
have you with us.
Then, we are going to talk about a top hitting panel of
witnesses. We have probably one of the finest FAA
administrators following the footsteps of Marion Blakey, who
served. I had the honor to be chair of the Aviation
Subcommittee. She is actually one of the people who helped us
launch some of the NextGen effort, and she now is the president
and CEO for Aerospace Industries. I welcome the former
Secretary and current president and CEO, Marion Blakey.
And then, another distinguished gentleman that represents
one of the most important aspects of aviation, and actually
people who use and be involved in all of the next generation,
use software and systems to develop them, we have the president
and CEO, Pete Bunce. And Pete Bunce, he is with the General
Aviation Manufacturers. He is on the end.
And then I am going to blow it, Alan Caslavka?
Mr. Caslavka. Caslavka.
Mr. Mica. Good. A fellow Czechoslovakian surname. Most
people think Mica is Italian, but it is also Czechoslovakian.
But he is vice president of avionics at GE Aviation, and we are
honored to have him here.
The order of this will be as follows. I have an opening
statement, and then I will refer to Members for opening
statements, and then I will go to our witnesses. Normally we
have 5 minutes; we would prefer it. I have read most of your
testimony already. If you condense some of it [inaudible]. But
with that, I will recognize myself, and then I will turn it
over to Members, and then we will [inaudible]. Again, welcome.
But I think today is a very important day because the
people who are on this panel and Members of Congress I am
sitting beside, and that is pretty decisive because I do not
intend for there to be another short-term extension of our FAA
bill. I happened to be chair in 2002. I headed that office from
close to a year 2000 and then as chairman of aviation, to pass
a 4-year bill that expired in 2007 passed in 2002. So, for more
than 4\1/2\ years now, we have not had a long-term FAA
reauthorization. As some of you know, we are very frustrated by
this. I agreed when the [inaudible], and since February when I
became the chair, there were three more, and I am the fourth
one, and I said that we have got to be the last. We did have
sort of a showdown, FAA and Congress, on the matter, and
through that I believe we will now have a long-term bill.
We will have it on the President's desk before Christmas
and certainly before January 31st. So, that is why this hearing
is particularly important because one of the most important
components for the bill is the conditions we have for next
generation aircraft. We did some things in the last
legislation, which is 4\1/2\ years old now, and it is overdue
for updating the policy.
The bill that we propose does some things, but I think that
we need the proper [inaudible] some of it, witnesses just
before we started. We want to hear anything about these new
provisions to alter, to improve to [inaudible] some dysfunction
that works best [inaudible]. This is not my work or Members'
work, but [inaudible] hopefully can move us forward [inaudible]
plan.
Specifically, the legislation currently [inaudible] the
NextGen technology to include accountability and management for
modernization, that sets immediate performance methods, which
we are hopeful hold FAA accountable for [inaudible] and be
responsible for, again, putting all this together.
It sets a deadline for the deployment of NextGen
[inaudible] administrator to utilize private sector and FCC to
accelerate the deployment of NextGen technology, and also
flight plans. Furthermore, to streamline we have a
certification process for NextGen technology, and for flight
paths. It sets a rulemaking deadline for offering more
beneficial ADS-B, and it also directs FAA to leverage private
sector capital to accelerate the NextGen [inaudible].
It provides a process for the timing for the acceleration
of FAA facilities so NextGens are enabled. That is also
important. And, finally, it provides [inaudible] safe
integration of our unmanned aviation systems into the National
Airspace System.
So, we came here to hear from you today to begin to assess
where we are, where we must go, and how we must get there at a
very pivotal time when the Congress [inaudible] legislation
[inaudible].
Also, at the conclusion of today's hearing at 2:00, as you
know, there will be an opening of the Test Bed. [Inaudible]
that we have and we will know about the progress of that
particular enterprise today and the other [inaudible] their
mission.
But the key to all this I think was summed up in a summary
that I read [inaudible]. It says that the FAA has said that
there are significant quantifiable benefits associated with
proper implementation of NextGen. FAA's estimates show that by
2018, next generation air traffic control management
improvements will reduce total delays by about 35 percent. And
also, they will have a dramatic impact on fuel prices and
[inaudible] compared to what would happen if we have no
[inaudible]. And the delay in the production will provide the
benefit of $23 billion accumulated from 2010 to 2018 to
aircraft operators [inaudible] project management areas.
So, getting back to airspace management improvements plan
from 2010 forward, we can save about $1.4 billion of aviation
fuel and carbon dioxide emissions, about 14 million tons.
[Inaudible] aircraft. The first would be an installation of
next generation avionics. It also drives job growth [inaudible]
economic prosperity and high-paying employment, and hopefully
this activity will alleviate the need to, again, [inaudible]
some of the finest people we have in the industry who actually
[inaudible] in the system, so the combination of that FAA
[inaudible] and management, to administer the program.
And, finally, we could not have a better university or more
well-qualified personnel here [inaudible] aviation and avionics
than Embry-Riddle University.
So, we are pleased you could join us. I hope you can take
some today to get some information on today's hearing, and
[inaudible] done here and where we do go from here.
We have been joined by the Honorable Sandy Adams, and she
and I have the privilege to represent [inaudible] community and
representing [inaudible].
So, with that, let me yield first to Mr. Petri, chair of
the House Aviation Subcommittee.
Mr. Petri. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for inviting
us [inaudible] the involvement of non-profit private
organizations and of industry [inaudible] technology
[inaudible] aviation [inaudible] safety that it will provide
for the expansion of the capacity of the system, for the
efficiency that it will provide to the airline industry. The
estimates are it will save some 15 to 25 percent of fuel as it
goes forward, so it's green technology. And it is something
that will maintain the leadership of our country for the
foreseeable future in aviation if we proceed with it in a
determined and orderly and well-organized way.
So, I thank your panelists and you for having this
important hearing and Embry-Riddle for making a contribution to
this national effort.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Petri. We will yield to the
chairman, Bill Shuster from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
bringing us here to Florida for this very important hearing.
I just want to highlight the importance of public/private
partnerships, and how that is what we have today, and we need
to continue to look across the scope of the Government to find
out ways to bring the private sector in and leverage the
Federal taxpayer dollars with the private sector to be able to
bring projects like this that are going to be very, very
beneficial to the traveling public, to Congress of the United
States. And so, it is great to be here, and thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Shuster. The gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. I would like to thank you all for your
hospitality. It is good to be back in Florida also as a regular
visitor on vacation. I am excited to be here and excited in the
anticipation in watching the way that Government should operate
working with the private sector and academia to come up with
the best solutions that in the long run will save both the
Government and industry time and money.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And I would like to welcome to the
panel--she is not a member of our committee, but I ask
unanimous consent that we recognize her. Without objection, so
ordered. And welcome, Representative Sandy Adams.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to be here,
and I am looking forward to the discussion of NextGen. We have
been talking about it for a long time now, and it is a good
public/private partnership. I am just happy to be here, and I
appreciate you allowing me to be here today.
Mr. Mica. And while we do not have a Democrat member of the
committee with us today, and I have given permission for some
of them to attend some other functions around the country, we
do have counsel from the Democratic staff, Alex Burkett. And
did you want to make any comment?
Mr. Burkett. Mr. Chairman, I respectfully would not, other
than just to thank you on behalf of the Democratic members for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And we have had wide bipartisan
support for the legislation. Thank you for your participation.
The important thing now is we get the job done, and I look
forward to working with everyone in that regard.
So, I think we have covered our membership and those
attending. The order of business will be now to hear from our
panel of witnesses. And, again, we are delighted, and I thank
you, too. Usually when I have the Administrator, he will sit on
a panel, and we bring in red velvet carpeting, and we have a
very special place for him. And I thank him for allowing us to
have him join the entire panel, but we will recognize him
first, thank him for his service, and actually just delighted
to have his leadership in, again, working on this important
issue, being here to report to us, and also see the Test Bed.
So, welcome, Mr. Administrator, and you are recognized.

TESTIMONIES OF HON. J. RANDOLPH BABBITT, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION; GERALD L. DILLINGHAM, PH.D., DIRECTOR,
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE; JOHN P. JOHNSON, PH.D., PRESIDENT, EMBRY-RIDDLE
AERONAUTICAL UNIVERSITY; ALAN CASLAVKA, PRESIDENT, GE AVIATION
SYSTEMS-AVIONICS; HON. MARION C. BLAKEY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AEROSPACE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION; AND PETER
J. BUNCE, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, GENERAL
AVIATION MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION

Mr. Babbitt. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Chairman Mica,
Congressman Petri, members of the committee. Thank you all for
the opportunity to come here today to highlight the
capabilities of the Florida Test Bed.
Mr. Mica. Can you all hear him? Move that up a little bit.
We do not want to miss a word, Randy.
Mr. Babbitt. That concludes my remarks.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Babbitt. Thank you very much for the opportunity to
come and speak with you about the Florida Test Bed and the
things that we are undertaking here. It is an exciting
expansion of the Federal Aviation Administration's NextGen
testing operation.
I am pleased to be able to join you all here in Florida. I
grew up here, so it is nice to be back. And as I was explaining
to Dr. Johnson, I actually learned to fly at Embry-Riddle, so
it is a little humbling for me to come back here.
The FAA's three NextGen Test Beds here in Florida, in
Atlantic City, and in North Texas provide an opportunity for
real world testing for us, demonstration environments that
facilitate both research and development, as well as real world
demonstrations and evaluations. They offer us a variety of
resources that offer us ways to develop NextGen technologies,
along with the concepts and various implementation techniques
that we need.
And today, we are marking the completion of renovations and
enhancements here at the Florida Test Bed, the enhancements to
equip this facility to handle not just today's testing
demonstrations, but they are also preparing us to take in new
ideas in the innovations of tomorrow to give us the ability to
integrate a full range of NextGen systems, and evaluate
operational impacts.
And the dozens of systems that it houses today are really
just a beginning truly. The Test Bed will constantly be
modified, as they all are, as we complete the demonstrations
and engineer additional platforms. We also look forward to the
new technologies that the Test Bed will yield. This is a great
facility, and it offers us the capacity for innovation and
prototype testing, as well as demonstration.
And I think key to this is having access to the resources
that Embry-Riddle provides to us that enhances the
effectiveness in what we can do. And this combination will make
it the birthplace of industry-driven concepts that will advance
NextGen and the benefits that come from NextGen.
The FAA has awarded a $22 million contract towards NextGen
research and development through an agreement with Embry-Riddle
University. This agreement enables the FAA to leverage the
experience and expertise that resides here at Embry-Riddle and
many of the industry's partners also. We get to capitalize on
all of that. It has already resulted in a number of solutions
of the product and industry collaboration, and we expect to see
even more developments ahead.
Although we are pleased to cut the ribbon here today and
witness demonstrations of the cutting edge systems that exist,
this event is more than just a celebration of what we have
already accomplished. It is truly a call urging our industry
partners to take advantage of the promise of the public and
private partnership going forward that this facility
represents.
We truly look forward to the evolution of our air
transportation system. The chairman has cited a number of the
benefits that we expect to receive as we move forward. NextGen
is going to make travel more convenient, more dependable. It is
going to improve safety and efficiency all at the same time.
And a continuous roll out of improvements and upgrades, all of
these will come as we pioneer things here in the Test Bed.
This building has the ability to guide and track air
traffic more precisely in order to save fuel and reduce costs.
We will be able to test and implement those as we move forward.
So, NextGen, as we know, is already a better way of doing
business. It is a better way for the FAA, for the airlines, the
airports, and the traveling public. It is better for safety,
better for our environment, better for efficiency and
flexibility, and overall it is better for the economy.
Congress has appropriated about $2.8 billion for NextGen in
the last 5 years. The President has requested another billion
dollars in the American Jobs Act for NextGen. We will continue
to invest in the coming years, and those investments will bring
us substantial returns. The chairman highlighted for us a
number of those, and we expect to recoup our entire initial
investment by 2018. We decided a 35 percent reduction compared
to what would happen if we did not do anything. We find those
to be very accurate projections.
All in all, we propose to save about 1.4 billion gallons of
fuel; that will cut carbon dioxide emissions by 14 million
tons. That is a lot of carbon emission reduction.
The NextGen benefits, however, do depend on getting
stakeholders to invest in avionics, ground equipment, staffing,
training, and procedures we will all have to use in order to
take advantage of the infrastructure that the FAA establishes.
Their willingness to make these investments depends in
return on the business case, their assessment of how valuable
these benefits will be, and their confidence that the FAA can
deliver in the timeframes and the manner required in order to
realize those benefits.
Facilities like this one right here, this Florida NextGen
Test Bed, helped make that case. Demonstrations and operational
trials of specific NextGen systems and procedures actually let
stakeholders see the very real benefits that NextGen can bring.
They mitigate program risk. They show us whether we are on the
right track in our technical approaches. They provide insight
as to how equipment should be designed for the best operation,
the best maintenance, and the human interface and automation
comparisons. In this way, the Florida Test Bed will spur
innovation. It will spur collaboration with the industry to
speed the realization of the many benefits that NextGen has to
offer.
NextGen is happening now, and I would note that if we delay
the investment, our long-term costs to this Nation, to our
passengers, and the entire environment overall will far exceed
the costs of moving forward today.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared remarks, and I
would be pleased to answer any questions at the appropriate
time.
Mr. Mica. I think what we will do, if you do not mind, is
we will go through everyone.
Mr. Babbitt. Sure.
Mr. Mica. And thank you for your patience. I am going to
call on our next Government witness, which is Dr. Gerald
Dillingham.
We have an important Federal partner in examining some of
these programs and undertakings, and that is GAO. So, I thought
it would be appropriate, first, if we heard from the
Administrator, and that we hear from Mr. Dillingham now, his
candid open comments.
Welcome, sir. You are recognized.
Mr. Dillingham. Thank you, Chairman Mica, Chairman Petri,
Chairman Shuster, members of the committee. My statement today
discusses the role of the NextGen Test Bed in the development
of NextGen capabilities, together with some observations on how
it can generally support a more robust R&D and technology
transfer function throughout FAA.
As we have reported over the years to this committee, ATC
modernization efforts often fail to meet cost, schedule, and
performance targets for a number of reasons. In some cases,
systems do not perform as intended because system operators and
users were not involved early and continuously in technology
planning and development. In other cases, commitment faltered
also when projects lacked a home or a champion in FAA.
In addition, concerns about FAA's credibility, which arose
when promised benefits did not materialize, or the agency
stopped a program after the airlines had equipped, discouraged
airlines from making further commitments needed to implement
the technologies.
These issues plagued FAA's past ATC modernization effort,
and despite substantial improvements, have surfaced again with
the ERAM system. ERAM is now projected to be almost 4 years
behind schedule and hundreds of millions of dollars over budget
in part because FAA did not ensure adequate collaboration and
cooperation among stakeholders.
The three test facilities that currently make up the
NextGen Test Bed have the potential to address these past
issues and make a significant contribution to accelerating the
implementation of NextGen. The Test Bed is designed to bring
together stakeholders early in the technology development
process so participants can understand the benefits of
operational improvements, identify potential risk, and foster
partnerships between Government, industry, and academia.
Furthermore, the Test Bed provides access to the systems
now in the NAS, which allows for testing and evaluating the
integration and interoperability of new technologies. Such
testing and evaluation are critical, since many of today's NAS
systems will be in service for many years to come, and the new
NextGen technologies and capabilities will have to be
integrated with them.
The Test Bed can also serve as a forum for private
companies to learn from each other and eventually enter into
technology acquisition agreements or technology transfers with
the FAA, with significantly reduced risk. However, our recent
work on technology transfer has identified some lingering
stakeholder concerns. For example, although work at the test
site has allowed private sector participants to see how they
might benefit from the technologies being tested, some of the
participants told us it was not always clear what happened to
the technologies that were successfully tested at the sites.
They said in some cases it was not apparent whether the
technologies being tested had a clear path to implementation,
or a clear path to FAA's NAS infrastructure roadmap.
FAA's linking together of testing facilities, expanding the
Florida facility, building a research and technology park
adjacent to the new to the New Jersey facility to complement
the capabilities of Embry-Riddle, are very positive steps that
should also help to address some of these issues.
Our recent technology transfer work has also identified a
gap in collaboration between FAA and the partner agencies that
can inhibit technology transfer. For example, after several
years of NextGen planning, FAA, DOD, and DHS have yet to fully
identify what R&D technology or expertise at these agencies
could support NextGen activities. According to NextGen
stakeholders we spoke with, FAA could more effectively engage
partner agencies' long-term planning by aligning implementation
activities to partner agency mission priorities, and by
obtaining buy-in for actions required to transfer on to NAS.
We have recommended that FAA and its partner agencies work
together to clarify NextGen interagency priorities and enhanced
technology transfers. Those recommendations are still pending.
To its credit, FAA has implemented several of our
recommendations for realigning its management structure and
improving its oversight of NextGen acquisition, which in turn
should help the agency to better manage the portfolios of
capabilities across program offices. These changes have also
placed a greater focus on accountability for NextGen
implementation, and can help address issues like finding a home
for FAA technologies. However, it is too early to tell whether
these latest reorganizations will produce the desired results.
Mr. Chairman, in summary, we believe that FAA recognizes
the importance and necessity of partnerships, and has taken
several important steps to improve its ability to manage and
enhance these technology transfer activities. We will continue
to monitor developments and outcomes in this area and provide
information and analysis to this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, and, again, we will withhold
questions.
Now, what I will do is turn to two of the partners in this
Test Bed activity. First, we will hear from academia, and
representing Embry-Riddle, their president, Dr. Johnson.
Welcome. You are recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to host the hearing today and to serve as a host
for the Florida NextGen Test Bed facility.
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University was founded in 1926,
prior to the development of the aerospace industry. We worked
closely with those industries to provide the needed personnel
and manpower to make them successful. We have always had a
corporate focus as we looked at partnering with aerospace
companies. That has not changed as we develop next generation
technology and make our air transportation system safer and
more efficient.
The university is really quite unique. We offer 40 degree
programs from the bachelors', masters', and through the Ph.D.
level. The thing that I think makes the university great is
that we have an outstanding college of aviation and an
aerospace engineering program that is the largest and among the
best schools of its type in the world. We also have an
engineering and space physics degree program that is one of the
largest ABET accredited programs in the country. That synergy
between aviation and engineering provides for wonderful
opportunities for research. Problems are identified, tested,
and real-world solutions are found.
We have been partnering with the aerospace industry, Mr.
Chairman, for all of our existence. I agree with Dr.
Dillingham's comments that we look very closely to not only
Congress, but to the FAA to provide coordination of efforts
across our aerospace industry partners, universities, and
Government initiatives. Coordination is going to be very
important to the future of the welfare of our aviation industry
and our national air transportation system.
The University is uniquely prepared to do research. We have
not only great colleges of aviation and engineering, but we
also have a fleet of 100 small airplanes. We can redesign and
test the avionics package on those airplanes. We can put
biofuel in one engine of a twin and put regular avgas in the
other and test them in a cost-effective manner. We can compare
the efficacy of a biofuel versus a traditional petroleum-based
fuel.
Mr. Chairman, we have been involved in developing NextGen
technology in a very real sense for many years. In 2003, we
equipped every one of our airplanes with satellite-based GPS-
type technology, ADS-B. We have been flying those planes going
on 8 years, and have had an opportunity to determine that the
GPS satellite-based type of technology substantially enhances
and increases not only accuracy in terms of identifying where
planes are, but improves communication with the tower, allows
us to see other airplanes in terms of altitude, closing speed,
and to make efforts to separate aircraft to prevent accidents
from happening. So, I think the development of satellite
technology is something that is very important to safety.
Now, that is just one aspect of NextGen technology. We have
also been working on improving ground safety by preventing
runway incursions. We have been working with high-speed digital
cameras along the runways and lighting systems that tell the
approaching pilot that is on final whether or not there is an
airplane on the runway. Active lighting systems will prevent
incursions and accidents. All of those things are very
important.
We are so pleased to be a partner with the FAA. It is doing
a great job. We look forward to establishing additional
relationships with our industry leaders, and feel we can help
better serve our industry and the flying public. We feel that
the Florida NextGen Test Bed is making great progress and
offers great opportunities to strengthen our air transportation
system.
In a very real sense, the Test Bed serves as a microcosm of
our national air transportation system. We can test things
efficiently and quickly, and make recommendations to the FAA
and to Congress to improve the safety and efficiency of the
system.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Dr. Johnson.
And we will turn now to Alan Caslavka. And Alan is the vice
president, Avionics, for GE Aviation. And I think they have
about total of 17 private sector partners in is this, and you
are one of them.
Welcome, and you are recognized.
Mr. Caslavka. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. members of the
committee, Alan Caslavka. As Chairman Mica indicated, I am vice
president of aviation systems within the avionics group at
General Electric. I thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.
General Electric is making large investments to improve the
global infrastructure not only in aviation, but in power
generation, health delivery, and rail facilities as well. In
the aviation world, most people think of GE as an engine
provider, which we are, but we have broadened our horizons
beyond the engine domain to focus on efficiency of broader
aviation systems around the world.
We are fully engaged in trying to solve the toughest
problems of aerospace and air traffic management. We see a
tremendous opportunity to fundamentally transform our airspace
and air traffic management infrastructure, to safely
accommodate traffic growth more efficiently, more reliably, and
in a way that positively impacts our environment and our
communities.
In the U.S., we are focused on advancing NextGen. GE is
currently involved with a number of next generation programs
with the FAA, some of which are here at Embry-Riddle. We value
tremendously the public/private partnership, and are hopeful
that by collaborating with Government and academia, we will be
able to accelerate the delivery of the benefit to aviation
owners and operators.
GE Aviation Systems is the avionics member of the
integrated airport initiative, the consortium that we are
involved with here today at Embry-Riddle. The Test Bed program
will host a number of demonstration programs that will allow us
to develop and refine operational concepts, as well as validate
the benefits and the technologies that it can provide. These
programs help quantify what the benefits will be to key
stakeholders, and often include life flights that lay the
groundwork for transitioning into ongoing operations.
The programs that GE has been involved with at the Test
Bed, though limited, have shown the value of collaborative R&D
and the impact of an integrated demonstration center to
showcase the combined NextGen capabilities of the FAA, Embry-
Riddle, and the industry team. One FAA funded project, referred
to as task G, is designed to leverage existing flight
management systems, of which we have a domain expertise, and
the technology to validate trajectory-based operations, which
we believe is key going forward in this particular domain.
Implementation will help aircraft fly more optimized
routes, conduct idle descents, and also to have more efficient
shorter paths to the terminal.
We look forward to funding under another project, task E,
where we will demonstrate the flight of a Predator UAS unmanned
air system, with a modified 737 flight management system that
will digitally link to air traffic control. These proof of
concept flights will show the ability of the FMS equipped UAS
to fly very precise paths, even in a situation where you have
lots of flying contingencies, while giving air traffic
controllers a high degree of confidence in the UAS intended
path.
Demonstrations under task E and another FAA program,
network enabled operation, otherwise known as NEO, later this
month will help pave the way for expanded UAS access to
national airspace.
The increasing involvement of the FAA in Test Bed
activities is valuable, not only to fund demonstrations, but to
enable moving the technologies closer to the demonstration from
a demonstration into an operational use in national airspace.
We recommend that Test Bed projects be expanded beyond just
demonstrations to include a forum for funded collaborative R&D
programs for near and midterm next generation capabilities.
I would like to take a moment to talk about the value of
collaboration between the FAA and private sector in the
deployment of near-term NextGen economic and environmental
benefits. GE has developed a great deal of experience deploying
performance-based navigation--specifically, RNP paths is what
it is referred to. In collaboration with the Government,
regulatory agencies, and airlines, we have designed and
deployed more than 340 RNP procedures in over seven countries.
Based on that experience, we find clear and compelling evidence
that PBN, if implemented properly, can immediately reduce
aircraft track miles, fuel consumption, and CO2 emissions. The
kinds of near-term benefits PBN brings unalign with the recent
recommendation of the NextGen Advisory Committee to develop and
deploy RNP instrument procedures that would allow currently
equipped users to routinely fly them and achieve associated
benefits. We estimate that over 50 percent of the aircraft
flying in airspace today have that capability.
The quickest and most efficient way to deploy these
procedures, we believe, is to engage qualified commercial PBN
service providers, like ourselves here at GE, and work closely
with the FAA to design and deploy them. The FAA policy for this
collaboration already exists within the current regulatory
framework, and work could begin immediately. Collaborative
research and development and public/private partnerships are
critical to deliver tangible benefits of NextGen to the
operators who utilize our airspace. NextGen demonstrations need
to be about getting on with the benefits of the technologies
and the operations into the hands of airspace users faster and
more smoothly.
GE Aviation is proud to be a part of the integrated airport
initiative and the Florida Test Bed. We look forward to working
with the FAA, Embry-Riddle, and our industry partners to
demonstrate real NextGen benefits for the operational users of
NAS in the weeks and months to come.
Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you for your testimony. I will turn now to
the president and chief executive officer of the Aerospace
Industries Association, Marion Blakey.
Ms. Blakey. Thank you, Chairman Mica. Chairman Petri,
Chairman Shuster, and Congressman Farenthold, and Alex, thank
you very much for having this today because this is an
important event, an important hearing as you unveil the Florida
NextGen Test Bed.
As you know, I was here about 16 months ago, so this is
really remarkable to see the progress that has been made since
then. And I have to commend Dr. Johnson and his team for what
he has accomplished. You've got a lot to be proud of in a very
short period of time.
I am here representing the Aerospace Industries
Association, AIA, which is the premiere trade association of
manufacturers and producers of aerospace and defense industry
products. Over 340 members manufacture the aircraft that fly in
our airspace, the systems that guide them, and the satellites
and unmanned aircraft that are a part of the wave of the
future. Our members are vitally interested in seeing NextGen
succeed, and many of them are partners here with the NextGen
Test Bed.
Mr. Chairman, I do not think there is any question about
the cost benefit of NextGen. Tom Captain, who you have recently
had at a hearing, has done a study for Deloitte Touche. I think
he captured it perfectly in one of the hearings where he said,
``NextGen has an open and shut business case.''
What we hear from industry, though, is a call for stronger
coordination. I think you have heard some of that this morning
from the private sector, including aircraft manufacturers,
airlines, and the manufacturers of equipment. As we speak, new
ADSB ground stations are being commissioned, more aircraft are
equipping and flying. But we are not realizing the full value
of these benefits. The development and approval of procedures
is simply lagging the technology. Mr. Caslavka just referred to
this, and I have to say, Mr. Administrator, we are very
encouraged that the FAA has certainly bought into public/
private partnerships. And the example here in Florida could be
applied vigorously all over the country, we believe, to advance
NextGen.
To its credit, as I say, FAA is responding. The agency
recently reorganized the NextGen management team, raised its
organizational priority, and we are very delighted that the
NextGen executive now reports directly to deputy administrator
Huerta.
We know that NextGen is a priority of the agency, but we
also fear that the coming budget reductions are going to make
it hard for NextGen to stay on track.
FAA's long-range budget was already programmed at flat
levels to the year 2016. Then the Budget Control Act, passed in
July, required funding cuts below these levels. And if that
were not enough, we now see that further reductions, part of
the sequester, may occur when the Joint Select Committee on
Deficit Reduction issues its recommendations later this month.
This is a perilous situation.
And as, Mr. Chairman, you know better than anyone else, FAA
is primarily an operating agency. Two-thirds of its funding
goes to operating costs. Seventy percent of that is needed to
make payroll. We all know what happens when operating budgets
are pitted against transformational capabilities. Operating
budgets win.
We also know that the agency's facilities and equipment
budget, where most of NextGen is funded, was already projected
to decline slightly over the next 5 years. I fear that if these
additional cuts are disproportionately applied to NextGen, we
may never recover the momentum we have today, or regain the
support of a skeptical industry. We will lose our technological
stature in global air traffic management to other, fast-moving
nations in Europe and Asia. And when our economy and air travel
begin to pick up--as we know they will--we will not be ready
with the new technologies that are needed. In short, Mr.
Chairman, as budgets get tighter, FAA's role in explaining and
demonstrating NextGen's benefits will become more critical.
Likewise, AIA is doing its part in that education campaign, to
make sure that our aviation system remains second to none.
Mr. Chairman, the National Airspace System is a ballet of
sorts that plays out each day in our skies and at our airports.
It involves the planning, coordination and actions of flight
crews, dispatchers, airports, and air traffic controllers, to
name just a few. FAA's services are providing businesslike
benefits to the U.S. economy, something relatively rare in the
Federal Government. Inefficiencies in the management of our air
traffic control system, or lack of capital investment, have a
direct impact on industry, and stifle our ability to compete.
And that's where the NextGen Test Bed comes in.
FAA and industry need an environment where NextGen concepts
are tested without affecting the day-to-day operations of the
air traffic control system. The agency needs to model,
simulate, and verify new technologies under different
scenarios. These results will help the FAA make data-driven
decisions that speed up NextGen's implementation, and bring
benefits sooner.
Mr. Chairman, there is no better institution to assist FAA
in the Test Bed than Embry-Riddle, the world's largest and most
prestigious aviation and aerospace university. They have
advised the FAA for over 30 years, and I counted on their
advice when I served as FAA Administrator. Professors, retired
controllers, and pilots, as well as Embry-Riddle's fleet of
over 90 aircraft will all have access to the new NextGen Test
Bed.
With the help of a growing number of industry partners,
Embry-Riddle has doubled the size of the Test Bed and vastly
increased its software and tracking capabilities. The Test Bed
now works with at least 15 companies. In fact, industry has
invested at least $1 million of its own in the Test Bed. This
is a clear sign of industry confidence. And it is a great
example of public-private partnership--companies, academia, and
the Government working, and jointly funding, a program to
address important challenges.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we have recently been
celebrating the life of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. With his
inventive genius, Jobs helped untether the world from the wires
of mainframes, landline telephones, and CD changers. And that's
exactly what NextGen promises to do for aviation. It promises
to untether air traffic control from ground radars, phone
lines, and voice switches. It promises to untether aircraft
from the fixed airways they fly through today, allowing them to
fly routes that are most efficient for their users.
Just as Steve Jobs saw that the world of consumer
electronics was ready to move beyond boundaries set in the
1960s, so too is the world of aviation. In fact, the aerospace
industry is chafing at those bonds today. So it's exciting to
be here as Embry-Riddle, its industry partners, and FAA help
make the vision of NextGen a reality.
Mr. Mica. Thank you for your testimony. Mr. Bunce.
Mr. Bunce.----several Embry-Riddle graduates, and I rely on
them each day and very senior leadership positions to be able
to help guide the general aviation portion of this industry,
and the product that you produce here is first hand top notch.
And it also is pretty neat for me to be able to walk around
this campus. Every time I come down here, I am really struck by
the nature of the international flavor that you get down here.
And our industry is global. Right now, we are hurting badly
because of the economy in the U.S. and Europe, and over 70
percent of the revenue that we will bring in this year is from
sales of aircraft going over to the Far East down to Latin
America and the Brazil area, and areas of the Middle East. So,
the global nature of this industry really relies on the
education that----
----is out at airports. We are partnering with academia to
be able to leverage the ADSB technology that is going to be
mandated in most aircraft by 2020. And the traffic situational
awareness alerting system basically allows general aviation
aircraft to have an alert warning system like the airlines have
with their system call TCAS, but TCAS is just too expensive to
put in most of the general aviation aircraft, other than just
the high-end business type of aircraft. So, this is extremely
important, and MIT is partnering with the FAA on that issue.
We are celebrating the 10th anniversary of a program that
we called the Center for General Aviation Research. CGAR is the
acronym we give to it. But it is part of the Center of
Excellence program that the FAA has set up with academia, of
which Embry-Riddle is one of the premiere players in this.
What we get out of that is absolutely phenomenal. When you
look at the fleet of aircraft that is out here on the ramp at
Embry-Riddle, just being able to use ADSB to tracking the
fleet, getting the data in that helps us understand we are in
high-density aircraft and traffic environments so we can go and
be able to use ADSB to be able to precisely manage aircraft is
important.
Dr. Johnson mentioned what we are doing on the research for
the unleaded avgas that we have to convert to. We know we have
got to get away from leaded fuel, and they are helping us
tremendously there.
Accident trend analysis becomes very important, and
probably the premier thing that we are getting out of the CR
initiative is experience in looking at glass cockpit technology
and looking at training standards and testing standards to be
able to allow people to use glass cockpits. And we all know
that that technology is now going into a lot of airline
aircraft, but if you go into a modern business jet or a turbo
prop today, or the high-end pistons, you are going to find
actually a more advanced glass cockpit that you find in most of
the airlines right now. And so, the research that we are doing
here is very important.
Now, could we do some things better? I think we can. We do
not have a lot of money in industry right now, and we are not
able to give academia a lot of research dollars to help us with
some of the issues and some of the projects that we want help
with. But we certainly would appreciate a call from all of our
institutions saying, hey, we got students that are going to
have to write papers; are there topics that you want us to
research for you? And we can leverage them, and actually it
helps the students because you get a paper, and one of my
employees is a prime example of this. He wrote an outstanding
paper, and Cessna hired him the day he graduated just off the
paper that he wrote here. And we can leverage off of that.
Also, the FAA is very software dependent right now, or we
as an industry are software dependent, and the FAA's very
limited resources to be able to go and help us certify product
that is almost wholly software dependent. We are in a situation
right now because of resources available at the FAA that were
in sequencing issues where we have got to streamline processes
to be able to get our product to market. But in addition to
that, we need to be able to use the expertise that we have in
academia with software expertise to be able to help the FAA
help industry to be able to produce the products for NextGen.
So, we are absolutely committed as the General Aviation
Manufacturers to this public/private partnership, both between
the FAA and industry, industry and academia, and academia and
the FAA, because that is the only way we will make NextGen
work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. And I want to thank all of our
witnesses for their testimony. And the next order of business
will be questions from Members of Congress to our panelists.
I brought this headline with me. It says, ``modernization
of air traffic may be delayed.'' It was a couple of months ago
in the Washington Post. And we just heard the GAO cite that,
let us see, that we do not need the most costs or schedules set
forth, and gave an example of ERAM some 4 years behind
schedule.
Some of these programs are important components, parts of
any next generation air traffic control technology. Mr.
Administrator, maybe you could respond.
The other thing, too, Ms. Blakey raised the issue of
financing. I have checked in periodically, and told that the
finances are adequate, but I heard that we are not keeping up
in other aspects of moving forward. Would you like to comment?
Mr. Babbitt. Certainly. I guess one of the issues with
these projects, and you noted ERAM; that is a good example.
ERAM is probably one of the largest software that is currently
going on in the country [inaudible] doing other things.
The program has been going 9 years. When I became the
administrator, one of the things we clearly had run into some
technical difficulties. I literally stopped the program, and I
asked everyone to just step back, and let us completely
reevaluate where we are. What is the issues? Are we having
proper program management oversight? This is technology; are we
really being asked to deploy oversight and management program.
It was being vetted before our eyes.
Yes, we did it. I am very comfortable now, however, that we
have reestablished a new waterfall schedule in communication.
We are on that track. We are currently, to the best of my
knowledge, on budget. It is a huge project, which you can
imagine. We are changing an entire analog system that has been
in existence for nearly 40 years in a complete digital
integrated environment. But I am comfortable in saying going
forward I am very comfortable with the targets, and we should
be able to stay on the revised scheduling.
Mr. Mica. Dr. Dillingham, one of the things that concerns
me--we do have three Test Beds. I have read your analysis of
their mission. Do you view any of it as duplicative, or do you
think they all serve, again, a beneficial purpose in this long-
term development?
Mr. Dillingham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we analyzed the
three Test Beds, we did not see anything duplicative. But what
we understand is that research has to be validated. And we saw
some of that, but we would not call it duplicative. But it is
the kind of repetition that you need to do when you are doing
research to reduce risk.
So, the short answer is, no, we did not find any
duplication that we would say is unnecessary.
Mr. Mica. Well, one of the things that was raised, issues
that was raised, is we have developed some technology and maybe
some systems or some protocols, but there seems to be a delay
or a failure to utilize, take these improvements to the next
level. Any suggestions? Maybe two of the participants, Mr.
Caslavka? Any ideas on how we could improve that? You are
involved in an important component. Do you see that as a
problem, and how can we solve it?
Mr. Caslavka. Yeah. I mean, from my perspective, I want to
see us continue to advance in that area. You know,
specifically, I see it as a benefit for business and for
academia, an improvement for business and academia in that
area.
As you know, when we look at what we hope to gain from our
adventure here with Embry-Riddle and the organizations that we
have here, we have performance-based navigation and front
management systems that aid in the development of a Test Bed
and the initiatives here with the tasks we are involved with.
And improving flight in the national airspace is fundamentally
important as over the next 20 years we see issues with flight
traffic almost doubling in that timeframe.
Mr. Mica. Well, you know, you are from the private sector.
You are not doing this just to keep all these occupied Wall
Street people happy. You want to sell a product, either
hardware or software, or systems, and it appears that while we
may be developing some, say, the next generation of equipment
software technology, that it is not going anywhere. How do we
take it to the next level?
Mr. Caslavka. So, I do not necessarily view it as not going
anywhere. If you look at airspace travel today, a lot of the
systems that are in use today in air traffic do have adequate
flight management systems and adequate performance-based
standards of opportunities. So, it is just a matter of
continuing to evolve that and grow it beyond where it is today.
We are currently working initiatives that are heavily
involved in performance-based flight management systems. And if
you look at some of the studies that we have recently done, I
mentioned earlier that we have over 340 PBN-based solutions
today. But if you take a look at a recent study we put together
for the FAA, we clearly see the benefits of emissions, fuel
savings, noise pollution, and safety associated with the study
that we did.
And we looked at 46 airports here in the United States, and
what the benefits would be associated with implementing
performance-based navigation departures and arrivals. In those
46 airports, over 13 million gallons of fuel could be saved
over a 1-year period, 274 million pounds of CO2 emissions, as
well as $65 million of operating costs in 2 years of flight
time.
So, the initiatives are getting off the ground, and what we
are doing here with the tests that we have with Embry-Riddle
are contributing. So, I do not view it as not going anywhere,
but it needs to continue to move along.
Mr. Mica. Well, one of the customers for the equipment, the
big customer is FAA. Mr. Babbitt, one of the things that we
have got in our proposed legislation--let us see. It
streamlines the FAA certification for NextGen technologies and
flight paths. Is that adequate to give you the direction?
Again, things are produced. We want them installed. They do
have to have some buy in to the customer, which is FAA and to
the airlines, to the industry.
And, again, one of the criticisms is we have deadlines.
Someone said FAA not moving. We have some deadlines. We have
some streamlining that is proposed in the bill. Speak now or
forever hold your peace because this may become law very soon.
Mr. Babbitt. Well, there are three important components
when you build a system like this. Obviously we have to have
ground-based construction to do deployments on schedule. We
should be up and running actually ahead of schedule, and we
want all of the ground-based GPS and AVS stations.
Secondly, we have got to have the appropriate airplanes
that you use. One of the things I talked about in the testimony
is being able to prove that these things work, and having
private partners like GE, who actually goes out and forecasts
for us, they can [inaudible].
The third piece is we simply have to have the procedures in
place. We have undertaken of our own initiative a streamlining
of the process where we have developed a procedure, not an old
one, but a new procedure. And we have eliminated about 50
percent of the time to develop that. We simply went through
using the lean and the Six Sigma reviews. Where were we wasting
time? What was taking this process so long? Do you mind if we
streamline that? So, I am comfortable that we are on the right
track.
Now, all these three parts just simply have to play
together. It does not do us any good to have all the equipment
and all of the both airplane and ground and not have
procedures.
Additionally, we have got to train the pilots and the air
traffic controllers. We also get to a point of having a
critical mass who are affected, for example, if we have 50
airplanes an hour arriving at LaGuardia, and only three of them
were equipped and ready to shoot the arrival approach,
approach, that does not fix LaGuardia. If 45 of them do, you
know, best equipped will have to best. So, I think we
appreciate the support, and I think we are on track.
Mr. Mica. What about the deadline and the blueprint that is
set out here? Do you think that is adequate?
Mr. Babbitt. I do. I do.
Mr. Mica. Well, let me go to the industry folks, Ms. Blakey
and Mr. Bunce. What do you think? Again, you have seen what has
been crafted and drafted. Is this adequate to keep this on
schedule? Ms. Blakey?
Ms. Blakey. I think it is. More specificity about the
schedule and the metrics that need to be met is going to be
very important. In other words, fleshing this out, because that
cannot all be done through legislation. We think industry
working with the FAA on the specifics here will work well.
We are also keen to see further integration of these Test
Beds, and the research that is being done, for example, at NASA
and Mitre, and others, very important work, all integrated
together closely, and really tracked right into a demonstration
and into operations.
Mr. Bunce. Mr. Chairman, I would add just two things, and I
will drill down a little bit on what Marion said there.
The first one is on the metrics. I know that we have a
great partner in the administrator, and he is working very
closely with us. But he has got to steer a ship that is very
difficult to steer. And the first thing that you have to do is
you have to adopt metrics that we can measure success of
NextGen. And your committee put forward metrics in your bill,
and I understand that the Senate somewhat agreed to it, and it
is frustrating for us in industry not to see an adoption right
away even before the bill is passed, of metrics that we can go
ahead and measure progress against. So, I think that is step
one.
The second one is exactly what Marion just mentioned. The
United States military went and they networked all their
simulators between their fighters, tankers, bombers, so that
they could save money, and they could fly missions like they do
out at Nellis Air Force Base, red flags, just with folks
sitting on terra firma in simulators, everything all linked
together. We can do that as well. And that critical mass that
Randy was talking about that we have to get is extremely
expensive when you're driving people around in the air burning
gas, and we have to wait until some mandatory equippage dates
to be able to drive some of that critical mass.
But we can do it by networking simulators and centers of
excellence together to be able to go and test some of these
concepts. Data link is one of the primary ways that we can go
and take a look at what it looks like, get all of these
centers, controllers at one, students at the other, because if
you think about whose flying our airplanes, and that it is
young people. And if they get down in the systems for data link
and prove it against grizzled old controllers, the system will
work.
Mr. Mica. Finally, well, two things. One, have you got
enough money, and from what you have seen, our authorization
does, I think we are going to end up with a higher rather than
a lower figure. Is that adequate from what you have seen?
Mr. Babbitt. We submitted this [inaudible], but it probably
would not be, you know, totally accurate. We understand, like
everybody, is that this was [inaudible] today. I think the
funding enables us to do a lot of things. I think one of the
important parts about our budget request is this is one of the
few agencies, as you pointed out, that we are an operating
agency, but a lot of what we put in place here would be
operational equipment facilities, and just like if we were a
board of directors. And we looked at whether we should buy new
equipment, we would ask what equipment, we would tell you it is
very positive.
The faster we can buy the equipment, the faster we can put
it into place, the more quickly we would use it. You are going
to be able to benefit from it, save that fuel, reduce that
noise, increase throughput with airports. Airports are assets.
People pay a lot of money to build an airport in a town, and
they want to serve that town. And if we can increase the
throughput formula, the investment in equipment would help.
Then we would get our money back.
This is one of those cases where we appreciate what we get
paid on the--but I would suggest the kind of money belt that we
are looking for, we might be able to deploy that equipment more
quickly.
Mr. Mica. Well, the final thing, and if anyone wants to
comment, this is a global race, too, because whoever accepts
the protocols and develops the technology, the software, the
systems, also wins the world market. And that is a prize that
generations will benefit from, and it will be in place. Anyone
want to comment on how we are doing compared to the Europeans
and even, I guess, the Chinese in their own little march?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, we are a global institution. We
have 150 campuses around the world--14 in Europe, 3 in the
Middle East, and we just opened 1 in Singapore. So, we have a
good deal of opportunity to interact with the aerospace leaders
in those regions. Our faculty and our administrators interact
fairly routinely with both the private companies and
governments around the world as we establish campuses and
relationships.
Our clear perception is that we are in the lead. Europeans
are working very hard on NextGen technology. However, the
United States has an edge in not only the genius of our private
industry and our universities, but also because we have
established some integrated efforts to bring together
universities, private partners, and Government toward a common
purpose.
I believe we are on track to develop the kind of technology
and deploy a system that will improve our national air
transportation system more quickly.
Embry-Riddle is working on establishing an aerospace
research and technology park. Our motivation is to try and
contribute to the safety and efficiency of our national air
transportation system.
In addition to NextGen, we are working on unmanned
autonomous systems and whether or not unmanned aerial vehicles
can be made safe and reliable in commercial airspace. We are
conducting research with other universities as well as selected
aerospace industry partners to address these concerns.
So, the short answer, Mr. Chairman, is that I think we are
ahead.
Mr. Mica. Dr. Dillingham.
Mr. Dillingham. Chairman Mica, we just recently completed a
study for your committee with regard to how the U.S. is faring
with the Europeans and their effort of SESAR, which is the same
as our NextGen. And they are having similar problems as the
U.S. in terms of bringing it all together because of the many
countries that they have to bring together.
But besides that, I think the FAA is probably doing a
tremendous job with regard to working with the European Union.
They just signed an MOU that described how they would work
together and what they were aiming for. We also know that FAA
is a significant player in the International Civil Aviation
Organization, and they are also moving in that direction.
I think one of the differences between the U.S. and the
Europeans is that the Europeans started off with a public/
private kind of orientation. I think we have caught up with
them, and the linking together of the Test Bed, and academia,
and FAA, and the rest of the Government is the way that is
going to keep us ahead of the game.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
Mr. Caslavka. Mr. Chairman, I would like to comment on that
as well.
Mr. Mica. Yes.
Mr. Caslavka. So, I concur with what Mr. Johnson is saying
relative to how we are progressing against SESAR. I do believe
that we are ahead today, but I am concerned as an industry
partner that we need to continue to look at policies very
firmly. We need to continue to invest in the technologies like
the demonstrations that we are doing here with trajectory-based
operations and performance-based navigation. So, it is
extremely important that we keep those things on track, we keep
them funded, and we keep industry involved heavily with the FAA
jointly progressing these initiatives.
Mr. Bunce. Mr. Chairman, I would just add that when I look
at SESAR and NextGen together, they truly can be complemented.
If you look and you go into some of the specifics that Mr.
Dillingham was talking about, if you look at ADS-B, we are far
ahead. They do not have any ground infrastructure deployed, and
they really do not have a good plan, so ADS-B does not work
unless you have a ground infrastructure. So, we are obviously
going to be ahead there.
But they are mandating equippage for data com much earlier.
We do not have any mandatory equippage except for data com.
They do, so industry is going to adapt to what the Europeans
require, and we need to leverage off of what they are going to
learn in data com for our systems so we can leverage what is
valuable in both.
And then, you take what the Chinese are doing, and I really
want to compliment the FAA administrator here because a lot of
the rulemaking that is going forward now for aviation is
something that we have to do in tandem with our partners. So,
the FAA administrator has been very willing to allow us to
invite observers from EASA to be part of rulemaking, and now
also the CAAC, the regulatory body within China, because if we
get a one set of regulations for our equippage out there, then
industry can universally go and equip, and we do not have to
have different aircraft flying or different aircraft equipped
to fly in different environments. We have to have that, and
really Administrator Babbitt has been a partner with this.
Mr. Mica. Again, we hope this sets the parameters, at least
for the next 4 years, of legislation. I was asking staff if we
have a data com provision in there. We will check that, and if
there is something we can do to ensure that we are, again,
moving forward--anything, Mr. Babbitt?
Mr. Babbitt. Yes, sir. I would only add, and I appreciate
the observations made. I think there is a fundamentally a
pretty significant difference between the way the Europeans are
approaching this. They have as, Mr. Bunce noted, they do not
have an infrastructure. It is all theoretical. We, on the other
hand, field test, prove using the Test Beds, we take concepts,
we develop them, we test them, we demonstrate them, we put into
the systems. We have 250,000 square miles in the Gulf of
Mexico. We are moving traffic today in positively controlled
environments using ADS-B in partnership with the industry,
helicopters, petroleum.
So, we are testing these things. We have a half a dozen
airports around the country where we would actually use a
profile on these things where we save 60 gallons of fuel every
day, and we will continue to expand it.
So, ours is a build, implement, and expand type of process,
work with the industry. We have a variety of sources of input,
and that is why I think this Test Bed will help us remain in
front and make a lot of progress.
Mr. Mica. Well, we trust you. We are just going to verify.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mica. Let me yield for the purpose of questions.
Chairman Petri.
Mr. Petri. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one quick comment,
and that is that Administrator Babbitt just spoke briefly about
the enormous pay off. We recently had a hearing where a
representative of one of the leading international accounting
firms said he had looked at and analyzed this. And it is a slam
dunk from an investor's point of view. If things were done on
schedule by 2018, they predicted an over 40 percent return, and
if it could be done, as you indicated, possibly 3 years
earlier, it would be over 60 percent return on the Federal
investment. And that is astonishing.
And, of course, it is not just a light switch you turn on
and off. You are putting in place a whole new procedure that
will tend to gain momentum and spread through a major sector of
the world's economy. So, it is very important.
One question. When I talk about this whole thing to rotary
clubs or service groups back in my district, they were very
excited because we are a little glum about Government, you
know. And right now, things seem to be negative. But this is an
area of great, positive, you know, it is a bright, shining
light of progress in a lot of areas.
One question I get constantly is, what about security in
terms of what if someone were to wish us harm, whether another
country or some other group? Is there a way they can shoot down
a satellite or foul the thing up? And if we put all of our eggs
in this basket and move off radar, will we be vulnerable? Could
you discuss that?
Mr. Babbitt. Sure. That is a concern, and we should have
that concern for any navigation system that we have. We have
backup alternatives. One of the areas that we are researching
is what would be our primary fallback? For some reason, it is
hard to imagine that we could lose an entire array of
satellites possible. So, it still would be a very long time
before we get rid of primary radar. The military is not going
to be without it.
We have other tools on board the aircraft today. Most of
the modern aircraft are equipped with modern capabilities,
which means they listen to any number of things. Most modern
airplanes built in the last 10 years have inertia navigation
where the airplane just knows where it is by its own virtue. It
knew where it started, it maintains awareness of its movement,
and, therefore, it--all of those are capable of being
translated, and all of those are a check against their own GPS.
So, we have some alternatives out there, and we will deploy
them. But you are right, some of this is grounds for mischief,
and we want to protect against that just like we concern
ourselves with cyber security. We will use our structure for
communication and data to cover some of these things.
But I am comfortable that we have enough backup in place
if, you know, we have a threat to the entire system.
Ms. Blakey. Mr. Chairman, if I might add one point, because
we have the opportunity as industry of observing the Joint
Planning and Development Office's work among the agencies.
There is a good partnership there, and that jointness is
important.
We would love to see more energetic engagement from the
Department of Homeland Security. I think that is an area where,
frankly, we do need the committee's help in terms of urging the
DHS to become a more active partner when it comes to the
security front. And I would support that.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Babbitt, how
confident are you that in 2018 we are going to have a roll out?
Mr. Babbitt. Oh, I am highly confident. Highly confident.
We will have our ground infrastructure fully operable 4 years
before that. And I think, again, in the business case, how well
the system is embraced is highly dependent on the insurance
that people get. We did see one of our early adopters come into
place, and we are looking right now as to what happened early
on. They had a high percentage of use, and now Congress says
they are not using it as much. Well, why? The controller is not
educated or the pilot is not asking for the approaches and so
forth.
We want to get to the bottom of that because we want people
to use it. The more people that use it, the more savings that
are going to be there to sell [inaudible] equipment use.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Petri point out. I have read some of the
same analysis that he has read that here is the business case,
strongly one of them. And I guess the ultimate end user is the
airlines. Are they talking to your folks at Boeing and Mr.--is
it Bunce? The General Avionics folks. Are they trying to pull
it forward with the end users that want to buy these things?
What are they saying when you ask the question?
Ms. Blakey. I think from the standpoint of the airlines, of
course, the airlines are the ultimate customer for a great deal
of our aircraft parts and operational aircraft deployed. They
want to get the most out of the equipment that is already on
the aircraft. I think that is fair to say that this is a lot of
capability that is flying up there now. They also feel it is
critical to get the system in place because that is the only
way that they are going to be able to deal with the traffic
that is coming.
I think from the standpoint of our manufacturers, our
greatest threat is the issue that the system will not be ready
for the traffic that is coming, and congestion, and the
dampening, therefore, of demand and dampening of our economy.
It is a huge problem. We are genuinely worried about it.
Mr. Shuster. Which part of the system? You pointed out the
three parts, procedures, the infrastructure, or the equipment?
All three of them will not be in place, or they are concerned
about not being in place, or one of the three they are
concerned about?
Ms. Blakey. I think the first two really have to come into
play because it is not reasonable to ask businesses like the
airlines, which frankly struggle to make the kind of corporate
investment that is needed for equipment, unless they are pretty
sure. The infrastructure has got to be there and the support.
It is like asking people to buy cars, but there are no
highways. That does not work.
Mr. Babbitt. We use the analogy that I use is the high-
definition cable box. And say, well, how many network
challenges I am showing. So, if it is 2 now, then we are going
to get 50.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Babbitt. When you get to 50, call me and I will buy a
lot of them.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Babbitt. And that is sort of where we are. We need to
produce those procedures, and that is a hurdle that we need to
achieve.
Mr. Caslavka. Chairman Shuster, I think that it is really a
conundrum that the administrator pointed out because it has
chicken and egg. It is chicken and egg, because the ground
infrastructure will be in place, and in 2013 we will have the
ground infrastructure out there. We need to have critical mass
for equippage, and we need to have those procedures out there.
Procedures right now that simply overlay today's approach,
they can give us some benefit, but the true benefit is when we
can develop new approaches, redesign airspace, and, of course,
we have environmental concerns there. If we could streamline
that NEPA process, that is really one thing that can help us a
lot.
But on the equippage, what concerns us is we have to see
those types of benefits, and the conundrum that the
administrator is in is, as he pointed out, if only a few equip,
then you actually get less efficient if you give them best
equip/best serve, because then you have got to put everybody
into a different pipe if you segregated runways.
So, if we can figure out a way, this idea of an
infrastructure development bank, or some of the creative ways
that we have some of our different companies say, OK, we will
loan to the money to people to equip, and as soon as they can
accrue some of the benefits, then they have to be able to pay
it back. When we have a surefire way to measure these benefits,
OK, then they will start paying back. That is a way that we
could potentially achieve the critical mass that we need to
make this really work rapidly.
Mr. Shuster. You mentioned earlier about metrics. We put
into the legislation--I think I heard Mr. Bunce answer the
question. I do not know if he fully completed it. Is there any
prohibition on you accepting what is in there now and saying
this is what we are going to use? Is there any reason you
cannot move forward without legislation being passed?
Mr. Babbitt. Well, I would like to think it is in our best
interest and the industry's best interest to deploy everything
we can as quickly as we can and benefit from it. They made the
investment; we made the investment. I mean, metrics are good
targets.
One of the things that we struggle with a little bit is
this is a very rapidly developing and new integrated
technology. So, the metrics, you know, we have to be careful
that we do not get about halfway through it and somebody says,
hey, we have a whole new, better data system just invented
yesterday; we should use that instead.
Metrics change. Our process changes at some point. And we
have to accept them the way they are, but we are never
[inaudible]. Things will come out of this Test Bed we have not
even thought about yet. I am certain that in 2 years it will be
something here that we should deploy.
Mr. Shuster. Dr. Dillingham.
Mr. Dillingham. Chairman Shuster, I wanted to add that this
is an opportune time to go forward in that we recently had the
RTCA report that made a lot of suggestions for near-term, mid-
term implementation of NextGen. And FAA has taken those
recommendations into its plan and is beginning to move towards
implementing them.
This is one of the first times that we have had airlines,
avionics manufacturers, FAA, everybody at the table saying if
you do this, if you bring these benefits in this timeframe, we
are on board.
And so, this is an opportune time to make it go forward.
Mr. Shuster. But you also said in your report that you did
not think that the private industry stakeholders were brought
into it at all.
Mr. Dillingham. Yes. That is one of the things that has to
happen, that those who are participants need to be a part of
it. Otherwise, you run the risk of when that system is fielded
or the beginnings of fielding, that the people who operate it
will say, this does not work for me. And it could be something
as simple as, this button feels like this button, and I am
watching the screen, and I cannot do it. Or it could be
something a lot more sophisticated in terms of software
development. But, yes, you definitely need to bring those on
board.
And that has been legislated as well. So, hopefully lots of
things are in place to make it work.
Mr. Shuster. Are you saying now that they are not fully
involved in it and they need to be?
Mr. Dillingham. They were not fully involved early on. Now,
there is legislation and there is the will to involve everyone.
So, the promise there.
Mr. Caslavka. So, let me talk from an industry perspective
as well. Clearly we have made a lot of investments associated
with NextGen, even before it was NextGen, in our FMS solution,
and also in our procedures for performance-based and arrivals
and departures.
So, I had a meeting with my team here just within the last
2 weeks where we are looking closely at what are we going to do
in support of NextGen from an investment standpoint. And we
laid out a strategy in those areas. So, we are focusing on
that.
This does not have to be a homerun. It can be incremental
steps. And, yes, we run into issues, like Mr. Bunce indicated,
relative to implementing new procedures to get the efficiencies
associated with landing and departures. But we can take those
steps, and we are trying to work with Mr. Babbitt and his team
to make those steps possible. Start with selective airports and
continue to progress to realize some of the advantages so you
can do more of an incremental approach rather than just go for
the homerun.
Mr. Shuster. Do you feel that you are involved at a level
you need to be at this point?
Mr. Bunce. I think that the FAA brings us on board. Again,
go back to the metrics. I think that it is important to measure
where we are today because if you think about it, every time
any one of us jumps on an airplane today, they are in an open
seat. So, we contracted about as much as we can contract. The
only way we are going to go is more aircraft out there, both on
the commercial side and on the general aviation as soon as this
economy starts to really recover.
So, for us to be able to measure, OK, what happens, what is
the baseline today, and real metrics that we can go and then
measure against as that traffic builds, and we implement the
NextGen technologies I think becomes very important.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Chairman, I have one more question.
Mr. Mica. Go right ahead.
Mr. Shuster. And this comes up over and over and over again
throughout the Government, different agencies who all work
together, like you said, DHS and DOD. I just thought maybe you
could address it. What do you think is DHS' problem? Why are
they not engaging in this area? Is it just the cultural
differences in DOD, or they do not have time for it, or they
are just not engaged at this time? I cannot get through to
these agencies that it is so important when we talk about
something--security. It is about safety. So, they need to be
engaged.
Ms. Blakey. You know, I can speak to that problem from my
historical perspective on this, and then I would yield to
Administrator Babbitt on this and Dr. Dillingham. But what I do
think has been part of the problem is that DHS has not grasped
the vision that NextGen brings to the transformation of an
aviation system.
One of the biggest obstacles all of us see for aviation to
realize its potential in this economy and this country is
security. It is the hassle factor. It is the time, which is, I
think, by almost everyone's standards, unreasonable today.
That vision of building security into the system, building
in network information so that you really do begin to have
total gate pushback to destination security built all the way
through in the information management system is something that
could be done. But we do not see DHS, in my historical
experience, stepping up, probably because they were forming at
the time. They had a lot on their plate. I think it was in the
early stages of NextGen.
But, as I say, I would yield to Administrator Babbitt on
the current situation.
Mr. Babbitt. I think some of the issues that might be there
are the perception of emission versus hours, and private would
be included in that. And I think we are making some progress,
trying to improve them. We have got the displays. We think it
would be critical information to know a lot about a particular
flight. Sometimes they, for security reasons they want to know
a number of things--how much fuel is on this airplane, where is
it on the airport. We can help them with a lot of those things.
And so, I think we are beginning to realize the benefits of
some of the security areas. It always provides the
opportunity----
Mr. Shuster. Did DOD say long-term----
Mr. Babbitt. Actually, DOD, from my perspective, did
partner with us. We have got a good relationship with them,
particularly DDO. It is a melting pot of information. I think
it is actually very reasonable when we do some of the things
that we are doing. There are a lot of stakeholders. We are
talking about using a GPS, so a lot of people use GPS for a lot
of different things. So, when we want to change it just for
airplanes, a lot of other people go, whoa. Just the impact of
what we use it for.
And so, we have got to have those places where we can have
common dialogue and explain what the uses are, how they could
better use it. Airlines are finding this flight object display
really useful. They know a lot about the airplane--
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. LightSquared utilized like they
want it to be? Do you have great concerns about it?
Mr. Babbitt. Well, I have great concerns about it. They are
a company who proposes to build an infrastructure to take
broadband across the United States. The original approaches to
using satellite broadcast signal within GPS had no impact. They
have since changed the business plan with ground base
modification that had about 1,500 times more powerful a signal
than [inaudible].
There is literally multiple, billions of dollars are
invested, hundreds of billions of dollars invested in
navigation systems, GPS equippage, and [inaudible] stations all
over the world. And to jeopardize that because someone has a
[inaudible] has us concerned.
So, I think the FCC has realized the interferences there. I
think there are stations that could [inaudible]. I do not think
anybody in industry thinks that is a good idea. So, we are sort
of waiting for the FCC at this point.
We have spoken pretty strongly to DOD, Homeland, a lot of
industry itself, people in manufacturing. It is kind of
lonesome right now in finding support. We are concerned it will
have an impact.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, Congressman. I want to point out that the
implementation of the basic system is not a technology problem.
The technology fundamentally is in place. Yes, we are doing
some new software development for some new systems. But
basically it is taking existent technology and integrating in a
way that has not been integrated before to serve our needs.
I think that Ms. Blakey's comment about vision and about
getting rid of silos and cooperating with each other are the
real challenges. This is where we look to Congress, this
committee, and to the FAA to help us integrate and provide
oversight, learn to share with one another.
But the basic technology is there. It is existent. We can
develop the software. We have outstanding software engineering
in this Nation. We can develop what is needed. Our private
industries' research and development is par excellence, and we
are moving forward aggressively. Technology is not the
obstacle. It is the human dimension that we have got to
address.
Mr. Shuster. I think my time has expired.
Mr. Mica. No problem. Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Chairman. I had a
couple of questions. We were talking a little bit about the
integration of UABs into the domestic air system. We are seeing
more and more UABs flying within this country now where we are
using them not only to control the northern and southern
borders, but also in the rescue operations and other life-
saving operations.
Administrator Babbitt, are we going to be able to do this
before NextGen? Are we going to end up having to wait to
NextGen to see more integration of UABs within the domestic air
system?
Mr. Babbitt. Well, it depends somewhat. I mean, certainly
if we had, before we fleshed out, a NextGen system in place, it
makes the operation a lot better. The fundamental concept with
the UAB and deployment with [inaudible]. The answer to any of
those is, no, it is not a good, cooperative maintenance.
So, we are making a lot of improvements to the autonomous
operations and [inaudible]. There is the time between winning
consensus and taking action and when it actually takes that
action. It is way too large to be mixing with the normal
airspace system. So, we sort of relegated it to airspace where
we can provide that extra margin because it does not respond as
quickly. And that will work for now.
We are working on reducing those margins, reduce the legacy
times, improve the machine's ability to--and take actions.
So, I see wonderful machines. They do a lot of great
things. If somebody just gets up out of the chair and nobody
sits down. We can do a lot of interesting things.
Mr. Farenthold. And, Mr. Caslavka, I know what GE is
working on. When are you going to be comfortable with your
family sitting in that 737 operating near one of those?
Mr. Caslavka. So, my perspective is you really have to roll
out NextGen before you have the infrastructure in place to fly
on top of those vehicles. You need trajectory-based operations
to be functional. You need the data link communications back to
the FCC. So, you really need to have those in place in order to
feel safe on those vehicles.
It is important to note that they will have a role, we
believe, at some point, whether it is border surveillance or
search and rescue. They will have a space in national airspace.
So, we need to roll out the infrastructures that provide for
that.
And we are currently, as part of our initiatives here at
Embry-Riddle, involved in a task that is going to view some of
that initial testing of trajectory-based operations. So, that
is part of the ongoing activity here at Embry-Riddle.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. And, Mr. Bunce, you know, you
represent folks in the general aviation industry. And in
general, I would imagine they are going to be the last adopters
of this NextGen technology when you are talking to obvious
pilots, or the crop dusters, or the guy who flies his plane
into his ranch.
I mean, we have got general aircraft now that do not have
even transponders in there, mature technology. Is there a price
point issue there? Are we going to be able to get enough of the
general aviation folks in where we are able to really see the
true benefit of some of this new technology?
Mr. Bunce. Well, sir, I think it is a matter of degrees
here. Actually general aviation has been the first adopter of a
lot of this technology. So, you take, for instance, the types
of GPS-based approached that we have populated this country
with. In fact, the administrator talked last week at a speech I
was listening to that we have reached a tipping point. There is
actually more GPS-based approaches out there than there are the
traditional instrument landing type of system approaches. That
is because general aviation uses these.
We can get into airfields that we never possibly could have
got into before because we have this technology, and we have
integrated through our systems--why we are so concerned about
life squared is because we have had so many of our airplanes
adopt systems that can use what is called WAAS, which augments
the GPS to allow us these precise approaches.
So, I would actually argue that there is a lot of general
aviation that has more modern cockpits that some of the
airplanes that I transit with on the airlines. I looked in a
cockpit the other day on my iPad. I have more situational
awareness of what the weather is ahead and where we are
actually going than the poor pilot up there because just that,
it is very expensive to upgrade those cockpits. So, the cost
for ADS-B is starting to go down.
My wife flies a Cessna 172, very light basic airplane out
there, so I equip with ADS-B. I have ADS-B out in the aircraft,
and it cost me $600 more than what I had to put a new
transponder in, and it integrates with the GPS system. So, it
was about a $600 differential.
So, the cost is coming down, and it is reasonable, but we
have got to be able to go and make sure that the benefits are
there. And the real key in ADS-B is ADS-B in. And when we can
start getting people to want to equip so that they can traffic,
and they can get real time weather, we are going to make flying
safer in this country. And that is really the golden goose
right there is being able to get people to see the advantages
of ADS-B in.
Mr. Farenthold. And I will go back to you, Administrator
Babbitt, just on a kind of, I guess, pushing the airlines into
implementing the technology. You used LaGuardia as an example
about how few aircraft come in there. We have got Washington, I
know the DCA airspace is very crowded.
It seems like it is a carrot and stick approach--more slots
in these airports, every plane you send in here is going to
have to be equipped with this new technology. And there is no
real Government requirement that you put it on your plane, but
if you want the hot airports, you are going to have to do it.
Is that something you all are considering?
Mr. Babbitt. Well, we have considered it and actually
implemented these things that require ADS-B, everything that is
on the plane. We have not gone to, you know, particular
airports. I think something Ms. Blakey said earlier is
important, in terms of procedures, that we need have those
developed in the areas, and then we will use them. For example,
we have done it in the O'Hare area, the Chicago area. We have
taken and separated the two airports, Midway and O'Hare, from
each other. Earlier was one metroplex area. And so, if Midway
Airport was operating at 60 percent of its capacity, and O'Hare
was at 105 percent with major delays, well, Midway starts
taking delays because it is the same airspace. Not anymore. We
now allow people in RNP arrival procedures, they can go to
Midway.
So, if you have the equipment, you can use the arrival, and
you do not have to wait. You do not have the equipment, you
wait. How many times are you going to hold and watch other
people go by you because they have the equipment? The answer is
not long.
I think it is important to note for general aviation, we do
not want people to buy equipment they do not need. If you
intend to operate a pilot in controlled airspace, you do not
need to buy it. There are people today that have airplanes that
do not even have radios in them, flying around their farms.
They never get above 1,500 feet. They are good pilots that and
that is their mission. Fine, you can keep it that way. We want
people to be equipped to the level of the operation that they
are working towards.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mica. Ms. Adams.
Ms. Adams. Mr. Babbitt, I noticed as Dr. Johnson was
talking, you were shaking your head in agreement, and that was
nice to see. I wanted to just put that out there.
Mr. Babbitt. He was talking nicely about me.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Adams. Mr. Bunce's written testimony, I do not know if
you had a chance to review it, but he writes about the
importance of research and development for FAA and NASA. And
so, I want to know, what is FAA doing with NASA R&D to leverage
NextGen?
Mr. Babbitt. Well, we have several programs that we are a
part of JPDO. We interface with them. Actually, there was a
provision that we were seeking to expand. We have taken
responsibility for commercial space with sort of our old
launches and so forth. We are trying to capture some of the
expertise [inaudible] where we would take some of the folks who
have been working [inaudible] think about a lot of what NextGen
is built on today came from [inaudible] navigation space. That
is the ultimate force now navigation [inaudible].
Mr. Dillingham. I just wanted to add that while we were
doing our work in tech transfer, the JPDO, which is composed of
the Federal agencies that are part of the long-term research
and development for NextGen, the strongest partnership we found
was NASA in terms of tech transfer. They have a long history of
working together, and their research transition teams are sort
of what we put up as kind of a model that other agencies might
want to use in working with FAA. So, NASA is the strongest
partner that we found.
Ms. Adams. And, Dr. Johnson, I want to give you a chance.
Again, kind of tell us the unique opportunities that you have
that are derived from FAA's partnership.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Congresswoman Adams. I appreciate
that. We have worked closely with the FAA. And we very much
appreciate it. We have worked with a lot of administrators, and
we have had very good relationships with them.
We work closely with the FAA in trying to ensure safety in
our Nation's airspace. And, of course, we are very proud to
have Administrator Babbitt as an alumnus of Embry-Riddle, and
we know that the FAA is in safe hands because of that.
I would like to make a comment about GAMA and general
aviation. I hope there is not a misconception that somehow
general aviation is not at the cutting edge of technology. We
have a lot of relationships with general aviation companies.
For example, we offer degree programs for Gulfstream in
Savannah, and we work with them on the development of
composites and advanced avionics.
When you look at Embry-Riddle's fleet, if you look at the
avionics in our small planes, like the Diamond 42, for example,
you will find that that avionics package is as good, if not
better, than most commercial airliners in our country.
So, general aviation is at the forefront in terms of the
development of a lot of technology that would be very
appropriate to making NextGen a reality and make our skies
safer. I want to compliment GAMA and their work, as well as the
AOPA and their efforts.
Ms. Adams. I think that he is recognizing that there is
this unique opportunity between FAA and NASA as they gather on
the commercial space industry. And I think that is probably
what--and, Mr. Bunce, we want to hear further--the written
testimony was about, was the fact that they have a unique
opportunity.
Mr. Bunce. Yes, ma'am. Over the last several years, that
budget has been whacked significantly. In fact, we partnered
with FAA a couple of years back to say, you know, put the egg
back in NASA, because as their budget was really getting
squeezed, aeronautics started to drop out. And there was an
initiative a couple of years back actually to take all
aeronautics funding, R&D funding, and just give it to all to
the FAA. And we were partners with the FAA there to say, no,
that is not smart to do because there are things, as the
administrator pointed out, that NASA does extremely well that
we want to tap into. And that is why this partnership is
something we would actually like to see expanded.
But we all know in the fiscal environment that we are in
right now, we have to leverage the best, and there are a lot of
smart people just over there near the Cape that we would love
to be able to see in the Government and industry to tap into
that expertise. They do data com better than anybody on the
planet, and we need to tap into the way they do it.
Ms. Adams. I agree that we have got a lot of very smart
people out there. And I would like to continue the aerospace
part of [inaudible].
Ms. Blakely, I listened and I was a little dismayed at the
fact that DHS does not seem to play an active role in what you
appear to have witnessed. Based on their own mission statement,
I believe that homeland security is their mission statement. I
am hoping that, Administrator Babbitt, you can help us to
figure out a way to encourage them to be more active and
involved as we move forward because there are some concerns
that have been raised by this panel, and I am sure concerns on
this committee.
Mr. Babbitt. We will certainly make those efforts. As I
said, I think we have made some progress. You know, the fact
that they saw the mission that they had, the organization. I
think they had some sort of getting in place structural issues
that probably help any of us. [Inaudible] was lacking, we would
say. So, I am beginning to see some better communicating line
has been developed. I think they appreciate--we have a lot of
expertise we could help them with, and they have a lot of
information that we could use and benefit all of us. So, we
will keep working on it.
Ms. Adams. And just a quick comment. Dr. Dillingham, thank
you for your information, for saying it is more validation of
research than duplication, because that is important that we
know that. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. I will call on our minority counsel. Did you have
any questions?
Mr. Burkett. Mr. Chairman, you are very kind, but I do not
think I have any questions. Thanks.
Mr. Mica. What we will do, since we have Members who may
have additional questions, in consultation with the minority,
we will leave the record open for a period of 2 weeks for
additional questions, which we may submit to the panelists.
Well, I want to thank everyone for participating, for
taking time out of your busy schedules to be with us, and for
the cooperative effort in moving next generation air traffic
control forward.
Again, we thank Embry-Riddle. I want to also thank, in
addition, Dr. Johnson and Dr. Recascino, one of the officers at
the university, who has helped us both with the Test Beds and
this hearing, but also with accommodating some of the meetings
that will take place among some of the private, public, and
academic players in bringing this important phase of next
generation air traffic control forward.
With that, again, I want to thank our Members for
attending, and the staff for their assistance in making this
fairly historic hearing possible. And on the eve hopefully of
us passing long-term FAA reauthorization and will incorporate
some important provisions to make certain that the United
States stays at the forefront both as far as the systems, next
generation, and particularly for aviation safety that is so
important for the traveling public.
Somebody said to me yesterday, sort of summed it up. He
said, it looks like you all are here to take our air traffic
control and aviation system from World War II era to the 21st
space age, and that sort of sums up the purpose of our being
here.
I invite to participate at 2:00. We will have some brief
commentary, opening of the new Test Bed facility, and then
there will be tours made available, and some actual operational
demonstration for all those who care to attend. So, that will
be at 2:00. And if you aren't with where the facility is, it is
right--if you are looking at the terminal, it is the building
right to the left. I saw it this morning. There is a white tent
out in front. But you all are welcome to participate in that.
Thank you again.
There being no further business before the Transportation
and Infrastructure Committee, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

