- TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ACT: ARE WE SAFER?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE

MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ACT:

ARE WE SAFER?

=======================================================================

(112-101)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 11, 2012

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
75-850                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey            Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           LAURA RICHARDSON, California
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
VACANCY
------                                7

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
Vice Chair                         NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)     (Ex Officio)
VACANCY
CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY
Panel 1

Rear Admiral Joseph A. Servidio, Assistant Commandant for
Prevention Policy, United States Coast Guard...................     4
Stephen L. Caldwell, Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
Government Accountability Office...............................     4

Panel 2

Bethann Rooney, Manager of Port Security, Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey, testifying on behalf of the American
Association of Port Authorities................................    13
Christopher Koch, President and CEO, World Shipping Council......    13

PREPARED STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY MEMBER OF CONGRESS

Hon. Rick Larsen, of Washington..................................    21

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Rear Admiral Joseph A. Servidio..................................    23
Stephen L. Caldwell..............................................    30
Bethann Rooney...................................................    84
Christopher Koch.................................................    92

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Rear Admiral Joseph A. Servidio, Assistant Commandant for
Prevention Policy, United States Coast Guard, response to
information request from Hon. Frank A. LoBiondo, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New Jersey, on the
availability of the Coast Guard's maritime security risk
assessment model...............................................     8

ADDITION TO THE RECORD

Passenger Vessel Association, written statement..................   100
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76850.006

TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARITIME

TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ACT:

ARE WE SAFER?

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
Room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank LoBiondo
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. The subcommittee will come to order.
Today marks the 11th anniversary of that horrible day that
changed America and changed the world, the terrorist attacks of
September 11th. I would like to take a moment to remember those
who perished on that day and those whose lives were changed
forever because of it.
I also want to express our gratitude to the brave men and
women working so hard both at home and overseas to improve our
ability to prevent anything like that from ever happening
again.
We are also approaching the 10th anniversary of the
enactment of the Maritime Transportation Security Act. It was a
landmark piece of legislation that established a framework to
improve the security of the Nation's ports, waterways, and
vessels from potential terrorist attacks.
The importance of keeping our ports and waterways secure
cannot be overstated. Approximately 90 percent of all global
trade and 25 percent of our gross domestic product move via the
sea. A terrorist attack at any of our ports could severely
disrupt the supply chain, which would be catastrophic to our
fragile economy.
However, as we recognize in the MTSA, improving security at
our ports and aboard our vessels means understanding how the
industry operates. When MTSA imposed new security mandates on
the maritime industry, it was done in a manner which did not
undermine the free flow of commerce or the economic viability
of the maritime sector.
I would like to praise the Coast Guard for following that
critical balancing act in their efforts in implementing MTSA.
Throughout the process, the Service has been fair, transparent,
and relatively flexible with the large number of stakeholders
in our maritime transportation system. Thanks to the leadership
of the Coast Guard and the commitment from industry and their
employees, I believe our ports and waterways are much safer
than they were 11 years ago.
However, although MTSA has been largely a success story,
there are a couple of areas where concern remains. As has been
documented in numerous hearings at both the subcommittee and
full committee level, regulations governing the deployment of
the Transportation Worker Identification Credential, TWIC,
readers have still not been set. The Service is now telling us
that it expects to publish proposed regulations sometime this
fall, well over 3 years later than the original deadline for
issuing a final rule.
As we continue to wait out these delays, the TWICs are no
more than a flash pass. Without the readers in place, we are
forcing maritime employees to pay for something that does not
serve its intended purpose and we are undermining security at
our Nation's ports. The administration needs to move forward on
these regulations as soon as possible.
As we highlighted at our hearing in July, concerns persist
with regard to implementation of requirements to improve
maritime domain awareness. Specifically, the Service's
inability to sufficiently tie its different MDA systems into
one common operating picture as well as its somewhat
duplicative approaches to tracking the same vessels have been a
source of frustration. Additionally, we remain concerned that
the efforts to share MDA information among stakeholders may
suffer as the initiative to build physical Interagency
Operations Centers at our ports wanes.
Finally, and more broadly, I remain worried about the Coast
Guard's ability to continue to carry out their core maritime
security responsibilities with an ever-increasing workload and
a shrinking budget. The administration has proposed slashing
the Service's budget by $350 million and cutting the number of
servicemembers by over 1,000, yet we have never asked the
Service to do more than they are doing now.
Cutting funding while adding new responsibility is a
formula for failure; and, unfortunately, we saw this formula
playing out in the 1990s when the Coast Guard had been
continually asked to do more, was given less, and then we were
surprised when they couldn't meet all the mandates that were
imposed by Congress. This is a very, very serious situation,
and I don't believe that we in Congress can ever allow that to
take place again. So we must be seriously on guard now.
Admiral, I hope you can speak to some of my concerns this
morning, and I look forward to hearing from the GAO and the
private-sector witnesses on some of these matters as well. I
want to thank the witnesses for appearing today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Now I would like to yield to Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
convening this morning's hearing to assess the effectiveness of
the Maritime Transportation Security Act, or MTSA, after 10
years of implementation. It is entirely appropriate that we
evaluate MTSA today as we observe the 11th anniversary of the
September 11, 2001, attacks. There can be no more sobering
reminder that our work to protect our shores from terrorist
threats and organizations requires our constant attention,
creativity, and dedication.
I also want to acknowledge the contributions made by the
U.S. Coast Guard on that day to secure New York harbor and to
oversee the successful evacuation of over 300,000 people from
Lower Manhattan after the collapse of the World Trade Center.
I want to thank you, Admiral. If you could pass that on to
the entire Coast Guard family as well. On that day, the true
definition of the Coast Guard motto, Semper Paratus, was made
evident to all.
Mr. Chairman, border and transportation security is a
pivotal function of the Federal Government in protecting the
American people from terrorists and their instruments of
destruction. The maritime domain is particularly daunting in
scale, totaling over 95,000 miles of shoreline, 300,000 square
miles of waterways, and 10,000 miles of navigable waterways.
There are over 360 ports, approximately 3,100 critical
facilities, and more than 14,000 vessels in the domestic fleet
alone. Each one of these can present a potential target for
terrorist activities, so the complexity of securing these
assets is a huge responsibility.
Aside from infrastructure, over 60 million Americans are
employed within 100 miles of our coasts and coastline and
contribute over $4 billion annually to the national economy.
The response of Congress to the attacks of September 11,
2001, was followed by specific targeted measures to protect the
country, such as the creation of the Transportation Security
Administration. It also included the passage of MTSA, which
addressed the maritime domain with new requirements for
passenger, crew, and cargo screening; the successful Customs-
Trade Partnership Against Terrorism, or C-TPAT; and the
MegaPorts Initiative that has systematically enhanced detection
capabilities for special, nuclear, and other radioactive
materials in containerized cargo.
Additionally, the greater use of technology to identify and
track vessel movements, implementation of comprehensive
biometric security measures, and the initiation of
vulnerability assessments and creation of site-specific
security plans were all new innovations.
The question asked today, though, is are we safer? That
question is as valid now as it was in the days and weeks
following the attacks of September 11th. This basic question
raises some fundamental questions for which I will be
interested to hear responses from our witnesses today.
Specifically, how do we know that we are in fact safer? By
what metrics are we making such determinations? What are the
economic effects on foreign and domestic maritime commerce and
the cost to the U.S. taxpayer measured against security? I
would also be interested in learning whether our witnesses
believe that adequate resources are being provided to support
these responsibilities.
As I mentioned during our hearing on maritime domain
awareness in July, when resources were freely available to
address the deficiencies in homeland security after September
11, 2001, it was fairly easy to get those dollars. But now we
operate in an entirely different budget environment. Present
fiscal constraints leave us little choice but to examine
carefully the assets and resources we devote to maritime
security, especially to the Coast Guard, whose budget is
already stretched thin over several different competing
missions.
I have said before, and I will keep saying it: We cannot
expect the Coast Guard to do more with less. The sad reality is
the Coast Guard will be doing less with less given the current
budget's trajectory. That is why we must spend effectively and
wisely on those activities which provide the greatest risk
reduction at the lowest cost.
Obviously, challenges remain. TWIC readers and cargo
scanning requirements immediately come to mind. Yet, as our
present maritime security strategies continue to evolve, we
must not allow frustration over some aspects to deter other
efforts. We must press on to develop a maritime security
strategy that is comprehensive in scope, flexible in
implementation, and adaptable to the changing tactics of those
extremists who would seek to do us harm. For if there is one
truth we have learned over the past 10 years, it is that
terrorists and terrorist organizations will not tire in their
efforts to probe, adapt, and exploit our vulnerabilities; and,
like the Coast Guard, we must remain Semper Paratus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Our first panel today we have Rear Admiral Joseph Servidio,
Assistant Commandant for Prevention Policy, and Mr. Stephen
Caldwell, director of the GAO's Homeland Security and Justice
team.
Admiral, welcome. You are on.

TESTIMONY OF REAR ADMIRAL JOSEPH A. SERVIDIO, ASSISTANT
COMMANDANT FOR PREVENTION POLICY, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD;
AND STEPHEN L. CALDWELL, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND
JUSTICE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Admiral Servidio. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking
Member Larsen, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss the Coast Guard's
role in securing our maritime infrastructure since the events
of 9/11 and the subsequent passage of the Maritime
Transportation Security Act.
The Coast Guard has made tremendous progress in securing
America's waterways and supporting an efficient and resilient
commercial environment. The men and women of the Coast Guard
and the Department of Homeland Security and its components are
committed to improving maritime security through continued
cooperation and collaboration with State, Federal, local,
international, and industry partners.
To help prevent terrorist attacks, we developed and
continue to improve on an effective domestic and international
maritime security regime. Our layered security strategy
includes initiatives related to MTSA regulatory enforcement,
identity and security processes, the international ship and
port facilities security code, deployable specialized forces,
and global supply chain security.
Before 9/11 we had no formal structured maritime security
regimes for ports, port facilities, or ships, with the
exception of cruise ships in the United States. With Congress'
support and through our expansive partnerships, we now have
strong and comprehensive domestic and international security
regimes in place. By successfully executing the requirements of
MTSA and the ISPS Code, we have reduced vulnerabilities within
the global maritime transportation system.
Specifically, the Coast Guard has reviewed and approved
over 11,000 domestic vessel security plans and 3,100 domestic
facility security plans, overseen the development of 43 port-
specific area maritime security plans and committees, completed
port security assessments for all U.S. ports using the maritime
security risk analysis model while collaborating with local
officials and stakeholders, visited almost 160 foreign
countries to assess the effectiveness of their port security
measures and ISPS Code implementation, and overseen the
continued development of the National Maritime Security Plan
which supports the National Strategy for Maritime Security.
Implementation of MTSA requirements such as mandatory
access control measures, designated restricted areas, and
screening protocols for persons and vehicles entering
facilities have hardened physical security in our ports. Our
continued work with TSA to implement the biometrically enabled
Transportation Worker Identification Credential is an important
part of this effort, and we are biometrically verifying almost
100 TWICs daily at facilities and on vessels. We work closely
with Customs and Border Protection to identify and evaluate
cargo risks before arrival and, when necessary, control vessels
and cargo that may pose a threat.
Finally, response and recovery protocols established and
exercised with Federal, State, local, and industry partners
build a resilient maritime community, one able to recover more
quickly from any disruption.
In closing, I was the captain of the port in San Juan,
Puerto Rico, on September 11, 2001, and my brother Larry was
working at the Number Three World Financial Center, a building
seriously damaged in the terrorist attacks. I did not know he
survived the attack and lost many friends until late that
night. I was transferred from San Juan to Coast Guard
headquarters, and I served on the team responsible for
implementing MTSA and the ISPS Code. I am deeply committed to
protecting our Nation and our people, and I know firsthand how
far we have come since MTSA was passed.
I look forward to continuing to work with Congress in
enhancing maritime security and providing oversight. I thank
you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Admiral.
Mr. Caldwell.
Mr. Caldwell. Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen, and
Mr. Cummings, good to see you today and thank you for inviting
GAO to testify on MTSA as we approach the 10th anniversary of
this landmark legislation.
My written statement summarizes almost 10 years of GAO work
evaluating programs to provide for maritime security, and in
our statement we include a detailed appendix on some of the
individual programs with information on what the programs were
designed to do, what GAO found and recommended, and what those
programs cost where we were able to find cost information.
As noted by Admiral Servidio, Federal agencies,
particularly DHS and its components, have made substantial
progress in implementing maritime security programs such as
MTSA.
Agencies have developed or facilitated the development of
security plans at the national, port, facility, and vessel
level.
Agencies have screened inbound foreign-flagged vessels as
well as foreign seafarers to ensure compliance with security
regulations.
Agencies have enhanced their awareness of the maritime
domain through extensive risk assessments with MSRAM, through
vessel tracking, and for information sharing through both
formal and informal means.
Agencies developed partnerships to get advanced information
on incoming cargo to identify the highest risk cargo and to
ensure that, as appropriate, it was screened or scanned at
domestic or overseas ports.
DHS encountered many challenges along the way in
implementing these programs. Many of these challenges have
hindered or delayed MTSA. There has already been some
discussion of that. At the high level, some programs had a lack
of planning, weak program management, and lax implementation.
Some programs also experienced a lack of or difficulties in
coordinating with a multitude of maritime stakeholders.
As Mr. Larsen discussed, there were also limits on the
level of resources available to start, operate, and sustain
many of these programs; and today's more austere budget
requirements has exacerbated many of these resource challenges.
Finally, there have been and still are difficulties
measuring the results of the security programs.
Because of these problems, there is still some unfinished
business in implementing MTSA. Chairman LoBiondo has already
talked about TWIC. I will talk about three other examples.
Soon after 9/11, Interagency Operations Centers showed
great promise in Charleston, Norfolk, and San Diego. Congress
mandated that DHS replicate such centers at all high-risk
ports. But the efforts have been plagued by limited and
irregular funding, delays in developing detailed requirements,
a lack of input from some of the key stakeholders, and weak
management of the acquisition. It remains an open question
whether the still-planned IOCs will be more than just single-
agency command centers or the ``Interagency'' Operations
Centers that Congress had intended.
The Port Security Grant Program was another program enacted
soon after 9/11 with good intentions to provide funding for
security improvements. While these monies have been
distributed, the program has suffered from a number of
problems. Program management has moved among several different
agencies over the years which has reduced long-term
accountability; the procedure for awarding and distributing
funds was complex and slow, leading to a large accumulation of
unspent funds; and, finally, despite assurances since our 2005
recommendation that the program would develop performance
measures, there has been little progress determining what the
$2 billion program has actually bought.
Several different container security and scanning
technologies were pursued with high hopes that they would allow
us to sufficiently scan every container bound for the United
States. But some premature efforts to move from research and
development directly into full deployment of new technologies
as well as several unsuccessful pilots at foreign ports have
shown we clearly have to reevaluate what we can actually do
within the existing technical, logistical, economic, and
diplomatic realities of the container-based international
supply chain.
I would like to end on a positive note and acknowledge
there has been substantial progress in that, collectively,
these programs have improved the security of our ports. GAO
will continue to evaluate a number of maritime security
programs for this committee and others in Congress with the
common goal of ensuring that ports remain safe and efficient
engines for economic prosperity.
I would be happy to respond to any questions now.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Caldwell.
Admiral, the President's fiscal year 2013 budget would cut
funding for the Coast Guard by nearly $350 million and over
1,000 service men and women. Talk to us about what you see
these proposed cuts meaning, their impact. What does it mean to
the Service's ability to conduct port security? How does it
impact traditional missions? I am very concerned about this. I
would like to hear your take on it.
Admiral Servidio. Chairman, with increasing
responsibilities and a declining budget, we will be challenged
to continue all that we are doing. As Ranking Member Larsen
said, we are going to have to look at risk-based decisions. We
are going to have to look at how we best address those risks
and focus our resources on those activities we are performing
that have the greatest impact.
We do continue to use various metrics and tools, such as
MSRAM, to look at the risks that we have and to drive those
risks down; and once we have seen that, we can devote resources
to other areas. But, as you highlighted, sir, it will be a
challenge to continue to do more if the budget is less.
Mr. LoBiondo. The Coast Guard's authorization act of 2010
required the Coast Guard to make their maritime security risk
assessment model available in an unclassified version to
facility and vessel owners to assist in the development of
their risk assessments. The deadline on the Service to do this
was 180 days. Why has the Coast Guard not met this legal
requirement?
Admiral Servidio. Mr. Chairman, I was unaware of that, but
I can speak firsthand when I was captain of the port in St.
Petersburg, Florida, all of the maritime industry--the
stakeholders, the members of the Area Maritime Security
Committee, and likewise the members of the Harbor Safety
Committee--knew what was the factors in MSRAM. They were active
parts in our development of the MSRAM each and every year and
the revalidation of where we saw the risks are and what our
action plans were to reduce those risks.
Likewise, we shared the MSRAM data with the Urban Area
Security Initiative, the Florida Regional Domestic Security
Task Force, and other law enforcement agencies so that together
in the port complex we could see what the greatest risks are
and how we could utilize all of our different funding sources
and our resources and our authorities to drive down those
risks.
Mr. LoBiondo. I am not sure that that is an answer to the
question. Maybe you need to try to get back to us.
Admiral Servidio. I will get back to you, sir, on the
specifics of that.
[The information follows:]

This requirement has been met by the Coast Guard. In
November 2011, the U.S. Coast Guard released a
nonclassified version of the Maritime Security Risk
Analysis Model (MSRAM) titled the Industry Risk
Analysis Model (IRAM). IRAM is a terrorism risk
analysis tool that employs a similar scenario-based
construct as MSRAM and calculates a relative risk index
number for scenarios based on threat, consequence, and
vulnerability factors. The data for each factor is
entered by the owner-operator of the regulated facility
or vessel and then IRAM calculates the risk index
number, which can be sorted to identify high-risk
scenarios. IRAM allows owner-operators to perform a
terrorism-focused, security risk analysis of their
facilities/vessels, provides a risk-based planning
capability for updating operations plans, and provides
a means to communicate risk information between owner-
operators and first responders. To date, six owner-
operators have requested and been provided the IRAM
tool.

Mr. LoBiondo. Moving to TWIC, can you tell us when the
final rules on the use of TWIC biometric readers and the
implementation of Section 809 of the Coast Guard Authorization
Act of 2010 will be published?
Admiral Servidio. Sir, it has the Department's highest
priority, and it is presently in internal clearance.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, Admiral, I guess I am expecting you
sort of had to say that, but it is almost laughable. It has had
the Department's highest priority for years; and if that is the
highest priority and how they are dealing with it, I do know
the frustration that we share here of how poorly this has been
managed. We just can't get answers out of them, and I guess I
was hoping beyond hope there would be a little bit more
specifics about this.
It is beyond frustrating. We have got a law that is in
place. It has been ignored. It has been passed over. Congress--
it is almost as if we are not asking questions, and the
Department just doesn't seem to care about this.
And I don't put all this blame on the Coast Guard. You are
forced to react to what the boss says. But I don't know whether
maybe we should go on a tantrum and a tirade and Rick Larsen
and I figure out how to pound our shoe on the table together or
something.
Mr. Larsen. You don't want shoes off.
Mr. LoBiondo. We don't want shoes off. OK. We will figure
out something else. Because I think I speak for everybody on
the committee, this is a high level of frustration here.
Admiral Servidio. Mr. Chairman, sir, with regards to 809,
we did put a policy in place in December of 2011; and over 500
merchant mariners have been able to receive merchant mariner
credentials without having a TWIC. That is about 250 or more
received it just the last month. So we are doing what we can
from a policy standpoint, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Mr. Caldwell, since enactment of MTSA,
has the Department of Homeland Security, the Coast Guard or
Customs developed any metrics or performance measures to
determine the effectiveness of their efforts to secure the
Nation's ports and waterways?
Mr. Caldwell. There have been a couple of performance
measures put in place. MSRAM is probably the most positive one
at an individual facility level. MSRAM has been mentioned by
Admiral Servidio. And we have done a recent report on MSRAM. It
was very positive, and MSRAM is probably one of the better risk
management tools in the Department.
Measuring the larger issue of security at the port level,
this has been a tougher issue. The Coast Guard developed a
metric to look at the percentage of risk that its activities
have reduced in the maritime domain and in ports. Last year
when we looked at MSRAM we also looked at this metric. We
thought methodologically the measure was adequate, but it
overstates the accuracy since it is really based on judgment of
a lot of Coast Guard experts. So to say they have reduced
exactly 85 percent or 30 percent of the risk was perhaps
overstating the case. Coast Guard has agreed to keep using that
measure but to use it at a reduced level. But that metric has
probably one of the more serious attempts to look at it
portwide.
As far as CPB, most of the metrics have been at the
individual program level, and those metrics have generally
measured their activities as opposed to measuring the results
in terms of reductions in actual risk. As you know, it is hard
to measure security, particularly deterrence, which is probably
one of the positive accomplishments of a lot of these programs
that we have now.
Mr. LoBiondo. The SAFE Port Act of 2006 set a deadline of
not later than April 2009, for the issuance of final
regulations governing the deployment of technology at ports and
aboard vessels to read TWICs. Now, more than 2 years later,
there are still no TWIC readers. Until the readers are in
place, can you give us any level of assurance that TWICs are
providing adequate access, control, or improved security at our
ports?
Mr. Caldwell. TWIC acts as a fast pass right now. We did
some work last year which showed that it is relatively easy for
our investigators to use fraudulent TWICs or to obtain them
fraudulently and then use them to get into secure facilities.
We have work right now that is looking at the pilots in detail
which will shed light soon on where DHS is in terms of actually
using TWICs as biometric identification, as was originally
intended.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Admiral, thanks again for coming and helping us
out this morning.
With regards to container screening in the SAFE Port Act,
we required 100 percent screening of containers entering the
U.S. earlier this year, but Secretary Napolitano deferred
meeting this requirement until 2014.
In your opinion--if the Coast Guard has an opinion on this
issue--can this be done in an economical and cost-effective
manner and is the problem less with technology and more with
increased cost to shippers and delays and disruptions to the
flow of commerce? What are the hurdles to achieving 100 percent
screening?
Admiral Servidio. Ranking Member, I don't think I am in a
position to best answer that question. I can say that we work
with Customs and Border Protection to screen every person,
every vessel, and all of the cargo that comes into the U.S. We
do that electronically. We do that looking at the history,
using a number of different tools. That is what we are doing at
present. But I am really not in a position to comment on
physically inspecting all of the containers, sir.
Mr. Larsen. With regards to performance measures--I am not
going to ask you to talk percentages or so on--but it strikes
me everything we have asked the Coast Guard and many other
agencies to do--and this is going back to 2002, which is a long
time for me to think back--still, how much of that in any way,
shape, or form were we doing before we passed MTSA, to give an
idea of the advances that we have made?
Admiral Servidio. Sir, I had no tool that could calculate
what the risks were in the various--I had 21 commercial ports
when I was down in San Juan, including the largest oil terminal
and the largest cruise ship port in the U.S., and we really had
no measures of seeing what those vulnerabilities were and we
had no systematic way of reviewing them or addressing what
those risks were.
I think MSRAM is an important tool in looking at a metric
on how we are reducing risk. We see that at the port level each
year when we revalidate it. We can determine how the risks have
been reduced.
Likewise, we have seen detention rates for security
violations each year going down, the number of vessels we are
detaining for security requirements are also going down, and
the number of facilities we need to take control actions on are
likewise going down each year.
Mr. Larsen. And going down because of----
Admiral Servidio. Because of MTSA, because of the training
that we have done, because of the exercises we have done,
because of the socialization, the fact that security is now
part of what is expected in the maritime environment and it is
part of our day-to-day operations, sir.
Mr. Larsen. And we didn't see that nearly as much pre-2001?
Admiral Servidio. No, sir.
Firsthand, other than cruise ships, we had very little
security. I know in Florida at the time, in 2000, they were
talking about actions to be taken to reduce theft, pilferage,
other types of things at the maritime--in the maritime
environment and facilities. And as a result of MTSA, those
discussions are no longer going on.
Mr. Larsen. With regards to ISPS screening, you noted the
Coast Guard has visited almost 160 foreign countries to assess
the effectiveness of port security measures and implementation
of ISPS Code requirements. Can you shed some light on that
process a little further for us?
Admiral Servidio. Yes, Ranking Member. At present, it is
approximately every 2 years we look to visit foreign countries
to ascertain their implementation of the ISPS Code, what they
are physically doing, and it is also to establish a
relationship.
For example, just yesterday, we had representatives from
Djibouti, Kenya, and Somalia that were part of a reciprocal
visit. We visited their countries, except for Somalia. At the
present time, due to security reasons, we aren't sending anyone
to their country. But we visited their countries, and they come
here, and we go over our program. We highlight what we are
doing, how we are doing it. And it is this exchange of both
information, of training, that we feel has substantially
increased the security level.
What we do is we ensure that the countries are fully
implementing the ISPS Code. If they are not, it goes through an
interagency process, sir; and if it is determined that the
country has not effectively implemented it, there are
conditions of entry that are required for vessels that have
called on that country in the last five port calls. We could
potentially delay the vessel's arrival, verify security
precautions, screen them, or do a number of other control
actions before that vessel actually enters the U.S.
Mr. Larsen. And you are meeting with port representatives?
Because some of these countries either have much weaker Coast
Guards or no Coast Guard.
Admiral Servidio. Yes, sir. Yesterday was the commandant of
the Djibouti Coast Guard. It was their port facility leader for
Kenya. It was their minister responsible for port security. And
for Somalia it was one of their port managers that was visiting
with us.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Mr. Caldwell, with regards to MSRAM, considering the Coast
Guard depends upon MSRAM, we have heard what an important tool
it is in its risk-based security framework, if Coast Guard
officials are saying now--and they are saying--that personnel
cuts are limiting the use of MSRAM data, what are the
implications if the Coast Guard's budget were to continue to be
cut? It is one thing to have a great tool to use. It is another
thing not to be able to use it.
Mr. Caldwell. Well, in a recent report on MSRAM we did have
some concerns about whether Coast Guard field staff who worked
on MSRAM at the sectors had the time to use the tool accurately
and to update the data in it. One of the strengths of MSRAM
that we found at the Coast Guard is that on an annual basis
they are revalidating the data. So it wasn't just a one-time
entry process.
Mr. Larsen. And the Admiral mentioned that.
Mr. Caldwell. In terms of the training.
The biggest concern we have with MSRAM is not as much in
the analysis. It is to what extent is it actually useful for
making decisions at an operational level. For example, MSRAM
can tell you the risk at a facility and what you might do to
reduce vulnerabilities at a facility. What is harder is for
that captain of the port to then make decisions of how to use
that risk information from MSRAM. Because, of course, the
captain of the port has 10 other statutory missions to engage.
So while MSRAM might indicate it is a good idea to escort this
cruise ship or this tanker that is coming into port, the
captain of the port, he or she may have a search and rescue
case going on or some military out-load to escort or other
things, other priorities. But there will obviously be a little
less fidelity in the model if we reduce the resources dedicated
to keep it current.
Mr. Larsen. Well, if you are following the Coast Guard on
Twitter like I do, you will note that they are pretty busy all
over the country every day doing a lot of things that probably
don't have anything to do with MSRAM, including up in the
Northwest. So we have to do a better job ourselves up there.
Mr. Caldwell, you have written--I noted in your written
statement about the WatchKeeper Program. This new information
management and sharing system has been dogged since its
inception due to the lack of good engagement between the
Federal, State, and local agencies and port partners with the
Coast Guard in developing the requirements. Furthermore, you
assert the situation has had a negative impact on the formation
of these IOCs.
At this point, is it possible for the Coast Guard to
reconfigure WatchKeeper or better engage partner agencies and
stakeholders to provide the type of information that was first
envisioned under MTSA when it was passed from an outside GAO
point of view?
Mr. Caldwell. If you think of these centers and what they
were intended to be originally, I don't think they are going to
be ``centers'' at all. They are not going to be a physical
place where people actually gather. Given the costs associated
with building those physical centers, the next best thing is to
move to a virtual model where you could share information via
WatchKeeper.
The beauty of the physical centers is that every agency
could bring in their own IT tools and have it there, and it
might not be all systems on one screen, but they all have their
equipment there and can share information by looking at things
and look at their own systems.
With WatchKeeper, there is some way to salvage it, but it
will require a lot of attention, and the Coast Guard has not
requested funds beyond 2013 to continue implementing that. It
would take a pretty strong outreach effort. We found that 82
percent of the stakeholders that were given access to
WatchKeeper had never even logged on. So the Coast Guard has a
long way to go to fix that.
It is the outreach piece they are going to have to work on.
Even the Federal agencies are not participating.
Mr. Larsen. Admiral, do you have comments both on
WatchKeeper and on the brick and mortar IOC versus the virtual
IOC issue?
Admiral Servidio. Ranking Member, I recognize there are
going to be some challenges in getting ports to fully utilize
WatchKeeper, because over the last 10 years there has been
other systems that have been developed for some of that
internal communications.
Going back to when I was in St. Petersburg, we had a joint
teleconference every morning with Customs and Border
Protection, with the local sheriffs, with the Tampa Police
Department, where we would go over who is going to be
patrolling in what areas, what the risks were, what high-risk
activities were taking place, who would be providing patrols
and escorts and other types of things.
Translating some of that into WatchKeeper now that that
system has been rolled out, it is going to take some change in
people's attitudes. And in most of our ports likewise there
have been other systems that we have used. But I think as
WatchKeeper goes to 20 different ports by the end of this
fiscal year we will see that it is going to be a tool that will
be used more in the ports. But, right now, I think there are
other tools and communication structures that some people are
using. So we are going to have to build to it, sir.
Mr. Larsen. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. All right. I would like to thank you,
Admiral. Thank you, Mr. Caldwell. We will take a brief break
while we reconfigure for the second panel.
OK. We will reconvene. The second panel this morning is Ms.
Bethann Rooney, manager of port security of the Port Authority
of New York and New Jersey, who is testifying on behalf of the
American Association of Port Authorities.
We also have Mr. Chris Koch, who is president and CEO of
the World Shipping Council.
Both Mr. Koch and Ms. Rooney were tremendously--very, very,
very helpful to this subcommittee as we went about our business
and the process of drafting MTSA 10 years ago and trying to get
it right and understand how it works in the real world. So I
want to thank you for your help then and thank you for being
here today.
Ms. Rooney, you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF BETHANN ROONEY, MANAGER OF PORT SECURITY, PORT
AUTHORITY OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF
THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PORT AUTHORITIES; AND CHRISTOPHER
KOCH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, WORLD SHIPPING COUNCIL

Ms. Rooney. Good morning Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member
Larsen, subcommittee members. Thank you for inviting us here
today to discuss MTSA over the past decade.
Prior to 9/11, security was not a top concern for most U.S.
ports. Eleven years ago today, that all changed. Congress and
the administration took quick and decisive action to focus on
the risk to our seaports. Enhancing maritime security and
protecting our ports from acts of terrorism and other crime
remains a top priority for the American Association of Port
Authorities and our members. Protecting America's ports is
critical to our Nation's economic growth and vitality and is an
integral part of homeland security and national defense.
The challenge for the past 10 years, however, has been to
integrate security into the efficient and economic flow of
commerce. We commend the Coast Guard for its excellent job in
developing the regulations and working in partnership with
industry to secure our ports.
Maritime security is a continuous activity that requires
the attention of many individuals. The cost of meeting and
maintaining the requirements of the security regulations is
significant. Implementing MTSA is not a one-time expense.
Rather, it requires recurring costs to operate, maintain, and
staff the equipment and systems that were put in place. My
agency alone has spent $166 million on port security in the
past 11 years.
As was mentioned, the foundation of a good security program
is a risk assessment tool. MSRAM should be used by all Federal
agencies to assess the risks in the maritime environment, and,
as has also been mentioned, we would like to see MSRAM made
available to regulated entities to assess the risk of their own
facilities.
Key to enhancing and maintaining security in ports is the
Port Security Grant Program. Our economy, safety, and national
defense depend largely on how well we can protect our seaports,
and cuts in Federal funding present significant challenges to
the security of our ports. We urge Congress to provide full
funding for the Port Security Grant Program.
DHS is proposing to merge all grant programs into a single
program that would be managed by the States. We encourage your
committee's continued support to voice opposition to this new
structure.
The Port Security Grant Program is one of just a few
security grants that requires a cost-share. At a minimum, we
urge Congress to direct the Department to eliminate the cost-
share for public agencies and our tenants. We also ask for this
committee's assistance to ensure that the performance period
for port security grants is no less than 3 years.
While the MTSA authorized grant funding to be used for
equipment that detects weapons of mass destruction and
conventional explosives, grant funding cannot be used to fund
Federal functions such as cargo inspection to ensure that the
goods entering the United States are in fact free of restricted
and prohibited items.
Today, DNDO and CPB are fiscally constrained and are asking
port operators to pay for Radiation Portal Monitors. As imports
increase and container terminals reconfigure and expand, we
need to ensure that we can continue to scan all of the cargo
that is entering the United States. We would like to work with
Congress and DHS to develop a plan to upgrade the obsolete
equipment in our ports. Ports should not be responsible for
paying for DHS owned, operated, and maintained equipment. If we
are, we should be able to use grant funding to help offset
those costs.
There has been a lot of discussion this morning about TWIC
already, and we have worked closely with TSA and Coast Guard
for many years on this important program. We strongly support
TWIC and look forward to the day when it will be fully
implemented.
The majority of TWICs will expire in the next 6 to 9
months. We are pleased that TSA has taken steps to address the
issue of offering a reduced cost 3-year renewal option.
However, our members are concerned that the lack of an updated
threat assessment could compromise the security of our
facilities.
We are also concerned that the renewal or extension process
be convenient and efficient. TSA and their new contractor
should again work closely with the maritime community on such
issues as enrollment center locations, bulk payment, and the
availability of onsite enrollment and activation. When the
reader rule is finally published, it is imperative that
sufficient time be given to ports to implement the requirements
and that adequate port security grant funding be available.
TWIC projects should be a top priority of the grant program
once the reader rule is released. We encourage the Coast Guard
to continue their proposed rulemaking process and for TSA to
complete the reader testing and publish a qualified technology
list.
Finally, as this committee considers future enhancements to
the MTSA, we respectfully request you also consider a number of
additional areas of concern that were outlined in my written
statement.
Thank you for inviting us to testify on the 10th
anniversary of the Maritime Transportation Security Act. We are
indeed safer than we were 10 years ago, and the AAPA and its
members remain committed to doing its part to protect America.
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Koch.
Mr. Koch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Congressman Larsen,
for having this hearing. It is always appropriate to review
where we are and where we are going.
My testimony, like other testimony here today, tries to set
forth and discuss the multilayer risk assessment strategy that
the DHS has developed cooperatively between CBP and the U.S.
Coast Guard.
There is obviously a sophisticated system in place for
vessel tracking using LRIT and other technology, obviously a
regime in place to look at people and the security of the
people, both on the ships that are coming in and out of U.S.
ports as well as those working in the ports. There is a good
strategy for vessel security plans, for port security plans,
and, importantly, which we know has been an issue to this
committee and Congress in general, for the cargo security as
well, particularly containerized cargo. And I think DHS
deserves credit for having constructed a system that is clearly
the most sophisticated system of any trading nation in the
world in terms of what data it acquires before vessel loading
from the people who should have the best information available
to them, so that Customs can undertake its cargo screening
before vessel loading.
We continue to believe that before vessel loading screening
is the proper strategy. Obviously, that requires getting the
best data possible, and we think improvements have been made in
that, and we think CBP is on the right track.
I guess what this basically says is that we believe that
the strategy that has been put together makes sense. It is a
sound strategy. The question really now should focus on the
implementation of that strategy. Are we doing what we need to
do to make that strategy actually effective?
Perhaps the most prominent question in that regard is the
one that the subcommittee has already identified here today,
and that is the TWIC, in terms of the personnel security. That
obviously needs work, and I think everybody is looking forward
to seeing DHS deliver on the high priority it said it has on
this and to having the proposed rule out before the end of this
year.
One of the issues in terms of getting better information to
the Government is how the Government uses that information.
Obviously, you would probably be interested in having a sit-
down with CBP to talk about how the National Targeting Center
deals with all of the cargo information it gets. Our
understanding is it has improved their screening capability
quite a bit.
Obviously, the high-volume shippers of repetitive products
are really not the kind of risk that is probably prominent in
their minds. Whether it is Ford auto parts or Heineken beer
coming in, those repetitive high-volume shippers are probably
pretty low risk. It is the cargo from people you see less
often, the shippers who don't have a good track record or who
may appear in consolidated boxes coming through, that requires
the kind of attention, requires the scanning of those boxes if
CBP is not satisfied that it has enough information.
Our understanding is that the risk assessment system is
working pretty well. Our understanding is that Customs is
getting the information it wants. But that would be something
you may want to be looking at as well.
One of the issues we have identified, which we also
identified in the last hearing at which we were asked to
testify, is getting CBP even better information about container
cargo weights. We have a proposal at the IMO for that. We thank
both you for having supported that proposal. It will be debated
later this month at the IMO. The U.S. Government has agreed to
cosponsor that proposal.
We think it makes good sense, certainly from a safety
perspective, but we also believe that there is security value
on this, and we understand that CBP has informed Coast Guard of
their support for container weight verification for security
risk screening purposes.
So all of those things being said, we believe the
partnership between the industry and CBP and the Coast Guard is
working quite well. There is good, open, honest dialogue. If
there is a risk, it is communicated and people can act on it
when they are reviewing vessel security plans or port security
plans, and we continue to believe that the focus should be on
the implementation of the strategy which we believe is a sound
strategy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be happy to take any
questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Koch.
Well, based on what you just said about working together
and sharing ideas, do you feel the Government has reached out
to the industry to understand how it works in the real world so
that they can get a better perspective on what can be done for
maritime security? You are pleased with that communications and
reach-out?
Mr. Koch. Yes, we are. I think when MTSA was just being
rolled out there were bumps in the road which you might expect
when a regime like that is coming together and being
implemented. But the experience our members have had has been
both the Coast Guard and CBP are quite professional; and when
they have issues, the relationships are good.
Liner shipping might be a little bit different than other
sectors because the vessels--the container ships and liner
shipping vessels are coming into ports every week--are
regularly scheduled services. It is the same crews. It is the
same captains. They are there time and time again. Schedule
reliability is key, so the operators will bend over backwards
to make sure the Government has got whatever it needs so they
can stay on schedule; and if there is a question, the operators
bend over backwards to try to make sure that the Coast Guard or
CBP has what they need. We think that goes on in other sectors
as well, but at least our experience has been the cooperation
has been excellent.
Mr. LoBiondo. On the TWICs, only U.S. mariners carry them.
What in your view could be done to improve the security of the
Merchant Marine credentials carried by foreign mariners?
Mr. Koch. Well, it is a difficult diplomatic question. The
U.S. Government has taken a position which is far more strict
than many trading nations, which is that crewmen coming in on a
foreign-flagged ship, if they are going to get off the ship in
the U.S., have to have a visa. The ILO Maritime Labor
Convention, which is about to enter into force internationally,
takes a different view, which is that seafarers ought to be
able to get off the ship without a visa. The U.S. Government,
Australia, several other governments have said, no, the
security of the United States requires that you go through the
visa process and you have an interview and that that process be
pursued.
So we believe the visa process satisfies the objectives of
the Department of State and DHS in terms of ensuring that the
crew on the ships coming to the U.S. have passed a sufficient
security check that they are trustworthy.
I would point out that is different than many nations who
have less security screening requirements on crewmen than the
U.S. does.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Ms. Rooney, your port hosted a pilot program for the TWIC
reader. Can you give us kind of a thumbnail sketch or a brief
discussion on the pitfalls that the port encountered on that?
Ms. Rooney. Yes, sir. There were a number of issues that we
encountered with the pilot program, some of which were able to
be worked out during the course of the pilot program and others
that were still unresolved. But, in essence, they were
technology issues. They were issues that allowed the reader to
make a positive confirmation of the biometric that was stored
in the card within a timely manner.
Many of the issues that were overcome had to do with user
training and user knowledge and experience. So the first couple
of times that a mariner or a truck driver or a longshoreman was
presented with a TWIC reader, they fumbled over the process;
and, over time, those were resolved. We are confident that
those issues can be addressed and successfully overcome and we
can move from this flash pass to the biometric credential that
was originally intended.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Rooney, with regards to both port security grant
funding and the cost-share requirement, I have a couple
questions.
First off, just some context. The Congress passed and the
President signed recently a transportation bill where we went
from 110 separate surface transportation accounts to
approximately 30 or 40. We had to gore some oxes to make that
happen, but we thought, over time, even going back to the
Democratic majority, to the Republican majority, that we needed
to consolidate some of these accounts to give some more
flexibility to recipients of the Federal dollars so they could
choose more what they wanted to do, as opposed to saying this
dollar can only do this and that dollar can only do that.
So that is the context of the question with regards to port
security grant funding. I would just like to hear the point you
want to make about why port security grant funding needs to
stay separate, as opposed to being consolidated with other
accounts other than it just should because it is.
Ms. Rooney. I think the point that it needs to be separate
is, by and large, because the maritime industry is largely
owned and operated by the private sector. And the private
sector is responsible for the security of the ports first and
foremost in connection with their Federal, State, and local
partners.
So when those private-sector entities--and, for example, in
my port there are 185 facilities that are regulated by the
Coast Guard. Approximately 170 of them are owned by private-
sector operators. When those private-sector companies come
forward in an environment where they are competing with the New
York City Police Department, with the New York City Fire
Department, with the Port Authority and others for dollars,
they will be challenged to truly secure their facilities when
other high-risk assets and activities are taking place in an
area such as New York and New Jersey.
Mr. Larsen. OK. All right.
And then with regards to the cost-share requirement, again,
we have cost-share on surface transportation as well. Can you
discuss a little bit more about the challenge of the cost-share
in your situation?
Ms. Rooney. Again, while many of the--while much of the
responsibility at the facility level for security is with the
private owners and operators, the public agencies provide
layers of security over and above that. And when you look at
the history of where the port security grant dollars have gone
to in the last 4 or 5 years, much of that is going to public-
sector agencies, all of whom are constrained with their own
budgets today. So it becomes very difficult for public-sector
agencies to provide the cost-share that is necessary. And, as a
result, what we have seen historically for many years now is
public-sector agencies pulling out of those grants and those
risks no longer being mitigated because they cannot afford the
cost-share.
Mr. Larsen. OK. Thank you.
Sounds like everything is great in the World Shipping
Council, Mr. Koch.
Mr. Koch. If the companies could just learn how to be
profitable, it would be even better.
Mr. Larsen. With regards to MTSA, your attitude in the last
hearing was the same as this one. It is like if it is a
problem, we are going to fix it, we are going to work this
thing out, we are going to find a way to move cargo, because
that is the job of the industry. And that is great. But can you
talk a little bit about screening protocols under MTSA that
shippers and carriers have to abide by to import cargoes in the
U.S.?
This gets back to the 100 percent scanning of containers
entering the U.S. Is the scanning--do you see that scanning as
unnecessary, given cargo screening protocols, the 10 + 2 cargo
screening protocols? Is 100 percent screening necessary? Should
it be all risk-based? Where do you think we ought to be moving?
Mr. Koch. Well, I think the 10 + 2 initiative did give CBP,
obviously, a lot more information to do effective screening.
And there is a semantic issue here. I think CBP would say they
are screening 100 percent of all cargo before vessel loading.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Koch. Screening meaning analyzing the information and
making a judgment about risk.
It is the 100 percent scanning of a box, usually meant to
be both radiation scanning and a kind of visual scan via x ray,
gamma ray, or analogous technology. And frankly, the problem
with such visual scanning of all containerized cargo is it is
just not practical.
Whether it is needed or not I think is also a debate.
Without meaning to be glib about it, I really don't think you
need to scan every box of Heineken beer coming into the U.S.,
as an example, or Toyota auto parts coming into the U.S. I
mean, I think the risk would not justify the expense of doing
that.
The other problem, obviously, with the 100 percent proposal
is it is an extraterritorial assertion of jurisdiction, and you
are asking foreign governments to do something and incur the
costs to do all of it. And there is resistance to that. They
point out, with some degree of fairness, the U.S. doesn't
undertake any such scanning for any of its exports, so why is
it fair to require them to do that for their exports? And so
there is a reciprocity issue there.
And then there is also the technology issue. The technology
has not yet developed to a point where you could process that
many containers through the system and continue to have the
efficient flow of commerce.
The risk-based strategy is a strategy that from a practical
perspective is your only choice. And so the question really I
think is not to question the risk-based strategy so much as is
to ensure that the agency, CBP, in charge of this, is getting
the data that really makes sense. Is there data that they
should be getting that they are not getting? And are they
enforcing the existing obligations on people to give them the
data?
In other words, you have an obligation for ocean carriers
to file their manifests, their stowage plans, and all their
container status messages. You have obligations on NVOs to file
all of their manifests before vessel loading. And you have
obligations on importers to file the 10 data elements
identified in the 10 + 2 reg. Are they doing that?
Our understanding is they are. But I mean it would be worth
checking into to make sure that they are getting the data that
the strategy calls for.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Ms. Rooney, Mr. Koch, I would like to thank
you for being here this morning; and the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:31 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

