- ASSURING THE SAFETY OF DOMESTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION: LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL SPILL

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSURING THE SAFETY OF DOMESTIC
ENERGY PRODUCTION: LESSONS LEARNED
FROM THE DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL SPILL

=======================================================================

(112-58)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 2, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-098 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey            Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
------                                7

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
Vice Chair                           (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Caldwell, Stephen L., Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
Government Accountability Office...............................     6
Rufe, Vice Admiral Roger, Jr., (Retired), Chair, Incident
Specific Preparedness Review, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill,
United States Coast Guard......................................     6
Rusco, Frank, Director, Natural Resources and Environment,
Government Accountability Office...............................     6
Zukunft, Rear Admiral Paul F., Assistant Commandant for Marine
Safety, Security, and Stewardship, United States Coast Guard...     6

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Caldwell, Stephen L., and Rusco, Frank, joint statement..........    53
Rufe, Vice Admiral Roger, Jr., (Retired).........................    75
Zukunft, Rear Admiral Paul F.....................................    78

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

United States Coast Guard:

Response to recommendations from five reports regarding the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill................................    12
Response to request for information from Hon. Frank A.
LoBiondo, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New Jersey.................................................    38

ASSURING THE SAFETY OF DOMESTIC
ENERGY PRODUCTION: LESSONS
LEARNED FROM THE DEEPWATER
HORIZON OIL SPILL

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:59 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank LoBiondo
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. The subcommittee is meeting this morning to examine the
lessons learned in the wake of the BP Deepwater Horizon oil
spill, review the latest investigations into the causes of the
spill, and the Coast Guard response to it, hear recommendations
of those involved in investigations, and find out what actions
the Service has taken or will take in response to those
recommendations.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill was an unprecedented
tragedy. The explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon tragically
claimed the lives of 11 individuals and left a tremendous--
almost unparalleled--natural and economic disaster in its wake.
The Coast Guard mobilized over 7,500 personnel, and 150 assets
from throughout the country to respond to the spill. While I am
extremely proud of how the Coast Guard handled this incident,
it is important that we review what went well and what we could
do better in any future type event.
As such, today we will hear testimony on the Joint
Investigation Team Report, the incident-specific preparedness
report, and the Federal On-Scene Coordinator report. These
reports each contain valuable insight into what caused the oil
spill, and how the Federal Government responded to it.
Among the many findings and recommendations, a few stand
out because they appear in nearly every report. Nearly all of
the reports noted that the area contingency plans were not
adequate for a spill of this magnitude, and that they must be
updated to incorporate protocols for using dispersants and
other response technologies, as well as the latest information
on environmentally sensitive areas. They must also do a better
job of involving State and local officials in the planning
process. I hope the Coast Guard has made some progress on this
issue, and look forward to hearing when we can expect all ACPs
will be revised.
I am also concerned with findings indicating the Coast
Guard's oil spill response and Marine environmental protection
mission has withered over the last decade, as a result of
emphasis on homeland security missions. This is in line with
the findings of the inspector general and others, which
indicate that funding and resource hours dedicated to non-
homeland security missions, as well as the oil spill response,
research, and development activities have shrunk considerably
over the last decade.
Finally, I am very concerned with the findings that
officials at all levels of Government were unfamiliar with the
national contingency plan, our Nation's 42-year-old blueprint
on how to respond to oil spills. But I am particularly alarmed
that senior leaders of the Department of Homeland Security were
either unaware or simply misunderstood how the plan functions.
But these concerns speak to a larger issue this
subcommittee has been concerned with since the Coast Guard was
transferred to the Department of Homeland Security, and that is
the Department does not understand nor appreciate the
traditional missions of the Coast Guard. We talked about this
extensively over the years, that when the Coast Guard has been
asked to do so very much--and homeland security is a very
critical mission--that the traditional missions cannot be
overlooked.
And while critically important, port security accounts for
only 20 percent of what the Coast Guard does on a daily basis.
The remaining 80 percent are traditional missions like oil
spill response. These missions require the Department's
leadership to understand that they need to commit adequate
resources and attention, as well as participate fully in
training and preparedness activities.
MODUs like the Deepwater Horizon continue to operate in our
waters, and will soon begin operations in Cuban waters. Each of
these operations, if not properly regulated by the Coast Guard
with the support of the Department, could potentially cause
another catastrophic spill. As such, we cannot afford to sit
back and take our time in implementing the lessons learned.
I look forward to hearing what the Coast Guard has done to
date to implement the recommendations of these reports, and
when they will complete action on the remaining
recommendations.
With that, I would like to yield to Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
scheduling today's hearing to continue the subcommittee's
oversight concerning the circumstances contributing to the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill, and to hear recommendations to
improve our energy development activities on the
intercontinental shelf of the United States.
We learned a lot earlier this year, when members from the
National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and
Offshore Drilling in February provided us with their
recommendations. I expect that this morning's witnesses will
provide additional insights and new motivation for the Congress
to take purposeful action.
The Deepwater Horizon oil spill was a major human and
environmental disaster of potentially unprecedented
proportions. The message today is the same as it was when we
heard from the National Commission 8 months ago. Undertaking
deep water drilling requires a fuller understanding of the
risks that accompany the clear benefits. It is great news that
we now have a much more full understanding.
Several common themes run through the findings and
recommendations contained in the various reports that we will
review today, and many of these seem parallel--themes parallel
the findings and recommendations contained in the National
Commission's report.
For example, the Federal Government's regulation of
offshore oil and gas drilling and of foreign-flagged MODUs was
too lax. Also, Federal oversight of foreign-flagged registries
and reliance on certifications of compliance issued by such
registries deserves greater scrutiny.
Additionally, as reported in the Joint Investigation Team
analysis, failures and deficiencies in the safety management
system aboard the Deepwater Horizon and the dual command
structure that existed prior to its demise each contributed to
the disaster.
The need for greater integration and outreach on the State
and local levels during the development of area contingency
plans--or ACPs--also was emphasized in these reports. Moreover,
efforts to better articulate the institutional and operational
differences between Federal response efforts under the Oil
Pollution Act and the Stafford Act are needed to improve
coordination between Federal responders and their State and
local partners.
Additionally, we learned that our limited tool box of
response capabilities exposed a legitimate need for a new
emphasis and resources to bolster research and development of
new oil spill response technologies.
And, once again, these reports reaffirmed that the Jones
Act, the law which protects and supports our domestic maritime
industry, was absolutely no hindrance to the Federal
Government's response to this environmental calamity. These
reports also make clear that we need to provide Federal
agencies with adequate resources to minimize the odds of
another tragedy from happening again, and respond efficiently
and effectively, should we have to.
The public depends on Federal agencies to ensure the safety
of deep water drilling, and the safety of the men and women who
work on those platforms. Diminishing this capacity through
budget cuts is irresponsible, especially considering the call
for increased investment borne out by these reports. As much as
we may want the Coast Guard to do more with less, what this
means in reality are fewer inspectors, less inspections, and
less certainty for safe operations. And, as we have learned
tragically, this has real consequences, in terms of loss of
life and economic disruption.
Now that we have these recommendations in hand, Congress
should act sensibly where it must to ensure that our policies
for offshore drilling are rigorous, that they safeguard
workers, that they benefit the economy, and protect the
environment. Too many lives are at stake and too many jobs are
at risk for Congress to remain complacent. If we cannot
demonstrate that we can utilize our offshore resources in a way
that protects lives and the environment, we stand to further
lose our credibility and trust of the American people.
And that result could be devastating to the maritime
industry, and the jobs that support our economy as a whole,
including the ship builders, welders, and pipe fitters who work
at places like Dakota Creek Industries, located in my district,
who actually do work to develop and build supply vessels that
support the energy industry in the gulf. No one is suggesting
that we eliminate deep water drilling off our coasts. In fact,
the record says just the opposite.
According to information provided by the Bureau of Safety
and Environmental Enforcement, perhaps not all, but many of the
drilling activities that were suspended as a result of this
disaster have resumed operations. Moreover, 97.7 percent of the
1,413 requests to extend deep water oil and gas leases have
been granted, and close to 300 new well permit applications
have been approved since June 8, 2010.
But given what we now know about the risks of deep water
drilling and the exposed deficiencies, we should put the pieces
in place to ensure the highest level of safety and reliability.
When the Exxon Valdez ran aground in Bligh Reef in Alaska in
1989, Congress responded with the passage of the Oil Pollution
Act. And fortunately, over the past 22 years, the act has
served its intended purpose, and greatly reduced the frequency
and severity of oil spills in the navigable waters of the
United States.
Nonetheless, the Deepwater Horizon disaster demonstrated a
need to amend and strengthen the act to ensure that
contemporary offshore drilling can be done safely, efficiently,
and with minimal harm to the environment.
Last Congress, the House passed comprehensive legislation
to reform and improve the Federal Government's oversight of
energy development on the intercontinental shelf. The Senate
did not act. Nevertheless, comparable legislation has been
reintroduced this Congress, and that bill, H.R. 501, provides
an appropriate starting point for discussions.
I suggest it is time for these discussions to begin in
earnest, and I stand ready to work with Chairman LoBiondo and
other members of this committee to shape legislation to meet
this challenge.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the chance to
provide an opening statement, and I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you. Mr. Mica, chairman of the full
committee, would you like to make any opening remarks?
Mr. Mica. Well, just a comment, first, to thank you all for
conducting this hearing. And it is important that our
subcommittees conduct appropriate oversight, particularly of
something so significant, so impacting on the Nation as the oil
spill, the Deepwater Horizon incident, in which we lost lives
and did damage to the environment of the gulf, and affected
many of the surrounding States.
I hope from this hearing and from previous reports that we
can also adopt measures and look at any changes in law or
policy that can make certain that we have a better response
when we do have an incident.
I am anxious to hear some of what will be the testimony
given today in regard to progress of the Coast Guard and its
ability to respond adequately and make certain that we give
them the tools to--and again, any changes in Federal law that
we need to make, or in their response pattern, so that again
they can do the job necessary.
I was concerned about several things I have heard lately.
One is--will affect pending legislation to divide some proceeds
from a legal settlement between the States and the Federal
Government. And I think it is important that at some point the
subcommittee ascertain who has been adequately compensated for
their losses, and try to come up with some fair and balanced
approach to make certain that people are made as whole as
possible.
Congress will have to divide that compensation that the
courts may soon decide upon, and we want it done fairly. I have
told some of the participants that I our responsibility in
Congress is representing the American people and the taxpayer,
who did expend a considerable amount of resources and effort.
And I thank the Coast Guard for their great job in helping
direct the cleanup, and Admiral Allen's incredible work at a
difficult time.
I was disappointed by some of the interagency problems that
we experienced, particularly with EPA. It is making decisions
that--on some of the chemicals and other treatment that was
used back and forth, leaving the response in the lurch, so to
speak, probably causing some delays and also uncertainty in
what should move forward.
I think, finally, that it is nice to have the Federal
Government prepared, and we have learned some lessons from
this. A delayed response by the Federal Government, but finally
getting in there. Part of that was based on inadequate flow
information, and that can be corrected, and we will probably
hear more about that today.
But I think, in the long term, the private sector has to be
held responsible. They also need to be developing technologies
or means to cap a spill like this as the disaster progresses.
Some of those mechanisms, the technologies, equipment need to
be in place. I understand they have taken some initiatives. I
don't know how adequate they are, in case we ever experience
something like this again.
And finally, that BP or anyone who was involved in and held
responsible for this makes certain that folks are adequately
compensated. I understand what initially started out as an
adequate response to those affected has now experienced some
problems, and people have not been adequately, again, assisted.
And I think we have got to find out how we move that process
forward and hold the private sector, as well as the
Government's feet to the fire.
I thank you again for conducting this hearing. I hope some
answers can evolve that will help us do our job better. And I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Mica. We now welcome our panel
of witnesses. We thank you very much for being here today.
Our panel includes Admiral Zukunft--I hope that is
pronouncing it correctly. If it is OK with you, we will go with
Admiral Z the rest of the way. The rear admiral is the
assistant commandant for marine safety, security, and
stewardship.
We also have retired Coast Guard Vice Admiral Roger Rufe,
chairman of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill incident specific
preparedness review, Mr. Steve Caldwell, director of the
Government Accountability Office of homeland security and
justice team, and Mr. Caldwell is accompanied by Mr. Frank
Rusco, director of GAO's National Resources and Environment
Team.
I thank you all again for participating. Admiral Z, you are
up.

TESTIMONY OF REAR ADMIRAL PAUL F. ZUKUNFT, ASSISTANT COMMANDANT
FOR MARINE SAFETY, SECURITY, AND STEWARDSHIP, UNITED STATES
COAST GUARD; VICE ADMIRAL ROGER RUFE, JR., (RETIRED), CHAIR,
INCIDENT SPECIFIC PREPAREDNESS REVIEW, DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL
SPILL, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD; STEPHEN L. CALDWELL,
DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND FRANK RUSCO, DIRECTOR, NATURAL
RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Admiral Zukunft. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking
Member Larsen, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
am honored to appear before you today to testify about the
Coast Guard's status in regard to the 2010 Macondo 252 spill of
national significance that resulted in a tragic explosion, loss
of 11 lives, and sinking of the MODU Deepwater Horizon. I
served as the Federal On-Scene Coordinator for over 6 months,
leading more than 47,000 Federal, State, local, tribal, and
private responders in the expansive response operation.
In the aftermath of the spill, the Coast Guard conducted a
comprehensive review of several Deepwater Horizon after-action
reports, including the incident-specific preparedness review,
or ISPR, the Federal On-Scene Coordinator report, that I
signed, the National Incident Commander's report, and the Joint
Investigation Team Report. These reports provide a valuable
body of lessons learned, perspectives, and opinions the Coast
Guard is now using to spur initiatives that will ensure we are
well prepared to respond to future spills of national
significance.
While there are many areas for improvement that we are
addressing through countless initiatives, we have concluded the
overall response framework and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990
and the national oil and hazardous substance pollution
contingency plan, or the NCP, is sound and effective.
The NCP established and organized a command and control
structure that allowed the National Incident Commander and the
Federal On-Scene Coordinator to effectively cooperate with one
another while directly coordinating with other Federal, State,
local, tribal, and private stakeholders to address the most
critical needs.
Additionally, the NCP provided the necessary discretion and
flexibility to address the very unique circumstances of the
Deepwater Horizon response. Since the Deepwater Horizon spill,
the Coast Guard and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement, or BSEE, have forged an interagency partnership
focused on improving compliance standards, oil spill response
and preparedness efforts, and regulation of drilling activities
on the outer continental shelf.
The director of BSEE and the Coast Guard deputy commandant
for operations meet on a quarterly basis--and they are actually
testifying together today--to discuss OCS activities. They have
established working groups that are actively engaged on a wide
range of issues, including oil spill response planning,
exercises, joint inspections, and of significant note, a
comprehensive analysis of regional and area contingency plans.
This effort includes a worst-case discharge gap analysis to
identify the most accurate up-to-date information for offshore
facilities in the Gulf of Mexico, Alaska, and Pacific regions.
One of the key lessons learned--one of our key lessons
learned was that, although we planned with State officials, as
prescribed in the national contingency plan, we need to drive
the same effort down to the county, parish, local, and tribal
levels. Accordingly, the Coast Guard has re-emphasized existing
guidance to our district and sector commanders to develop an
aggressive outreach program with local municipalities to
facilitate a true whole-of-government approach under the NCP
and future response efforts.
The various after-action reports highlighted 51
recommendations and areas for improvement. In response, the
Coast Guard is reviewing each item and establishing goals,
objectives, courses of action, and a timeline, as a followup.
Our significant initiatives that are currently in progress
include developing an on-scene Federal officer coordinating
course, which has already been launched.
We have requested additional personnel in the President's
budget for fiscal year 2012 to establish a national incident
management assistance team that will provide immediate
deployable incident management surge capability. We are working
with DHS and the interagency to update documents and protocols,
and we have also promulgated a National Incident Commander
spill of national significance internal instruction that
codifies a number of the lessons learned during the Deepwater
Horizon response.
We are also implementing senior-level Coast Guard liaisons
to State, local, and tribal levels during a future response. We
have engaged with EPA and FEMA to develop improvements for
whole-of-government responses under the national response
framework and the national contingency plan, and we are also
working closely with the national response teams, EPA and NOAA,
to review and update guidelines for dispersant use and in situ
burning, two tools that were critical in the Deepwater Horizon
response.
The Coast Guard is aggressively pursuing updates to
regulations governing activities on the outer continental
shelf. These updates will identify safety gaps for critical
equipment, as identified in the Deepwater Horizon reports, and
reflect standards for new and emerging technological
advancements within the industry.
On July 7, 2011, we announced policy in the Federal
Register detailing a new risk-based oversight program that will
target the highest risk foreign-flagged MODUs operating in the
U.S. EEZ.
The Coast Guard is also addressing funding concerns with
both the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund and the research and
development. To improve our response capability we need to
modify current authorities to increase per-incident cap under
the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund permit multiple advancements
from the fund to underwrite Federal emergency response
activities, and provide access to funds for administration of
claims.
There is also an urgent need to further invest in oil spill
research and development funding. Fiscal year 2011
appropriations included $4 million for oil spill response and
development, and the President's fiscal year 2012 budget
request includes R&D funding for spill response in the Arctic,
Deepwater subsidy response, and for a full-time executive
director on the interagency coordinating council on oil
pollution response.
In conclusion, although we faced early challenges,
particularly the technological challenges of oil recovery in
sub-sea containment at a depth of 5,000 feet, the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill response met its objectives through the
prudent application of the national contingency plan, and unity
of effort--of all efforts of Government and the private sector.
Gaps that are not addressed in the national contingency
plan were implemented as best practices in the midst of this
unprecedented response, and we continue to enact oil spill
prevention and response initiatives with a focus on outer
continental shelf activities.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify before you today,
and I will be pleased to answer your questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Admiral, very much.
Admiral Rufe?
Admiral Rufe. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, Ranking Member Larsen. I appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you today to testify on the incident-specific
preparedness review, which I chaired for the Coast Guard. My
name is Roger Rufe. I am a retired Coast Guard vice admiral.
Our team was chartered by the commandant of the Coast Guard
on the 14th of June----
Mr. LoBiondo. Excuse me, Admiral, can you pull the
microphone a little closer?
Admiral Rufe. Our team was chartered on 14 June 2010 by the
commandant of the Coast Guard to assess the implementation and
effectiveness of preparedness and response to the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill. Our team was composed of 14 spill response
experts from Federal agencies, State governments, industry, and
a representative of the environmental advocacy NGO community.
It is important to note that we were focused solely on the
oil spill itself, not on the fire and explosion, and that we
were completely independent of the Coast Guard or any other
oversight from the administration. We conducted 92 interviews,
all of which were not for attribution, unlike some of the other
investigations. Our members all signed nondisclosure statements
and confidentiality agreements.
We are integrated fully with the President's National
Commission, which was mentioned earlier. Their staff members
participated fully in all of our interviews. And, in fact,
chapter 5 of their report is based largely on the information
gleaned during the process.
While the findings and recommendations of our report are
all important, I would like to highlight a few and, at risk of
being redundant, certainly some of them were mentioned already
by the chairman and others, as well as by Admiral Z.
The ACPs are of uneven quality, especially with respect to
identifying and prioritizing environmentally sensitive areas,
and laying out detailed strategies for protecting them. It is
also important that they identify the resources that are
necessary for responding to a worst-case discharge.
There is a need for the incident commander to quickly
attain information dominance, and maintain it throughout the
incident. A single source of authoritative information is
critical to public confidence in the Government's response. It
is also very difficult to achieve in our 24/7 cable news cycle,
and in an era of social networking where it is so pervasive.
As already mentioned, there has been insufficient inclusion
of local officials in the contingency planning or exercise
process. That needs to be improved. And Admiral Z has already
spoken to the fact that it is under scrutiny right now.
But the inadequacy of local involvement relates to my next
point already mentioned, that it was unfamiliarity at all
levels of Government on the national contingency plan, which
led to what Admiral Allen described as the social and political
nullification of the NCP.
State and local officials are much more comfortable with
and familiar with the NRF model, which allows for the Stafford
Act to support State and local officials with funding and
resources, but the local officials are in charge. Obviously,
that is different than the national contingency plan. And, as
Admiral Z has already mentioned, our report indicates that we
feel the national contingency plan is the right model for oil
spill response, and there needs to be a better process of
educating State and local officials in that process early in
the game.
One thing not mentioned earlier is--and a central part of
our report was--a failure of crisis leadership at virtually
every level of response, from industry to Government, from
Federal to local. Among the indications of this failure was the
decisions being made on response tactics at political levels,
rather than at the level of the response experts, which led to
response tactics being implemented which were known to be
inadequate at the outset and delayed, in many cases, an
adequate response.
And finally, I want to emphasize the issue of funding. It
was clear to our team that the support of the Coast Guard's oil
spill preparedness program following the Exxon Valdez spill had
atrophied over time. This was partly due to the preventative
program's doing so well in lowering the number of major oil
spills. But it also resulted from diversion of funding to
critical homeland security responsibilities.
This is not an either/or proposition. The Coast Guard and
the administration need to propose, and the Congress needs to
provide, adequate funding to the Coast Guard for all of their
critical missions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be happy to answer your
questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Admiral.
Mr. Caldwell.
Mr. Caldwell. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo and Ranking
Member Larsen, other members of the committee. I am pleased to
be here to discuss the oversight of offshore facilities, based
on some of the work GAO has done recently. As noted, I am
accompanied by Frank Rusco here, who is a director in our
Natural Resources and Environment Team.
GAO has done a variety of work related to the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill. We have reviewed the management of the Oil
Spill Liability Trust Fund. My team has done work on protection
efforts by the Coast Guard to secure these facilities from
terrorist attacks. And Mr. Rusco's team has done work on
Department of the Interior and their oversight of offshore
facilities.
Today my testimony will focus on inspections of offshore
facilities. It summarizes work we have done at both the Coast
Guard and Department of the Interior. Such inspections are
meant to ensure compliance with a variety of regulations, but
particularly those related to security, safety, and production.
One of the key purposes of these inspections is to prevent the
type of incident that happened with the Deepwater Horizon.
Regarding the Coast Guard, we found that the Coast Guard
had taken a number of steps, which are detailed in our recent
report, to secure offshore facilities. However, one of the key
components of the Coast Guard regime for security, the
inspections, had not been done for the majority of the offshore
facilities. Of the approximately 50 offshore facilities, the
Coast Guard had only conducted 13 percent to 45 percent of the
required inspections, depending on the year.
The reasons for not conducting these inspections varied.
Some of this was confusion over which Coast Guard unit should
conduct inspections and confusion over which types of
facilities should be inspected. Some Coast Guard units were not
tracking which inspections were coming up. And finally, there
was reliance on owners and operators to tell Coast Guard when
they needed inspections.
In addition, the Coast Guard's database for planning,
conducting, and evaluating such inspections had a number of
limitations, in terms of consistency, accuracy, and duplication
of the data.
Regarding the Department of the Interior, we also found
that the agency was not conducting all of the inspections
required to fulfill its regulatory role. The Coast Guard
delegates certain safety inspections to the Department of the
Interior. And according to Interior officials, they met their
internal targets for safety inspections, but those internal
targets were only set at 10 percent of facilities within a
given year. Interior has not met its internal targets for
regulatory inspections to measure the production of oil and
gas. These production inspections are important because they
determine how much revenue is due the U.S. Government, as well
as which facilities the Coast Guard then puts under its
security regime.
We found that Interior had met its target for production
inspections in only 1 of the 4 years we reviewed. We found
Interior was not able to meet these inspections for reasons
generally related to personnel, such as hiring, training, and
retaining inspectors. More recently, we are concerned that
Interior's reorganization of its bureau and its processes will
further reduce the number of inspections being conducted.
Our written statement also goes into detail on the Coast
Guard's security authorities over MODUs such as the Deepwater
Horizon. And these authorities, in some ways, are more limited
than they are for some of the other types of offshore
facilities.
In summary, our work has shown deficiencies in both the
Coast Guard and Department of the Interior regimes for doing
these inspections. These deficiencies ultimately hinder these
agencies' ability to ensure that the regulatory requirements
are met for security, safety, and production. We have
recommendations to the Department of the Interior, as well as
the Coast Guard. I am glad to say the agencies both have steps
underway to take corrective action.
And hopefully, our collective activities of the agencies of
GAO and the Congress will help prevent another disaster like
the Deepwater Horizon.
In closing, thank you very much. Mr. Rusco and I would be
happy to answer any questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK, thank you, Mr. Caldwell, very much.
Admiral Z, this is for you. Over the last year, five
reports or investigations have come back on the causes of the
spill and the Coast Guard response to it. These investigations
and reports include several hundred recommendations for the
Coast Guard to review and to implement to improve the safety of
the offshore energy industry prevention of oil spills, and the
Service's response to the spills.
With the exception of the Joint Investigation Team Report,
we do not know whether the Coast Guard is currently taking
action on any of these recommendations, and which they will
take action on in the future. Can the Coast Guard provide this
subcommittee with a list of the recommendations that the Coast
Guard is taking action on, and which ones they intend to take
action on for each of the five reports?
[The information follows:]

Admiral Zukunft. Chairman, I would be delighted to provide
you a brief on that. What you will find is that there is
commonality across a number of the five reports. I highlighted
six of those key objectives, as we talk about whether it is
research and technology for response, or measures to prevent a
spill of national significance, our involvement with--at the
very local level, with our ACPs.
But just to walk you through each one of these very
briefly, the incident-specific preparedness report provided us
a third-party assessment that characterized our efforts to
respond to this spill.
We have since created a national incident command spill of
national significance instruction that identifies gaps that
aren't addressed in the national contingency plan to better
prepare us for a response. This is everything from seafood
safety, behavioral health, assigning liaison officers to every
parish president, county official, and Governor throughout the
affected area. So, we have taken a number of those and have
already put those in place so that we can then act for
prevention and response.
At the same time, with the FOSC report, that is a report
that I am required to provide to the national response team
that provides a chronology and a summary of response actions
and interventions that were taken, which is fairly expansive,
but is really directed at the response itself. And that would
be to better inform and better prepare our Nation, should we
see a similar event transpire on the outer continental shelf.
And I say that because, as we look at where is oil and gas
being exploited, it is now in more remote areas. Not only in
deep water in the Gulf of Mexico, but we are also using these
lessons learned, as we look at initiatives going forward, to
drill in the Arctic region. So again, we are applying these
best practices that were learned during this particular
response.
But I can brief you on each and every one of these reports,
but the--really directs, you know, what can we do to prevent
these activities. The ISPR and the FOSC report are really
focused on how to improve our response protocols, including
research and development. And all of these are in progress. And
again, I would be pleased to provide you a summary of all those
activities.
Mr. LoBiondo. We would like that, Admiral. We would like
the subcommittee to have a list of the recommendations of what
you have done and what you will do, and each of the five
reports. And can you suggest to us when we can expect to
receive that list?
Admiral Zukunft. A lot of this we are working across the
interagency, so it would be circumspect on my part to--as we
work with NOAA, EPA on, you know, whether it is research and
development, dispersants, we are working closely with BSEE. But
I would need some time to look at that. We have some----
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, let's--excuse me--let's put it this
way. Recognizing that it is a work in progress, there is some
that is already decided, and maybe we will have to do this in
bites. So can we say that within a month that we will have your
list up to this point in time, and then we can see what that
includes, and then go from there? Is that reasonable, from your
perspective?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, we would be able to provide that.
Yes, Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Also, the Coast Guard has requested
Congress to make changes to the way the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund functions under current law. The Service has not
requested any changes to current law governing oil spill
prevention and response, or in response to any of the
recommendations of the various reports.
Can you tell us, will the Coast Guard be requesting any
changes to current law to improve prevention and response, or
to implement a recommendation? Or does the Service feel they
have sufficient authority to make these changes,
administratively?
Admiral Zukunft. That is one area where we will seek a
regulatory change. For any spill out of the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund there is an initial $50 million funding
appropriation, followed by a $100 million emergency response.
It then requires congressional approval to get subsequent
installments of $100 million.
To put that in perspective, at the peak of this spill--and
again, this was being funded by BP--we were expending upwards
of $70 million per day at the peak of this response.
Mr. LoBiondo. Yes. Excuse me, I apologize if I was unclear.
We understand about this funding scenario, but I am interested
in changes to current law, as it results in response and
implementation or recommendations for the Service.
Can you do this administratively, or changes to current law
of how you respond? Does it have to come through legislation?
Admiral Zukunft. Chairman, right now we are doing that
through policy, and so we are able to invoke many of these
measures through policy and not regulation.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. And, Admiral Z one last question for you.
In the wake of the disaster that we had with this oil spill,
several responders to the spill and manufacturers of
dispersants and other technologies who were following the
request, or the requirements the Coast Guard laid down for them
to deal with the spill, have been sued for the actions they
took at the direction of the Government during the response of
the spill.
So, the Government tells them what to do, tells them what
they need, and then, you know, in the height of all the
confusion and the run-up to getting this done right. And now,
because they did what they were told, they are being sued.
Has the Coast Guard heard from the responders or dispersant
manufacturers regarding the issues? And has the Coast Guard
taken a position on these lawsuits?
Admiral Zukunft. We have not taken a position. But in the
urgency of a response, there needs to be a provision for
indemnification of these oil spill response organizations that
are responding in accordance with our interagency action plans.
So that would be a needed change if, in fact, these responsible
organizations are being held liable.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, I would like to suggest in very strong
terms that the Coast Guard consider either sending up
legislation or taking a very strong position on this. I don't
see how, when we have a disaster like this, we can expect
people to respond and follow what we are requesting them to do,
and let them swing in the wind when the dust starts to settle.
And I can only think of a future situation where there is
an emergency and a disaster, and especially if it is involving
some of these same groups, if it is an offshore disaster like
this. If I were one of them, I think I would be pretty slow to
respond. So I would urge you to figure out how the Coast Guard
can minimally weigh in on this, and ideally become proactive in
how we can resolve this problem.
Admiral Zukunft. I agree completely.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Also, I would like you to report back to
us how you are making out with that.
Admiral Zukunft. I have that for action.
[The information follows:]

The Coast Guard interprets this question as pertaining
to conferral of responder immunity, rather than
indemnity. The Coast Guard has met with certain Oil
Spill Response Organizations (OSROs) to discuss their
concerns with respect to litigation claims against them
for personal injury and death alleged to be from the
use of dispersants during the Deepwater Horizon spill
of national significance. By statute, OSROs already
enjoy immunity for response activities under the Clean
Water Act as amended by OPA 90, 33 U.S.C. 1321(c)(4).
The statute essentially exempts responders from
liability for actions taken consistent with the NCP
relating to a discharge or substantial threat of a
discharge. However, this exemption does not apply with
respect to personal injury or death, or if the
responder is grossly negligent or engages in willful
misconduct. OSROs have asked that the U.S. Government's
sovereign immunity under 33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(8) be
extended to them: ``The United States Government is not
liable for any damages arising from its actions or
omissions relating to any response plan required by
this section.'' The Coast Guard is in the process of
carefully considering the various legal, policy and
operational implications of addressing the OSROs'
concerns through any procedural vehicle(s) that may be
available. The Coast Guard will coordinate conclusions
and actions with the Environmental Protection Agency
and Department of Justice.

Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Because we will revisit it if the answer
is not correct.
I have some additional questions, but I am going to turn to
Mr. Larsen now.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
start with Mr. Caldwell with regards to the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund, and actually the financial risks which you just
briefly mentioned in your testimony.
But it is my understanding that, as cleanup costs continue
to mount, the GAO has estimated there is a reasonable chance
that expenditures from the trust fund will exceed the $1
billion total expenditure per incident cap, and that funds will
no longer be available to reimburse the Federal agency costs
associated with the incident. Does that--is that correct?
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, sir. We don't have a specific time when
that is going to be. But right now we are at 62 percent of the
cap. So, given the uncertainty of the cost, and the long-term
nature of restoration, it could certainly go over that cap.
Mr. Larsen. And so, the influence on the timeframe is sort
of getting some harder costs about the longer term cost of
restoration, as an example? What other factors would be
involved in getting that other----
Mr. Caldwell. I think just the lag, in terms of when costs
are incurred and when they are reimbursed, as well as the
uncertainty of some of those restoration costs going forward.
Restoration is more of an art than a science.
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Mr. Caldwell. We know about such lags from the Exxon
Valdez. It took 10 years to clean up some of the damage.
Mr. Larsen. Right. Well, it has an implication, I guess,
for us then, as well. Because to alleviate the strain on the
trust fund, GAO has again recommended that Congress consider
setting a new incident fund cap based on net expenditures,
rather than total expenditures. Would that change provide an
immediate improvement in the financial status of the trust
fund? And is there any downside to doing that?
Mr. Caldwell. It would have no immediate impact on the
fund. What it would do is reduce the uncertainty that you have.
And if you make those changes in advance, you will increase the
chances that those reimbursements would continue unabated.
As I said, some of the restoration work can take years.
Obviously, there is a lot of other funding options Congress
does have. But having one that is directly linked to the fund
is obviously useful, since the fund pays for these.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. In terms of the downside to a change like
that?
Mr. Caldwell. I don't really see one right now. The
advantage we had in this case, in this horrible incident we did
have, is that the responsible party had deep pockets. BP
upfront said, ``We are going to pay for these costs.'' So we
didn't have the problem of either a small player that created
large damage, or a company that then went bankrupt and couldn't
fund any of the cleanup.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Would the--but the cumulative impact, say,
of several incidents--one big incident could blow the fund up.
Unfortunate choice of words, I guess, sorry about that, but it
still would. And you would have perhaps smaller, unrelated
incidents elsewhere in the country who then potentially get
squeezed out of access to the trust fund, unless there was
something done with it.
Mr. Caldwell. That is correct. If you had multiple
incidents, you would be more likely to draw down the fund
quickly. Perhaps you could have a natural disaster but that
would be different, that would be funded under the Stafford
Act.
But you could have multiple accidents within a year or two.
You could have an accident like the Deepwater Horizon, which
was now more than a year ago, but if you have another large
incident, you may be still drawing down from the first one and
then you have got costs from the second one, as well, which
could put a large strain on the fund.
Mr. Larsen. Right, right. Well, the GAO has expressed
concern that the per-barrel tax, the primary source of revenue,
is due to expire at the end of 2017. And they estimate the fund
balance will likely decrease over time and raise the risk that
the fund would not be adequately equipped to deal with future
spills--we sort of discussed that--particularly another spill
like Deepwater Horizon.
Based on that uncertainty of future costs associated with
this incident, I know GAO isn't in the direct business of
providing direct recommendations to Congress about what we
should do or shouldn't do, but rather, what you see. Is it
better for Congress to reauthorize the per-barrel tax sooner,
or wait to see if the--wait 4 or 5 years, when the tax is
scheduled to expire, to see what happens with the trust fund?
Mr. Caldwell. You reduce the risk of uncertainty if you
take these steps in advance. We do have 5 years here, but there
was other periods where the tax expired. What I don't have in
front of me is whether during those certain years--I think
there is a 12-year hiatus where the barrel tax expired--what
happened to the financial health of the fund during that
period.
But if you have this established in advance, you have less
uncertainty. There is a lot going on in Congress, and some
things don't get reauthorized or don't get passed.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. There is always a lot going on in
Congress. And my personal view, it is never an excuse not to do
something.
So, Admiral Z, the GAO has recommendations on inspections
as they relate to Coast Guard. Hearing your testimony and
hearing GAO's testimony--I am just trying to get my head
wrapped around where they connect and where they disconnect--
can you, from your point of view, discuss the recommendations,
a few of the recommendations from the GAO specifically, and how
the Coast Guard is addressing those?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. We recognize we do have shortcomings
in our tracking of security inspections on the outer
continental shelf, whether they are fixed platforms or mobile
offshore drilling units, which are technically vessels. And so
we are working to correct those inadequacies. But the points
they make are being taken for action, so we can better track
those particular events.
On the safety side, those inspections have not languished.
Some of those are actually carried out on our behalf either by
Department of the Interior or, in some cases, by other
recognized organizations. But there is a distinction between
safety and security inspections. And we do have room for
improvement on our enactment of security inspections on the
outer continental shelf.
Mr. Larsen. I have got one more question for Admiral Z, and
then a second round I have some questions for Admiral Rufe--I
don't want you to feel ignored--actually some ones about ACP.
So if you--think through that.
But just finally for Admiral Z, on this determining what is
a high-risk MODU for inspection from your policy letter of 11/
2006, you talk about 2 things: how to determine what is high
risk; and second, the JIT said inspections were so routine
that, essentially, complacency got set in. So you could still
focus on high-risk MODUs, but that could still become routine,
and it could still introduce a measure of complacency into even
those inspections of high risk.
So talk about what a high-risk MODU is, and then talk about
what you would do to prevent that complacency that the JIT
report found on inspections.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. For the--this really applies to
foreign-flagged MODUs.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Admiral Zukunft. And where we depend on the flag state, and
often under the auspices of a recognized organization, to
follow through on IMO-accepted codes. But when we have foreign-
flagged vessels operating in the U.S. EEZ, we do need to be
more stringent, and ensure that these also comply with U.S.
standards.
And so, it is possible to look at a MODU's history, you
know, if they have had oil spills in the past, to then target
that as a high-risk mobile offshore drilling unit. It does one
of two things. One, it rewards the good actors, and at the same
time it holds those that may not be in full compliance to not
just international, but also U.S. standards. And so, that is
the process that we use in assessing those high-risk MODUs.
Mr. Larsen. And the issue of complacency, though? You could
still have that level of inspection, but again, we had levels
of inspection before, and things got routine, and people got
complacent.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. No, I could not attest to that, you
know, complacency has set in. This was an issue with foreign-
flag, you know, operating in the EEZ, that we were not as
strident as we would, had that been a U.S.-flagged vessel
operating in the EEZ. So it is that issue of, you know, how
strident were we with a foreign flag, but not an issue of
complacency. But it was a dependency, if you will, on the
foreign-flagged state, and a number of recognized organizations
such as DNV or ABS to provide that level of oversight. But we
will provide that measure, as well, for foreign flag in our
EEZ.
Mr. Larsen. All right, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Admiral Rufe, the incident-specific
preparedness review is a third-party report that is chartered
by the Coast Guard and compiled by a team of industry and oil
spill experts. The ISPR noted that the Coast Guard's
environmental response capabilities have atrophied. Can you
share with us what your thoughts may be of why that has
happened, and any suggestions that could be made to restore
those capabilities?
Admiral Rufe. Well, I think two things, Mr. Chairman,
contributed to that. One is that over time, because of the
infrequency of large spills, I think the Nation became
complacent--not just the Coast Guard, we all became
complacent--that perhaps we had gotten past the concern about
oil spills. And so the shift away from the oil spill response
capability in the Coast Guard was probably a factor of that.
But it was also a factor of increasing responsibilities of
the Coast Guard that caused attention to be shifted to homeland
security missions and other high-priority missions. I think the
Congress and the administration were equally at fault for not
ensuring that the Coast Guard, as the Coast Guard overseers,
made sure that they continued to be fully funded and adequately
funded, and that the emphasis did not drift away from
inadequate oil spill response capability.
Mr. LoBiondo. And also, let me thank you for your service
and your willingness to return back to the public side of
things to share with us your expertise. It is very much
appreciated.
The incident-specific review, the review notes that the
area contingency plans were ineffective, and that the national
contingency plan was not well understood by State, local, and
even some Federal officials. Would strengthening and improving
the ACPs to make them more effective help Government officials
to understand what the Coast Guard is doing, and make us more
effective here? Do you have any ideas or thoughts in this area?
Admiral Rufe. Yes, sir. Well, I think underway already,
according to Admiral Z, is more inclusion of the local
officials in that contingency planning process. And we think
that is vital.
But I will say that it is much easier for these State and
local officials to get up on their high horse and get excited
about the fact they weren't included when there is a spill
underway. It is another thing to have them sit through these
long, laborious, really difficult meetings, where they have to
sit down and decide what are the priorities. When everything is
a priority, nothing is a priority. So to sit down and say,
``This marsh is more important than this beach, and when it
comes to protecting them, I am willing to have oil come up on
this beach, as opposed to the marsh,'' it is an important
consideration that they be able to sit down and hammer out at
the contingency planning process.
So, including them certainly is important. They have to be
willing to come to the meetings, to participate, and then to be
part of the team that says, ``This is the way we are going to
handle this when the spill occurs,'' and I think then you will
have less of the political influence over decisions being made
about response strategies during an incident. They will feel
part of the process. They will understand, as you point out,
the national contingency planning process, as contrasted with
the NRF. And we will have a much better process.
Mr. LoBiondo. All we have to do is figure out how to force
them to do that.
Admiral Rufe. That is right. Some funding for--they are
always looking for funding. I don't know if that is a
possibility. But, it is expensive for them to participate in
the process.
Mr. LoBiondo. Right.
Admiral Rufe. It takes them away from other things they are
doing. And that is the case at every level. You know, the
Secretary of Homeland Security only has so much bandwidth. And
for her to go to an exercise--or him, whoever the secretary
is--to learn more about the national contingency plan takes him
or her away from something else that is on their plate.
So, I don't want to be critical, but it is important that
these officials become engaged when you are not in the middle
of a crisis, so they can understand what the process is, they
can understand how the system works and be part of it, right
from the get-go, rather than being in the learning process when
the spill is ongoing.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you. Master Chief Coble.
Mr. Coble. I thought you had forgotten me, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Never.
Mr. Coble. Good to have you all with us, gentlemen. Admiral
Z, I was going to ask you about the administrative authority,
or lack of it. But I think you and the chairman pretty well
detailed that, so I won't revisit it.
Admiral Rufe, good to have you back on the Hill, as the
chairman said. The incident-specific preparedness review is a
third-party report chartered by the Coast Guard and compiled by
a team of industry and oil spill experts. The ISPR noted that
the Coast Guard's environmental response capabilities have
atrophied, or lapsed. What can be done to restore these
capabilities if, in fact, you agree that they did lapse?
Admiral Rufe. Yes, sir. I certainly agree they did lapse. I
think the Coast Guard is already underway in bringing their
response capability up to the level that it should be, based on
our report and based on the other reports, to the extent that
they can do that internally.
However, it is going to require funding. And that is, I
think, where the Congress comes in, where the President comes
in. It is important that the President support a strong budget
for the Coast Guard. Admiral Z can't say this, but I can, I am
retired now, that the President support a strong budget for the
Coast Guard that doesn't compromise one critical mission for
another, and that the Congress support a strong funding for the
Coast Guard so they can do the R&D that is necessary, and can
restore the capability that it needs to respond to these
spills.
And, you know, the fact that we are drilling further and
further offshore in deeper and deeper water, I think we are
being less than honest with the American public to say that
that is a free lunch. You know, we need the oil, but it comes
with great risk. And we need to minimize that risk, and be sure
that we are doing it as safely as possible. But it is not a
zero-risk industry. So, when these incidents occur, as
infrequently as they may, we have to be prepared to respond to
them adequately.
Mr. Coble. I concur. Thank you, Admiral. Mr. Caldwell or
Mr. Rusco, since the oil spill there has been much discussion
about the regulatory oversight of MODU--that is, offshore
drilling units--especially those that are foreign-flagged. Was
the Coast Guard adequately inspecting MODUs prior to the
Deepwater Horizon incident, in your opinion?
Mr. Caldwell. We put a chart in our report, and we tried to
get color copies to committee members, as well, to show it is
really complex. This chart shows which MODUs fell under which
categories. The inspections that were conducted by the Coast
Guard would differ from a normal offshore facility.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Chairman?
Is that the chart on page 15 of your report?
Mr. Caldwell. Correct.
Mr. Larsen. OK, thank you.
Mr. Coble. Well, was there a gap between the Coast Guard
and BOEM inspections prior to the incident? And if so, what was
being overlooked, or missed?
Mr. Caldwell. We didn't find that Coast Guard wasn't doing
inspections of MODUs. What we saw was that the kinds of
inspections Coast Guard was doing on a MODU were generally
different than they do on a larger offshore production unit.
Mr. Coble. OK.
Mr. Caldwell. Because MODUs rarely meet the production
thresholds to bring in section 106 of the Maritime
Transportation Security Act, which would require that they have
a security plan, the Coast Guard does not do annual security
inspections.
Mr. Coble. I thank you, sir. And just for the record, Mr.
Chairman, for the benefit of the uninformed, the chairman has
affectionately promoted me to master chief status. I am not a
master chief, and I am not qualified to be one. But I thank you
for that, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, in this committee you are a master
chief, and you are qualified to be one.
Mr. Coble. I thank you, sir. I appreciate that.
Mr. LoBiondo. The gentleman from Minnesota.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the great panel being here today. Thank you for the United
States Coast Guard for doing what you do on a daily basis that
so many people don't even realize what you do. So thank you for
keeping us safe.
A couple of questions I did have is for Mr. Rusco, if I
could, sir. Is it safer to drill in deeper water or more
shallow water? Or is it the same?
Mr. Rusco. There are different risks associated with both.
So I am not sure I can answer which is safer. But what we can
say is, looking at processes for managing offshore drilling,
that it is clear that the regulator needs to understand more
clearly what all those risks are, and build that into the
planning and permitting process.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. If an incident such as Deepwater Horizon
occurred in more shallow water, would it have been easier to
respond to?
Mr. Rusco. Yes. I am certain that that is correct, that
Deepwater, in the specific incident that occurred, did create
its own unique difficulties, in terms of response.
Mr. Cravaack. In your opinion, can you tell me why we were
drilling in such deep water, versus in more shallow water?
Mr. Rusco. The progress of drilling in the gulf has taken
place as a result of following the resources where they are,
but also taking advantage of new technologies that have allowed
drilling in deeper and deeper waters.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. So there is--the reason why we were
drilling in deeper and deeper water is only--was because of the
resources that were available out there, versus, for example,
drilling in more shallow water?
Mr. Rusco. I think we started in shallow waters because
that is what we could do, technologically, way back at the
beginning. The technology improved, both in terms of
exploration and discovery of resources. And we discovered that
there were vast resources further and further offshore, and the
technologies enabled the companies to go there.
Mr. Cravaack. Do you think we are prepared now for another
Deepwater Horizon, if that would occur? I know there were some
unique, you know, incidents that occurred. But do you think we
would be able to do it again, but respond in a better manner?
Mr. Rusco. Obviously, a lot of lessons have been learned.
But I think those lessons need to be codified into regulation
and rules, and that process is ongoing. At GAO we currently
have ongoing work looking at response technologies, and also
looking at the permitting and planning process that BOEM is
using, and inspection regulations and rules that BSEE is
adopting. We will be reporting out on that towards the end of
the year and the beginning of the next year, and we should have
a lot more to say about that.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. Thank you, sir. Admiral Rufe, would you
agree with that, or--since you are not wearing the stripes any
more, you can let her rip.
Admiral Rufe. Yes, yes, generally speaking. Now, we did not
look at the drilling operation itself. We were strictly
limited--our team was strictly limited to the response to the
spill. So we didn't have any role in assessing blame or looking
at the technology to--the drilling technology.
But I will say, in terms of responding to a spill, yes, I
think there were a lot of lessons learned about how to cap a
well that we didn't know before this came. There were things
developed--to BP's credit, there were things developed on the
fly that should have been in place earlier, weren't, but they
developed them pretty quickly. And I think, were it to occur
again we would be better prepared.
I wouldn't say we are not going to end up with oil on the
beach. I think history tells us if you have oil in the water,
it is going to end up on the beach, and people have to accept
that is a risk. That is one of the risks of production.
Mr. Cravaack. Right.
Admiral Rufe. That is one of the costs of production, and
people have to accept that.
Mr. Cravaack. Right. OK. Great. Thank you, sir. Appreciate
it.
Mr. Caldwell, in your recent findings you noted that the
former MMS was not adequately staffed for inspecting offshore
facilities. Under the MOU with the Coast Guard, the MMS was
responsible for ensuring the safety compliance for all offshore
oil platforms. Is there a cause to believe that the safety
systems for the platforms were not being inspected prior to the
Deepwater Horizon? And I understand that there has been some--
you are up to a certain percentage, but you are not quite there
yet.
Can you kind of expand upon that, and what we are trying
to--making sure that you have the resources that you need to
make sure it occurs?
Mr. Caldwell. I will ask Mr. Rusco to answer on those----
Mr. Cravaack. OK.
Mr. Caldwell [continuing]. Issues.
Mr. Rusco. Yes. So we have found for a number of years that
Interior--and this is not just offshore, it is also onshore,
but obviously this is about offshore--have not met all of their
internal and regulatory requirements for inspections. And the
key reason for that is that they have had trouble attracting,
training, and retaining staff that are qualified to do that.
These inspectors go out and they are inspecting for a lot
of things having to do with production verification. Also, in
the same inspection, they will look for safety violations or
environmental issues. And so these inspections are all together
typically done by the same staff. They have been hard pressed
to maintain a level of trained staff to meet all those needs.
And Interior has requested funding for additional staff, but to
my knowledge they are working on developing that. But they are
not there yet.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman, my time has
expired. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Gentleman from the 27th District of Texas? Is
that correct?
Mr. Farenthold. Yes, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. You are now recognized.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We--
there has been a lot of talk today about inspections. And I
guess we will ask--or I will ask--Admiral Z and Mr. Rusco. Had
the Deepwater Horizon been inspected the day before the
blowout, would you all have--do you think you all would have
caught something that would have stopped it?
You know, my reading of the reports were there were a
series of bad events that happened and bad decisions that were
made and troubles associated with setting cement that deep
under water. Had all the inspections in the world been
conducted, do you think the result would have been different,
and there wouldn't have been the blowout?
Admiral Zukunft. One area of particular concern was the gas
detection system had been muted, which would not have provided
maybe perhaps adequate warning that there had been a release of
gas to perhaps earlier attention to shut that well in. But that
would have been detected during an inspection.
Some of the other--the electrical systems, the life-saving
systems that we would check would not have had any impact on
the outcome of this. But some of the inherent--especially these
remote sensors that would detect a presence of gas, you know--
--
Mr. Farenthold. It might have given us a little more time?
Admiral Zukunft. That may have provided us a little bit
more window of time.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Rusco, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Rusco. I think that I can't say that it could have been
prevented, had there been an inspection the day before. But
what I can say is that Interior recognizes that its inspection
process needs to be improved, both in terms of applying risk-
based standards for when and how to inspect. And they are
working to change their inspection process. We are in the
process of evaluating that, and we can report out on that.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. And there is--the United States
is not the only country developing oil and gas in the Gulf of
Mexico. You are seeing an increase in Mexico, and now Cuba is
starting to be involved in that.
How--the way the currents work in the Gulf of Mexico--I
represent the gulf coast, you know, from Corpus Christi, Texas,
to Brownsville--that stuff tends to--the currents tend to take
it our way. And we suffered for years from a blowout in Mexico.
How is the Coast Guard prepared, if at all, to deal with a
spill taking place in waters of another country, and in a
completely foreign-controlled situation?
Admiral Zukunft. We are working multilaterally, as we
speak, to address concerns that we have with offshore drilling
in Cuba and the Bahamas. Those currents, while not of concern
to Texas, is of great concern to southern Florida and our
eastern seaboard, and perhaps would make impact within 5 to 10
days of a catastrophic event. So we are already working on our
area contingency plans.
More importantly, you know, what our response posture--
there are some legal gaps, in terms of what we would call a
responsible party when, in a foreign EEZ, there is a release of
oil that impacts the U.S. Clearly, we have our Oil Spill
Liability Trust Fund. But certainly there are constraints
there.
And so, working with that other foreign country--Cuba, in
particular, is--will be a challenge, but we are working very
closely at the interagency level to address that particular
concern, because that drilling effort will commence in January.
Mr. Farenthold. Now, under existing law we have got
technology that we couldn't share with a country like Cuba, is
that correct?
Admiral Zukunft. Again, we are working with other
governmental agencies. What we did learn from Deepwater
Horizon--the capping stack did not exist on April 20th, on the
day of that blowout. That was designed, literally, on the fly,
as was the top hat and other intervention methods. Helix, a
U.S. company, now has dynamically positioned vessels and that
technology literally on the shelf. So what we need to--you
know, our concern is we want to contain that before that oil
comes ashore and causes environmental and economic damage to
the United States.
So, that information, we do want to be able to share that
to protect U.S. interests.
Mr. Farenthold. And finally, there was a lot of talk in the
media as this was going on that there were various offers of
assistance from foreign governments and foreign assets that
could have been brought to bear in responding, and those were
either not used or turned down for a variety of reasons.
How has that been addressed? Can we, in the future, find a
way to deal with the foreign companies that want to help, or
are we adequately situated to do it entirely ourselves with no
help?
Admiral Zukunft. We address this in our instruction. Again,
this was a lesson we learned on the fly, and we stood up what
we called an interagency technological assistance program that
assessed every foreign offer of assistance, and whether it
would immediately alleviate some of the impact that we were
seeing.
We actually flew equipment from the Netherlands to the Gulf
of Mexico. We didn't send the vessels, because it would take
them a month to get there, but we entertained over 67 foreign
offers of assistance, and we did receive assistance from 22
countries across the globe.
Mr. Farenthold. So you think you may have been treated
unfairly with the media on that one?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. Well, I think the other part is, you
know, you do not want to be doing research and development in
the midst of a spill of national significance. So having that
available on the shelf would have been much more helpful for us
to implement----
Mr. Farenthold. Well, I see my time has expired. Thank you
very much for your answers, and I will yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. The gentleman from coastal Louisiana.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Rear
Admiral, Vice Admiral, for your service, and the panel, for
being here today. This question is actually for both Admiral Z
and Vice Admiral Rufe.
Do you agree with conclusion O of the JIT report which says
that the proximity and operational capabilities of the offshore
supply vessel Damon B. Bankston were critical to the successful
evacuation of 115 survivors of this casualty?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, absolutely. Although the
Damon B. Bankston was not a standby vessel, she was in that
immediate proximity. And the outcome could have been much
different for those 115 survivors.
Mr. Landry. And she was an EEP vessel, classified vessel,
though, right?
Admiral Zukunft. That is correct.
Mr. Landry. You know, because one of my biggest concerns--
certainly, you know, I always believe that the greatest natural
resource we have in the Gulf of Mexico is actually the men and
women who ply that dangerous trade. And I want to learn from
this accident, and I want to take it as a learning experience,
and make sure that we implement ways to make sure that those
people get back home if we ever have another accident like
that.
We heard from the panel that this action was mostly caused
by human error, communication problems. Those things can happen
again even under the most perfect system, any time you insert
the human element in it.
And so, you know, and one of the things that I find amazing
is that, by having the Damon B. Bankston there, the Coast Guard
lowered a rescue swimmer down from the chopper that arrived at
the scene about an hour-and-a-half or so later. And that
swimmer conducted triage, and ensured that the most severely
injured individuals were evacuated first.
Absent the presence of that vessel, of the motor vessel
Damon B. Bankston, where would this triage have occurred on
these 110 people?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. Again, had it not been for the Damon
B. Bankston, you know, I think the outcome for some of those
survivors would have been much different. She was very critical
to the immediate rescue and survival of some of the more
critically injured.
Mr. Landry. So--and so I guess you would agree with the
witness statement that was found in the JIT report which says
that if the Damon B. Bankston wouldn't have had a fast rescue
craft, there may have been 10 more lives lost?
Admiral Zukunft. That was a very likely outcome. Yes, sir.
Mr. Landry. And so, again--because it is hard for people
who have never been out in the Gulf of Mexico, who can't
understand the environment that these men and women are dealing
with, and how vast that gulf is, that--and the amount of
people. I think it is hard for people to even understand how
many people were actually on that particular rig.
That again, if you have everyone evacuating off that rig,
and this rig being totally taken out of service in a manner
that no one can stay on it, if we don't have a place where
those people can--where we can bring everyone to a central
location in an effort to allow the Coast Guard--because only
the fastest manner that you all have for getting out there at
that distance would be a helicopter, is that correct?
And so, again, to triage those personnel, and ensure that
we provide and administer first aid and get those who are
critically wounded helo'd out, we need a stable platform by
which to do that. Would you not agree?
Admiral Zukunft. I have been in that business for over 34
years, Congressman, and I do agree.
Mr. Landry. And lastly, again--I mean I hate to continue to
beat this dead horse--so you would agree with the safety
recommendations which state: ``It is recommended that the
commandant revise 33 CFR subchapter N to establish designated
standby vessels for MODUs engaging in oil and gas drilling
activities in the outer continental shelf''?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. We have not pursued that. We are
currently working with our Federal advisory committees to first
work through that process. But certainly we, in the context of
Deepwater Horizon, fully appreciate the safety of life factor
that is involved with this.
But we are going through, as we would any regulatory
process, going through that outreach process first.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. Admiral Rufe, I said I would get back to you,
and then you ended up answering all the questions I had. And I
had--a lot with the ACPs and what we can do about those, but
there are a few more questions.
Your report generally speaks positively concerning the use
of alternative response technologies, specifically the use of
dispersants and in situ burning. Your report does recommend,
however, that more work needs to be done to evaluate those
technologies and assess their overall impact on the marine
environment, and establish protocols and procedures for when
they might be safely used.
Which Federal agency should lead that assessment? Should it
be conducted by a nongovernmental entity? Is there a role for
industry? If there is, what role would that be for industry, in
order to accomplish what you have recommended?
Admiral Rufe. Well, first of all, yes. This was an unusual
spill, and dispersants we used at a level never before seen and
never before contemplated, including inserting large amounts of
dispersants at the well head. So the long-term impacts on the
environment are still out there. There should be studies done,
and there are studies being done to see what, if any, negative
long-term impacts there might have been by that extensive use
of dispersants.
I think EPA should lead that, and they are qualified to do
it. That is their wheelhouse for that kind of work. I think
industry has a large role to play in that, because there is a
lot of expertise in industry, both in the manufacturing and
producing of dispersants, as well as the application of them.
Certainly the Coast Guard ought to be involved in it, because
the Coast Guard does have a role in the authorization in the
use of dispersants, although EPA is the lead.
So, I think--EPA ought to be the lead for it, but certainly
with input from a number of Federal agencies. NOAA probably has
a large role in being part of that investigation, because they
have the scientific capability to assess best how that impacts
the environment.
Mr. Larsen. On the ACPs, if I could--just yes or no, or you
can expand a little bit--I just want to make sure I understand
your point about the involvement of local communities, what a
State, what this parish, what this county level, city level----
Admiral Rufe. Right.
Mr. Larsen [continuing]. That your point is that if we are
going to use the NCP, which you state is the appropriate
framework to use in these kinds of incidents, that it is going
to take much more education and training of these communities
about what the NCP is, and how they fit into it, than has
currently been done. And, as a result, it will take more
resources to do that, resources that currently, you know,
either exist in the budget, would need to be moved from some
other place in the budget, or don't exist in the budget and
need to be added to the budget in order to get the magnitude of
the training done.
Admiral Rufe. Yes. I think so, because I think, up until
recently, the Coast Guard has had a good relationship with the
State authorities who are involved in the spill response----
Mr. Larsen. Yes, right.
Admiral Rufe [continuing]. And they have been fully
involved in the contingency planning process.
I think the Coast Guard relied--overly relied on the State
to bring in the local folks. And that hasn't happened, either
because of funding considerations, because they weren't
invited, because it was too complicated. Just don't know. And
that hasn't been the case everywhere. As I said, it is uneven.
Some places there has been better outreach to the locals.
But they need to be included. And if there are incentives
that need to be put in place to get them included, that is very
important, because we can't have this confusion and discord in
the middle of a spill, where the local officials are
recommending that we power-wash marshes, when that has been a
known inappropriate response technology for years and years,
and should have been worked out in the contingency planning
process well in advance, so that you know that when oil gets
into the marsh you leave it alone, you don't power-wash it out
of there and do more damage than just by leaving it alone.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, right. Admiral Z, I want to talk a
little--just a question about RMI. The JIT report concludes the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, the flag state registry
failed to meet its responsibilities to ensure the safety of
Deepwater Horizon, and also failed to properly monitor the two
recognized organizations that it contracted with for verifying
the compliance with ISM codes.
Admiral Papp, in his final action memo in response to the
JIT report, however, finds that more fault lies with the IMO
guidelines, rather than RMI's Government or the recognized
organizations.
That being the case, what specific changes does the Coast
Guard intend to pursue within the IMO's flag state
implementation subcommittee to, for lack of a better term,
tighten the IMO guidelines to ensure proper vigilance by the
flag administrations and by recognized organizations?
Admiral Zukunft. We have since met with RMI and with DNV
and ABS, one the flag state and two of the recognized
organizations that were cited in the JIT report.
Mr. Larsen. Just--Det Norske Veritas and American Bureau of
Shipping.
Admiral Zukunft. And American Bureau of Shipping.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Admiral Zukunft. As a follow-on, you know, that impelled us
to invoke this high-risk MODU program. Now, would Deepwater
Horizon have been identified as a high-risk MODU at the--you
know, prior to this event? In all likelihood, probably not. But
at least it does provide us a better targeting approach of
foreign activity within our EEZ that not just meets the IMO
code, but also meets U.S. standards, as well. So that was
really the impetus behind us invoking that high-risk MODU
program.
Mr. Larsen. Can I ask you to clarify for me? Would this--
identifying the high-risk MODUs, is that--would that be an
additional set of steps, or would that be a replacement?
Admiral Zukunft. That would be in addition to. And this is
a policy, not a regulation.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, good. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Admiral Z, you stated we don't want to do
research and development in the midst of a response, which I
think we certainly understand your point and agree. But in the
20-year lull between the Exxon Valdez and this Deepwater
Horizon, very little, I think, oil prevention research and
development was done.
Now that the response phase is over to this particular
disaster, do you have any idea, or can you tell us what
research and development is being done, so that we don't find
ourselves in the year 2030 and we're going to have to learn on
the job again?
Admiral Zukunft. Clearly, we need not look any further than
dispersants. And what is--especially the impact of sub-sea
application of dispersants on the ecosystem. I will say that
that did launch a--the most expansive--the sub-sea monitoring
program that I worked with NOAA to implement, to determine if
there was any recoverable oil anywhere on the sea floor
throughout the Gulf of Mexico, an armada of ships out there
doing sampling on the sea floor and in the water columns. So--
but we didn't have good technical awareness of what the impact
of all of that dispersant applied at 5,000 feet would be.
There will always be challenges in mechanical removal of
oil. During this oil spill we had 17 consecutive days where
wind and weather prohibited us from using skimmers or doing in
situ burning because of the sea state. And so when you lose
that mechanical ability, what other tools do you have? And it
really comes down to, you know, chemical dispersant, and to be
able to mitigate that before that oil works its way into these
very sensitive wetlands.
But that would be one of the key areas is, you know, one,
what is the baseline within the Gulf of Mexico of the
ecosystem, recognizing there are natural seepages that take
place, the microbial activity, because we had an oil budget,
and that at the end of that there is a certain amount of oil
remaining, but we don't have a good model to predict, you know,
what the degradation rate of that remaining oil would be, and
at what point does it no longer cause harm to the environment.
So, those are some of the, entering into a spill,
information that I could have benefitted from, as we looked at
the day-to-day decisions over dispersants, and what the long-
term impact of that might be.
Mr. LoBiondo. Rick, do you have anything else?
Mr. Larsen. No.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. I would like to thank the panel very much
for being here today, for your work on this issue.
Admiral Z, we will look forward to your responses to those
several areas we asked about.
I thank the Members for their participation, and the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

