- THE FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION'S HIGH-SPEED AND INTERCITY PASSENGER RAIL PROGRAM: MISTAKES AND LESSONS LEARNED

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION'S
HIGH-SPEED AND INTERCITY PASSENGER RAIL
PROGRAM: MISTAKES AND LESSONS LEARNED

=======================================================================

(112-65)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 6, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-530 ODF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY
Panel One

LaHood, Hon. Ray, Secretary of Transportation, United States
Department of Transportation...................................    10

Panel Two

Capon, Ross B., President and CEO, National Association of
Railroad Passengers............................................    39
Geddes, R. Richard, Adjunct Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute......................................................    39
McDonald, Joan, Chair, Northeast Corridor Infrastructure and
Operations Advisory Commission.................................    39
Orski, Kenneth, Editor and Publisher, Innovation NewsBriefs......    39

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Edwards, Hon. Donna F., of Maryland..............................    59
Gibbs, Hon. Bob, of Ohio.........................................    60
Johnson, Hon. Eddie Bernice, of Texas............................    63
Johnson, Hon. Timothy V., of Illinois............................    64
Price, Hon. David E., of North Carolina..........................    66
Rahall, Hon. Nick J., II, of West Virginia.......................    68
Richardson, Hon. Laura, of California............................    70
Slaughter, Hon. Louise McIntosh, of New York.....................    74

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Capon, Ross B....................................................    76
Geddes, R. Richard...............................................    87
LaHood, Hon. Ray.................................................    95
McDonald, Joan...................................................   109
Orski, Kenneth...................................................   114

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Capon, Ross B., President and CEO, National Association of
Railroad Passengers, response to question from Hon. Richard L.
Hanna, a Representative in Congress from the State of New York.    82
LaHood, Hon. Ray, Secretary of Transportation, United States
Department of Transportation, responses to questions from Hon.
John L. Mica, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida; Hon. Jeff Denham, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California; Hon. Laura Richardson, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California; and
Hon. Larry Bucshon, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Indiana.....................................................   104

ADDITION TO THE RECORD

Hammond, Paula J., Chair, States for Passenger Rail Coalition,
written statement..............................................   120

THE FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION'S
HIGH-SPEED AND INTERCITY PASSENGER
RAIL PROGRAM: MISTAKES AND
LESSONS LEARNED

----------

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:06 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Mica
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Mr. Mica. I would like to call to order the House
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, and welcome you to
our hearing today. The title and subject of this hearing is
``The Federal Railroad Administration's High-Speed and
Intercity Rail Program: Mistakes and Lessons Learned.'' And we
have some distinguished panelists.
We have two panels today. And I think in between we are
going to squeeze in a small Members panel. We have had a couple
of requests for Members to speak who are not on the committee,
but their districts are affected by some of these projects. So
we are going to provide some opportunity for a couple of the
Members after we finish with Secretary LaHood. And then we will
turn to our second panel. But we are delighted and pleased this
morning to welcome the Secretary of Transportation, Ray LaHood,
and my former colleague, who will lead off today for the
administration.
The order of business will be opening statements first by
Members, and then we will go to Mr. LaHood. And as I said, we
will have one or two Members not on the committee who have
requested to come forward with some brief comments. And then we
will go to our second panel today. So with that, the order of
business will be, again, Members' statements.
And I want to open with my statement and, again, thank the
Secretary for his participation, and others.
As some of you may know, I have been a long, strong,
committed advocate to high-speed passenger rail service in the
United States. I was delighted to work in the past to put
provisions in PRIIA, which was signed into law by President
Bush. That was the first rail operations and Amtrak
reauthorization in, I believe, 11 years. And I took great pride
in working on trying to set up a blueprint and some guidelines
for beginning the process of instituting high-speed rail in the
United States.
I was also pleased when President Obama made high-speed
rail one of his top priorities. And, in fact, I think it was
his commitment and direction in which we had some $8 billion
firmly anchored to high-speed rail.
All that being said, I am here today--and actually tried to
give some of these projects as much time and leeway as possible
to move forward and see what develops--but I am here today in
this hearing to say that I am very disappointed in some of the
things that have happened. I have to give some credit where
credit is due, but as far as high-speed rail we have hit an
impasse. I am very concerned about the progress of actually
achieving a successful high-speed rail program.
And the failure to date, particularly on high-speed rail,
actually sets us, I think, further behind. There are many
critics to various forms of public transportation. And
unfortunately, it gives them more ammunition to undermine what
should be positive alternative means of transportation, which
is efficient, which helps with our energy problems, which has a
whole host of benefits.
Unfortunately, some of the high-speed rail funds--and we
have not only the $8 billion that was in the Recovery Act and
committed some 2\1/2\, almost 3 years ago now in January, we
had $2.5 billion in regular appropriations, bringing the total
for high-speed rail in the country and improvements to $10.5
billion. Of that, some $400 million has been rescinded and gone
back to deficit reduction.
Unfortunately, three States have returned money for
projects that did not get off the ground, or fell off the
track, so to speak: Ohio, Wisconsin, and my State of Florida.
Actually, it is quite startling that more than a third of the
funds have been returned, which is another setback for the
program.
More recently, our one hope of actually achieving high-
speed rail--and I have given that project as much leeway as I
possibly can in trying to see what would develop--but again,
the one potential where we had to achieve high-speed rail on an
average of at least 110 miles per hour--that is not reaching
110 miles an hour, that is not reaching 150 miles an hour at
some point in the journey. I am talking about the average
speed, which is the measure by which, internationally, high-
speed rail is evaluated.
But our one hope, California, appears to be in disarray. In
fact, we are devoting an entire hearing to that next week, to
see where that one project is going. We have problems with,
first of all, the route that was chosen. I went out with Mr.
Denham and actually looked at some of it--Fresno to
Bakersfield, mostly populated by agricultural community and
interests. We will hear from those folks next week.
But again, the site that was abandoned, southern California
or the Bay Area, where you have significant populations to be
served and at the present time have incredible congestion, both
of those corridors--again, it is an initial operating segment
that was chosen.
The more disturbing news is within the last month now the
projections on the cost may double the original $40-some
billion and reach over $90 billion. Furthermore, it appears
that there will be a 13-year delay. We are now looking at,
what, 2033, which would mean either subsidization of a ``dog
operation'' and give us more heartburn, as far as anyone ever
seeing a viable high-speed rail operation in the United States.
And finally, I was informed last week that even if they
built this segment--again, trains to--at the short operating
segment, not serve any fixed large population--that the
equipment that would be available at that point would only be
contemporary slow train vehicles, which could not achieve high
speed.
So, I am very concerned about the progress of California.
We will hear more about that next week. So we have $3.8
billion, the biggest amount going of the $8 billion and a total
of $10 billion, going to California. There is $10.1 billion, as
I said, left over after the return of $400 million.
Then the next issue that I have with the whole process of
selecting these corridors is--well, of course it is not
something I raised, but also GAO in March 2010 said that the
process that FRA had followed in selecting these lacked
transparency and some of the manner in which these were chosen
did not really make a whole lot of sense.
We have three what I call pseudo-high-speed rail projects,
and maybe you will hear of those touted as a success, most of
them centered in Chicago, two of the three, Chicago to St.
Louis. That is going to run an average of 71 miles an hour. Now
that is not incremental high speed, that is not high speed. And
it doesn't hold much hope for the future. Chicago to Detroit,
that route goes at 64 miles an hour on average, a snail-speed
train followed by a Portland to Vancouver so-called and named
high-speed rail project, which is 65 miles an hour.
These are, again, a bait and switch for high-speed rail,
and will continue to give high-speed rail a bad name in the
United States because they will not operate at high speeds, and
act as merely a mirage of high-speed rail.
Finally, Amtrak and some of the projects--and they are--
hosted by them, spread around the country--will get another
$3.6 billion. Of that there is $900 million that was redirected
to the Northeast Corridor. But if you take that $3.6 billion
and amortize it over 3 years, you have a current subsidy of $49
a passenger on Amtrak, and you attribute the cost of that $3.6
billion and amortize it over 3 years, you are looking at a
subsidization during these 3 years of $99, just a $1 under $100
per ticket for every Amtrak passenger, based on 30 million,
which is their current ridership. So that is disturbing.
So, I have to say, sort of in conclusion, we need a
success. I believe that the most logical place to put high-
speed rail--have said it before, I am from Florida--is in the
Northeast Corridor. You are from--members of the panel--are
from around the country. But we can all benefit by a success of
high-speed rail in the Northeast Corridor. Unfortunately, there
too we have seen delays. It has taken now 3 years to finally
issue an RFP to do an environmental study. That environmental
study RFP went out in August. To date--and this is December--
there is no award for doing the environmental study in the
Northeast Corridor. So we still lag behind in moving forward
with that project in the Northeast Corridor.
We will all benefit by the Northeast Corridor, one, because
it is the most densely populated area--20 percent of the U.S.
population resides in that corridor. We own the corridor. It is
the only corridor that we own. Between the Federal Government
and the States, they own almost the entire distance between
Washington, DC, and Boston.
We, of course, operate Amtrak's other service over freight
rails, 22,000 miles of them. We also will benefit as a Nation,
because 70 percent of our chronically delayed flights are in
this area, whether it is summer or winter causing the meltdown
of air transportation. And most of it will emanate from the
northeast region, so we can all benefit by, again, having one
success in our most densely populated area on a corridor that
we already own. Half of Amtrak's passengers of the 30 million
are in that corridor. So, again, it just makes sense.
Finally, let me say I had offered an alternative and
suggested separating out the Northeast Corridor into a separate
entity. I did meet a slight bit of resistance on that. And I
announced recently that I was willing to look at having Amtrak
and--if there wasn't an Amtrak, we would have an Amtrak; I have
supported a nationwide service system. But I am willing to work
with Secretary LaHood, Mr. Boardman and others to come up with
a plan. And we don't have to create a separate entity and
transfer the assets out. But what we do need is to attract
private sector capital and move this project, which Amtrak now
has projected would take 30 years, and would cost $117 billion.
Now, Congress cut off funds to high-speed rail in the
coming fiscal year. And Congress certainly is not going to give
Amtrak $117 billion, based on its current record, lack of plan
or progress in the Northeast Corridor. So we have got to work
together and we have got to find a solution to have a success
and put high-speed rail and transportation projects where they
make sense, and move forward on these important projects.
So, I'm willing to work with the administration, with other
Members of Congress, and in an effort to, again, end the
failure that we have seen, and hopefully have a pattern for
success for high-speed rail in the future.
So, that is my opening, rather lengthy comment. I will
defer to Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. I represent some of the most densely populated
areas in the country. And I want to thank you for being here. I
always been a proponent of not only the Northeast Corridor, but
especially local train and also freight, because of the
district that I represent.
I am sorry to see some of the problems that we are having
with Amtrak and some of the expanding--or some of the programs.
I wish we could speed it up. But I know that there is progress
that is being made. The Northeast Corridor, I think, is
probably the only place where you have the population to
sustain a real high-speed rail. And that was always my argument
with local rail in some of the areas of the country where they
don't have the population to sustain intercity rail. You know,
my district, I think it is something like a quarter of a
million people going through New York City every day.
I just wish that we could speed up some of this--some of
the issues that are holding back some of this--the work. And I
want to thank you, Secretary LaHood, for knowing that the
Portal Bridge going into New York City is one of the bridges
that is 100 years old, and is getting a whole face lift and a
new bridge. It really means a great deal to my district.
And that is basically what I have to say. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you so much. We will turn to the chair of
the rail subcommittee, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, good
to see you again. I am going to abbreviate my typical speech
that I give on this issue. Mr. Szabo is sitting behind there,
smiling. I think he could probably recite it verbatim. But I
appreciate having this hearing, and I agree with the chairman
and many other Members.
With respect to the President's vision of high-speed rail
in this country, I just don't believe it is going to happen
because we don't have the money. Number two, I don't really
think we have the need to have 80 percent of the American
population have access to high-speed rail. I do believe there
are corridors in this country that need high-speed rail; we
should be focused on them. We should be absolutely focused. And
we are not, in this present form that we are taking. We are
spreading money all over the country. It is no surprise that
Ohio and Wisconsin have turned down these large sums of money,
because they realize they are going to be strapped with
operating costs that are going to drive them further into debt.
I really believe if we focus on the one true high-speed
rail corridor that we have today that desperately needs it, it
is the Northeast Corridor. We own the tracks, so we don't have
to go round and round with our friends in the freight rails on
it. We own the tracks, we can do separations where we need it.
And as my friend from New Jersey mentioned, there is a bridge
up there, and it is a huge bottleneck. We should focus the
money there. Regarding the tunnel in Baltimore, I know some of
the money is coming back to make those improvements.
But if we are really serious about getting high-speed rail,
we need to find one place to do it in the country to do it
right, spend the money to do it right, learn from it, and then
take it to these other corridors that will emerge in the
future.
The California corridor, the money being spent there, the
more I see of it--and you see the numbers; they have gone from
$40 billion to $100 billion to maybe 20 years to who knows--
and, Mr. Secretary, you have been in Congress, you have been in
Government long enough to know that if they are saying $100
billion or $90 billion, you know it is going to be more than
that. And I have been to southern California. And they are
telling me that between $1 billion and $1.5 billion you could
truly have significant impact on intercity rail transportation
between San Diego and Los Angeles. That is where we ought to
start in California. The northern city of San Francisco and
that corridor and the southern California.
So, again, I urge you to go back and sit down with the
President and Mr. Szabo and really reevaluate what we are doing
here, because I just don't believe that we are going to be able
to have high-speed rail across this country because we can't
afford it and because the American people really aren't
clamoring for that. They are clamoring, though, to have better
intercity rail at higher speeds. The Keystone Corridor is a
great example. It is not high speed, but the ridership has gone
up 40 percent over the last 4 or 5 years, and it continues to
grow, Harrisburg to Philadelphia. And that is not high-speed
rail, but it is higher speed, more frequency. Those are the
things that I think will benefit the traveling public and
America, if we focus on those areas.
So, again, appreciate you being here today, look forward to
your testimony, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I would like to recognize the ranking member, and
the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am glad we are
holding this hearing today to focus on progress and pitfalls of
implementing high-speed and intercity passenger rail in the
United States.
All of our international competitors are beating us to the
punch. They have invested billions of dollars in passenger rail
systems that have significantly reduced highway and aviation
congestion. While here, in the United States, we fail to
provide adequate funding for passenger rail, and waste $115
billion a year in fuel and lost time sitting in traffic.
Let's step back and look at this committee progress, or
lack thereof. Over the past year we have no surface
transportation bill, no FAA bill, no water resource bill. And
to top it off, we are here today arguing about a High-Speed and
Intercity Passenger Rail Program that has already been defunded
by the Republicans.
Our country is building huge infrastructure projects in
Iraq, giving tax credits to the company, taking jobs overseas,
and building massive bridges in the United States with Chinese
steel. Yet, the committee leadership here today is trashing a
program that would improve passenger rail throughout the
country and put thousands of people to work.
Since today's hearing is titled, ``Mistakes in FRA High-
Speed and Intercity Passenger Rail Program,'' I thought I would
make a list of a few mistakes that I have seen since enacting
the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008 and
Recovery.
First of all, we fail to dedicate any significant funds for
passenger rail. Our main competitor, the Chinese, have invested
$350 billion in rail. Let me say that again: $350 billion. They
see the importance of moving people, goods, and services.
Then we invite private companies that I have had several
meetings with over the world, including some of the biggest
rail operators and manufacturing business today to invest time
and resources into vying for parts of the U.S. high-speed rail
market, only to slam the doors in their face by canceling
projects and cutting Federal funds.
Look at Wisconsin. Just yesterday, Talgo announced it is
going to shut down its Milwaukee train manufacturing operations
in 2012, killing over 4,700 jobs because Wisconsin Governor
Scott Walker rejected Federal funds for the high-speed line
between Milwaukee and Madison when he took office. It is worth
noting that--talking about mistakes--that the government later
reapplied for a portion of the funds he rejected. That is
absurd.
And let me talk about the poster child of mistakes, my home
State of Florida. The mistakes started when Governor Jeb Bush
shut down the high-speed rail authority in Florida before they
were able to study the most desirable Orlando to Miami route.
Our current Governor, Rick Scott, was able to come up with one
of the biggest acts of stupidity--returning $2.4 billion in
awarded funds. A ridership study which was paid for by
taxpayers' dollars indicates that it would have made money. The
study estimates that the ridership, at more than 3 million the
first operating year, would increase to 4.7 million in the 10th
year. Revenues were estimated at $4.2 million in the first
operating year, rising to $38 million in the 10th year.
And with respect to jobs, something we have all been
talking about and are supposed to be focusing on, 30,000 jobs.
You know, well, what kind of jobs are we talking about? We are
talking about engineering firms, steel, cement factories, and
construction jobs. Those are real jobs. What a loss. What a
loss. I want to welcome Secretary Ray LaHood, and thank him for
his efforts in working out the agreement that averted a
possible rail strike during the holiday season. I really think
you are one of the bright spots in transportation. And I
welcome you here today. And I want to thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentlelady. Mr. Denham, gentleman from
California.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding
this hearing, something that is of great concern to us who are
representing California, especially in the Central Valley. Here
not only to hear about the mistakes and lessons, but what we
always continue to hear about is the investment.
Now, to me, as a small business owner, the investment means
there is a return on investment at some future date. So,
really, what I think what we have to look at here is: What is
the public benefit, and does that outweigh the cost to
taxpayers?
The concern that I have in the California project is there
is a real failure to plan. There is not a defined Federal
obligation. How much of our transportation dollars are we going
to spend in California? We have got $3.6 billion right now
already obligated. Where do we come up with the other $95
billion on the new costs that have been projected? What is the
State's obligation on that? What is the local obligation? And
where are the private investors that we continue to hear about?
Recently the ridership numbers have--certainly have been
great doubt. They have pretty much fallen apart on the
California side of things. And now we have extended it by
another 13 years.
So, certainly as we are defining an investment, and we are
going to ask a private investor or a private company to invest
in this project, we have got to be able to define what the
project is. Who is obligated on each of those various areas?
And how much are the taxpayers obligated to, as well?
We get compared to other countries quite frequently. There
are other countries that are certainly spending billions of
dollars on high-speed rail. And their cost per mile of track is
much lower than what we have here, in California or across the
Nation. So as we start to compare with other countries, we need
to look at how they are doing things not only smarter, but less
expensive.
In California, we have the CEQA environmental law, which is
much greater than NEPA. Why do them both? If the President and
the administration's commitment is to do high-speed rail in
California, wouldn't we waive some of the high cost of the
environmental process that we have seen the Federal Government
waive in the past for other priority projects? So those are
going to be some things that I will be looking at as we take a
look at the investment of our taxpayer dollar.
And then, finally, we have been hearing about shovel-ready
jobs for quite some time now. The stimulus package was passed
in 2008. And yet in 2011 going into 2012, we still do not have
one shovel in the ground. To me, a shovel-ready project means
if you are going to go out and ask taxpayers to spend money on
a shovel-ready project, that means it is ready to put a shovel
in the ground. Three years later, going on 4 years now, still
no shovel and no plan on putting a shovel into the ground. I
believe that if the high-speed rail project in California is
not going to get moving quickly, then that money ought to be
diverted to shovel-ready projects that would be committed
quickly: goods movement, people movement, building highways.
But letting a pool of money just sit out there, I think, is
irresponsible.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentleman. Mr. DeFazio?
Mr. DeFazio. I am waiting to hear from the Secretary, sir.
Mr. Mica. OK. Ms. Johnson?
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I simply
want to welcome our Secretary and ask for unanimous consent to
put my remarks in the record.
Mr. Mica. Without objection, so ordered.
We haven't yet--we got a little late start.
Mr. Rahall. I will just ask, Mr. Chairman, my remarks be
made part of the record, as well, so we can go ahead with the
Secretary.
Mr. Mica. Without objection.
Other Members seek recognition on the Democrat side first?
Ms. Edwards. Then we will come back----
Ms. Edwards. And the same, Mr. Chairman. I will simply ask
that my remarks be made part of the record.
Mr. Mica. Without objection, so ordered.
All statements will be included. Any other comments,
Members seeking recognition? Mr. Gibbs, I guess, is next? I am
sorry, Ms. Schmidt, not Mr. Gibbs. Sorry.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you. First off, I want to thank the
Secretary for coming today.
Mr. Chairman, in your remarks you talked about the
subsidies that we have for Amtrak, $49 per rider over a 3-year
period. I would like to also highlight another subsidy, and
that is the food service. Last year we lost almost $61 million
in the food service on Amtrak. If you buy a hot dog for $4.50
it costs $6.60 to produce that hot dog for your plate, which
means the taxpayers are left holding the bag of $2.10. I do
have a bill that I have given--that I put in the hopper a few
weeks ago to correct that. And I do hope that this is a simple
fix to save the taxpayers almost $61 million. And I do hope
that we can come together and remedy that.
And by the way, I also want to thank you for the signage
issue for highways. You have made a whole lot of people in the
State of Ohio very, very happy. Thank you for your leadership
on that, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Another Member on our side? Mr. Gibbs, you are
recognized.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing. I think it is appropriate that I make an opening
statement because when we talk about mistakes and lessons
learned, Ohio is probably an example of some lessons learned.
I served on the State Senate during--in the Transportation
Committee--during the consideration of our so-called high-speed
rail project that would connect Cleveland, Columbus, and
Cincinnati. After the details of the project came to light,
Ohio rejected the Federal funding, due to the impractical,
inefficient, and expensive problems inherent to the project.
First, the supposed high-speed rail was more like snail
rail. The proposed Ohio passenger rail service would only reach
a maximum speed of 79 miles per hour, with an average speed of
39 miles per hour. According to the 2009 Amtrak study, the
estimated travel time from Cleveland to Cincinnati would have
been 6 hours and 30 minutes, substantially slower than the 4
hours it would take to drive the car. Combined with the fact
that the average round trip ticket was priced--was projected to
be $190, it is hard to believe that many Ohioans would see any
real savings.
Cost to the taxpayer is another serious issue. A 2009
Amtrak study determined that the project would require $500
million to $700 million in startup costs, plus millions of
dollars in annual operating subsidies. Further studies have
suggested that ridership would average only 1,315 riders per
day, resulting in extremely low rate of return.
Aside from the long travel times and high costs, there are
several other impractical elements to the project. For example,
unlike some larger cities, Ohio lacks the interconnectivity
necessary for passenger rail to work. When a rider gets off the
train at a Columbus station, where would they go from there?
There is nowhere to go.
Additionally, this proposal would share with freight lines,
and any move to go faster than 79 miles an hour would require a
totally new system.
In the Northeast Corridor, true high-speed rail may be
feasible. Earlier this year I visited the Northeast Corridor
with Chairman Mica and members of this committee. And it
quickly occurred to me that if true high-speed passenger rail
is going to work, it would work in the Northeast Corridor. The
Northeast Corridor has the population, the congestion, and the
interconnectivity that makes sense for a project like this, as
well as the need for alleviating the highly congested roads and
airports.
While this region of the country looks promising for cost-
effective development, for Ohioans $190 per ticket for a 6\1/
2\-hour ride from Cincinnati to Cleveland simply didn't make
economic sense.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentleman. Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
welcome. Great to see you again. Welcome back to the committee.
Very briefly, I just want to be very, very clear. Anybody
who wants to give the money back to you, we will take it in
Massachusetts. I just want to be on record very clearly. We
will take it, we will use it, we will improve our rail, and we
will say thank you to you and anybody else who wants to give it
back. And I look forward to a couple of hundred million, maybe,
any time you are ready. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Capuano. And I will be supporting
you, as long as it is dedicated towards the Northeast Corridor.
I had one more Member. Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Secretary LaHood, for being here.
I want to just take a minute and say thank you and
recognize the DOT commissioner from my State, New York. And in
particular, Joan, I would like to thank you for your
responsiveness in the recent hurricane and disaster in our
district. You set an example for the whole State with--through
Irene, and for the whole country, through those disasters of
Irene and Lee. And you expedited permits, and you did things
concurrently, and it was a big help, and I am grateful. So
thank you for being here, ma'am.
Mr. Mica. Other Members seek recognition? Mr. Cravaack?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rahall, for holding this important meeting today. And I would
like to welcome Secretary LaHood, and I look forward to your
testimony, sir. I look forward to the fact-based hearing on
high-speed passenger rail that includes a discussion of
benefits, and perhaps, most importantly, all the costs
associated with high-speed rail.
Too often, in some parts of the country, the proponents of
high-speed rail exaggerate its collective benefits while
downplaying, obscuring, or misrepresenting the actual capital
costs and the eventual long-term operating costs to the
American taxpayer.
Moreover, I am concerned that the bulk of this
administration's high-speed rail plans will only be viable as a
result of this administration's energy and environmental
policies that are continuing to drive up energy costs to the
American public.
Thank you again. I will be brief, and I look forward to
your testimony. And I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I think we have now heard from all Members who
seek recognition. I appreciate the Secretary, again, being with
us and also having an opportunity to hear from some of the
members of our committee.
And we will now yield to our distinguished Transportation
Secretary, Mr. LaHood. Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF THE HON. RAY LAHOOD, SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION,
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Secretary LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am delighted
to be back on a committee that I served on for 6 years. And
also, to the Ranking Member, Mr. Rahall, to both of you, thank
you for your leadership on transportation. Over the last 3
years I think we have worked well together, and I look forward
to continuing to do that.
The reason I am here is simple. I asked to be here. High-
speed rail is a signature initiative for President Obama and
this administration. But most of all, it is an important
initiative to the American people, whose representatives have
submitted more than 500 applications requesting $75 billion to
build high-speed rail projects. And all that since 2009.
In fact, when Florida's Governor decided to send back his
State's $2 billion of high-speed rail money, 24 States and the
District of Columbia and Amtrak submitted requests for $10
billion. Another powerful testament to America's enthusiasm for
high-speed rail.
So, I am looking forward to our conversation about
President Obama's vision, President Obama's plan, and 3 years
of successes achieved and progress to build on.
The fact is, high-speed rail has been a priority for
decades at the local, State, and Federal levels. And among
members of both parties. Let me read you something that I just
came across. And I quote: ``It is the policy of the United
States to promote the construction and commercialization of a
high-speed rail transportation system.'' That is a quote from
the 1991 transportation bill signed into law by President
Herbert Walker Bush.
Just 1 year later, one of my outstanding predecessors, a
Republican, former Transportation Secretary Andy Card,
designated the first five high-speed rail corridors during a
recession. And if you think this was an historic anomaly, I
remind you that the Republican House and Republican Senate
passed another transportation bill reiterating America's
commitment to high-speed rail in 1998. I remember, because I
was one of 337 Members of this body who voted for it.
So, what has changed today is that we have a President and
a Vice President who are putting their money where their mouth
is. We are not just asking--we are not just writing reports and
filing them away. We are hiring workers, laying track, and
building stations.
High-speed rail is coming to America. It is here. Three
years ago, President Obama started with a vision. He envisioned
an American in which 80 percent of the people can have access
to high-speed rail. And we know that as this system emerges,
jobs, economic development, and economic competitiveness will
follow.
In the short term, we are creating manufacturing
construction jobs. These are American jobs building the next
generation of America's infrastructure. Once track is laid and
stations are built, we are spurring economic development,
quality jobs, and American-owned small businesses all along the
United States rail corridors. What is more, our investment in
train tracks, in train sets, don't just give travelers more
option, they improve existing rail lines for freight cars.
We have invested in the last 3 years a half-a-billion
dollars in our Class I freight rail system in America. Now we
have done that selfishly, because that helps us get into high-
speed rail. But that is the first time that anybody can
remember that kind of investment was ever made in what is the
best rail--freight rail--system in the world: ours. A half-a-
billion dollars.
President Obama's administration is working every day to
eliminate bottlenecks and choke points in America's freight
rail. I have been to tower 55 in Texas. I have been to the
CREATE program in Chicago. All over America we are making
investments in freight rail. One-third of our competitive TIGER
grants went to projects that speed delivery of products from
factories, farms, and businesses to customers across the United
States and around the world. And in the long term, high-speed
rail will bolster America's economic competitiveness.
You know we are being out-competed right now, today, all
over the world, but in particular in Asia, on countries that
are building roads, building airports, building bridges, and
building high-speed rail. We used to be the leader. If we don't
catch up here pretty quick, we are going to be in second place.
We know our Nation will be home to 100 million additional
people by the year 2050. That is the equivalent of another
California, Texas, New York, and Florida, combined. Our
highways and airports simply can't handle the growth. We need
to do something, or we will be crushed under the weight of our
own expansion.
So, how are we bringing President Obama's vision to life?
What is the plan? Well, we have designated an integrated
network with trains moving at different high-end speeds, based
on the needs of the market, just like in rail systems overseas.
Not all the trains overseas go the same speed. Where it makes
sense, we are building state-of-the-art high-speed lines on a
par with anything in Europe or Asia.
Feeding into this true high-speed core will be regional
service. We know that everybody is not going to drive a car to
a train station. There will be regional service. There already
is, faster than most trains we have today.
Finally, we are building out our energy corridors. This is
happening already. These are local lines along which
entrepreneurs are opening shops. These rail lines will become
economic corridors for jobs, just like the interstate highway
was. This integrated approach is exactly what rail operators
have done in countries around the globe. Some trains are fast,
other trains are faster.
So, how far have we come during these last 3 years? We have
put American workers on rail job sites in 32 States and the
District of Columbia. Projects in Illinois, Maine, Minnesota,
North Carolina, Oregon, Vermont are coming in ahead of schedule
and under budget. The same time, we are supporting jobs at
manufacturing plants in industrial States like Indiana, and at
suppliers in States like Arizona and Arkansas. And everything
from tracks to ties to train sets to construction material for
new stations is being built by American workers, American
workers building America's infrastructure.
From here, the future is bright. During the next 6 months,
more than $1.1 billion of new job-creating construction
projects will commence. We have invested in increasing the
Acela speed from 130 miles per hour to 186 miles per hour. We
have invested in bringing 110-mile-per-hour service to the
Midwest. We will soon break ground on a new line between
Portland and Seattle. We continue planning for a southwest
network from--that connects Dallas to Houston and Oklahoma
City. And we are committed to helping the people of California
achieve their vision for high-speed rail.
This is not Ray LaHood's vision; this is California's
vision. This is the people's vision, people that have worked on
high-speed rail in California for 15 years. It is not a cheap
project, but it is an essential one. Its costs are in line with
those of similar projects that have been successful around the
world. And we are in it for the long haul. We will not be
dissuaded by the naysayers, by the critics, some of whom you
are going to hear from later on today. We are not.
High-speed rail is in America, coming to America, and
expanding in America. There is no going back. The dollars to
support all of this were included and paid for in every budget
that President Obama has submitted to Congress. All of this was
included in the President's outline for a long-term
transportation bill which charted a course in proposed funding
for the next 6 years. All of this was included in our push for
high-speed rail projects as a part of the American Jobs Act.
And all of this is anchored in our shared history.
We have always met tough challenges by doing big things. We
have always done big things.
And transportation has always been bipartisan, always. When
I was here, sitting where you are sitting, I was voting for two
transportation bills. Both of those bills passed with over 400
votes in the House. There are no Republican or Democratic
bridges. There are no Republican or Democratic railroads. We
have had a rich history in this country of bipartisanship when
it comes to transportation, because transportation puts people
to work. It puts friends and neighbors to work. That is why it
has been bipartisan.
Our blueprint for building high-speed rail is the same as
America's blue print for building the interstate system. We are
right at the point where America was at when we started the
interstate system. We didn't know where all the lines were at.
Do you think they knew where all the lines were at when
President Eisenhower signed the interstate bill? Of course not.
Do you think they knew where all the money was coming from? Of
course not. Fifty years later, we have the best interstate
system in the world because people had a vision.
When the United States first started going from planning to
paving, we didn't know where all the routes were going to be.
We didn't know where every penny was coming from. But President
Eisenhower set a goal. He had a vision. Through 10
administrations and 28 sessions of Congress--that is when I
say, ``High-speed rail is coming to America,'' because through
10 administrations, 10 Presidents, and 28 sessions of Congress,
we got it done. That is what America has always been about.
We didn't invest when times were good. We have a proud
history investing when times were tough, because transportation
puts people to work. Through boom years and bust years, through
eight recessions, we built the best roadway system in the
world. And we should do no less for high-speed rail.
Members of this committee, our parents and grandparents
dreamed big, planned big, built big so we might have the chance
to lead. What the previous generation did for us is left us an
interstate system. State of the art. We should do no less for
the next generation. I am not going to benefit from high-speed
rail, but I have four grown children and nine grandchildren.
They will. We should do what generations did for us. Think big,
build big, and leave the next generation of transportation
high-speed rail.
I am happy to answer your questions, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. And again, we
appreciate your commitment to transportation, and particularly
to a successful high-speed rail program.
I outlined some of the problems that we have had, and
hopefully--the title of this hearing, again, is lessons learned
from some of the mistakes that we have made. And one of the
things that you just cited is that--in fact, we built the
interstate back in the 1950s, with President Eisenhower. On
Tuesday, we heard the President say, ``We've lost our ambition,
our imagination, and our willingness to do the things that
built the Golden Gate Bridge and Hoover Dam and unleashed all
the potential in this country.''
I went back to look and see how long it took in the
planning process and approval process and then the construction
process. And then I look at the Northeast Corridor.
For example, it has taken 3 years to get out an RFP on an
environmental study, and that hasn't yet been awarded. Can you
tell us the status of the award of doing the environmental
study for the Northeast Corridor, which is essential to move
that----
Secretary LaHood. What I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, is we
have taken our cues from what you have told us. We are
investing in the Northeast Corridor.
Mr. Mica. Yes, and you----
Secretary LaHood. We just announced an investment of almost
$1 billion. I will get you the specific date when I believe the
environmental will be done.
Mr. Mica. Again, if you can't give it to me now----
Secretary LaHood. I will give it to you.
Mr. Mica [continuing]. Been helpful. After many, many years
we finally got, in March of 2010, the designation of the
Northeast Corridor, and I thank you. But we cannot move forward
until that is awarded. And I guess back in August, the
proposals had come in. We just need an award. So I think that
is very important to moving forward.
And then, wisely spending the money. I supported the money
for the Northeast Corridor. We heard Mr. Sires, who was here,
talk about additional funds and others--Mr. Capuano wants some
for Boston. But what we don't want to do is spend that money in
a half-baked process without a good plan to build the whole
corridor. And I don't think $117 billion over 30 years is the
way to go, and in dribbles and drabbles.
Mr. Boardman testified, sat in the same chair and said he
believed that we also had to attract private capital into that
process. But the whole process is contingent on going forward
with just a regular order of environmental study, and that is
delayed.
You said not all trains in Europe are high-speed. But every
high-speed rail train goes between 110 and 150 miles an hour,
on average. We don't have a single proposal to reach that speed
with any project that is under consideration. And we have had a
setback now in California.
Do you see any way to achieve high-speed rail in an
expedited----
Secretary LaHood. The line between Chicago and St. Louis
will go 110 miles an hour, Mr. Chairman. When----
Mr. Mica. That is the high speed.
Secretary LaHood. Let me just finish. In California it will
be high speed--it will go 200 miles an hour when that project
is finished.
We are also--the investments we are making in the Northeast
Corridor will get to higher speeds, which is what I said in my
testimony.
So the investments we are making--the figures that you used
are the current figures. With our investments, trains will go
higher speeds. Are they all going to go the same speed? No.
California, 200 miles an hour. Illinois, 110 miles an hour. The
Northeast Corridor, higher than they are doing now. That is why
we are making the investment.
Mr. Mica. Again, the speeds that I have, average speed,
Chicago/St. Louis, 71 miles an hour, on average----
Secretary LaHood. That is the current speed, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Chicago to Detroit----
Secretary LaHood. Before we made the investment.
Mr. Mica [continuing]. Sixty-four miles an hour. Now, these
are----
Secretary LaHood. Before the investments.
Mr. Mica. Yes. Again, I am just telling you what we are
told, that after they make the investments these will be the
average speeds. And this is information provided by your
department on the project----
Secretary LaHood. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Yes?
Secretary LaHood. After the investments, Illinois, 110
miles an hour. After--when California is complete, 200 miles an
hour. On the Northeast Corridor, higher speeds than now once we
invest the $1 billion that we just announced.
Mr. Mica. There is a public article about some of the
stress and problems by Mr. Phillips and appeared recently in
Trains magazine. It talks about the turmoil at Amtrak. One of
my concerns is I recently learned that Al Engle, who was the
vice president for the high-speed rail under Amtrak was either
fired or dismissed, we are not sure. I believe he has been
replaced. But the reports are that there is turmoil right now
in Amtrak, not only on high-speed rail, but overall.
Secretary LaHood. I don't run high speed--I don't run
Amtrak, Mr. Chairman. I have plenty of things on my agenda. I
am not in charge of Amtrak. Mr. Boardman is. I can't answer for
him. I don't have any idea who you are even talking about
there.
Mr. Mica. Well, again, we just gave $900 million to Amtrak,
and I think that we should conduct some oversight. I mean that
is--I can account for about $1 billion going into Amtrak. And
when we have reports of the person in charge either being fired
or dismissed on that project, it does raise concerns.
Finally, I invite you to again look at some successful
models. I would like to see Amtrak more successful. You did
help Ms. Brown and I on an Auto Train facility in Florida. We
finally made the connection at Lorton. Years ago they put a
facility in. People deserve more than a tented, hot--a facility
that was a replacement for a storm--we appreciate that. But my
concern is that we have a great project like Auto Train, but we
don't have people that can manage and expand that service. We
should be running a larger number there, and also in the
Northeast Corridor of passenger service in other quarters.
Mr. Shuster and I put a provision in the PRIIA law that
allowed for the private sector to pick up some of these routes
and show what they can do on money-losing routes or successful
routes, and make them more successful and less costly to the
taxpayers. That process has been slow during the past 3 years.
Not much has been done. And I understand a rule is about to be
issued.
Is that forthcoming? Can you tell the committee the status?
Secretary LaHood. It is about--we are getting close.
Mr. Mica. OK. And if you could give us a--maybe in writing
to the committee, the--some specifics on when you plan to make
that decision, we would be grateful.
Secretary LaHood. Absolutely.
Mr. Mica. All right. With that, I will yield to Mr. Rahall.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I
certainly commend you for your testimony today and your--the
fact that you asked to be before us.
You are right in your nonpartisan remarks. There are no
American bridges, American railroads, or--I mean no Democratic
railroads or bridges or Republican bridges or railroads, they
are all American bridges. And we all want to be nonpartisan
when it comes to transportation. But I still think you are the
best Republican in this administration.
Let me----
Secretary LaHood. I think I am the only one.
[Laughter.]
Secretary LaHood. The bar isn't very high.
Mr. Rahall. You know, I understand a lot of my colleagues
wanting to put everything in the Northeast Corridor. You know,
that is not the only part of this country that is experiencing
growth. I think we have to look at rural America, we have to
look at the West and Midwest. The passenger rail system in this
country should truly be a national program. You have compared
it to our interstate program, and how it took 60-some years to
get our interstate systems to where they are today. And that
could be very much the case with passenger rail service, as
well.
But there is growth in other parts of our country. There
are people aching to be relieved of congestion that exists in
rural America. Congestion is just not a big city problem any
more. And passenger rail service is a way to alleviate that,
along with improved infrastructure. So, I commend you for that
national vision that you have, and the vigor with which you
have expressed it here this morning.
And, I know your application process, the DOT application
process, has come under some severe criticism. But I commend
you for that, too. I think you have been very transparent in
that process, as confirmed by a GAO report released in May of
this year that called the accusations against that program into
question, and said--and I quote--that ``the FRA selection
process was an example of good grantmaking.'' So, I commend you
for that. You have involved all the stakeholders. It has been a
transparent process. And bravo to you.
Let me ask you a question about the Buy American
provisions. You touched upon that in your testimony, as well,
and a lot of us on my side of the aisle have introduced a
stronger Buy American bill in the last week or two.
There are loopholes--gaping loopholes, I would call--in the
current Buy American provisions that allow companies to
subdivide, et cetera, and escape Buy American provisions of
current law. Do you think they need to be strengthened? Can we
close those loopholes, legislatively?
Yet, at the same time, as my legislation does, it allows
you the waiver authority if there is a national interest issue
involved. If we are incapable of making the product up to
sufficient standards in this country, or we would drive up the
cost above a 25-percent increase, it would grant you that
waiver authority.
Secretary LaHood. Well, Mr. Rahall, I would say this. I
think we have a very, very strong commitment at DOT to Buy
American. And we have been complimented numerously for the idea
that Buy American is very important. We want to make sure that
every one of these dollars goes to American companies and
American workers. That is our number one goal. And if you want
to strengthen that, go for it. We will take any encouragement
we can. We are committed to Buy American, more than anything
else. These are American tax dollars, and they should go to
American workers and American companies. And that is why we
have just been very disciplined about making sure that these
dollars do go to American companies and American workers.
Anything you can do to help us on that we will appreciate.
Mr. Ribble. [presiding.] Thank you. And the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much. Again, Mr. Secretary, it
is great to have you here today. And I would point out to the
committee there is another Republican in the administration who
came from the Armed Services Committee, Mr. McHugh, who is
Secretary of the Army. So it is fitting that the Secretary of
Transportation is a Republican and former members of two
committees that have been bipartisan. And we hope to continue
to be bipartisan.
Part of the problem, though, with bipartisanship these days
is that we don't have the money. We just don't have the money.
And that is when I come back to--as I said, with this--with the
way some of this money has been spent on stimulus, you put it
out on projects, some of them may get speeds up to 110, others
they are not going to get up there. And again, as we pointed
out, Wisconsin and Ohio rejecting them because it is just--it
is a tremendous drain on their treasury.
So I come back to you talking about the vision. There was a
vision Abraham Lincoln had for connecting this country with
railroads, an important vision to the entire Nation. And
Eisenhower with the highway system, something we had to do to
connect this vast, vast country together. Aviation, vast spaces
we have to travel. And when you come to passenger rail today
the need is not the same as it was in the past. But it is
present in some of these corridors, and that is what I come
back to: Focus on these corridors. To send out the money in
dribs and drabs as we have I don't think is going to accomplish
the President's vision, which I believe is wrong, to think we
are going to have high-speed rail available to 80 percent of
the country.
So, I get now to my question of the Northeast Corridor. You
know, why isn't there a focus? I mean what are you--why are you
opposed to saying with all this money--taking the money from
maybe even California and focusing it on the Northeast
Corridor, when we own the tracks, when the numbers, the number
of people who live in the Northeast Corridor, 18, 19 percent of
our population on 2 or 3 percent of our landmass, it is
absolutely ripe for high-speed rail. So why wouldn't we focus
on that like a laser to get it done there, a place that I
believe will be highly successful and we can learn tremendous
lessons to take it to these other emerging corridors,
especially in these times of very, very short, very small
budgets that we have to work with?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we do believe in the Northeast
Corridor. But we also believe in America. We believe there are
people in other places in America that would like to have a
train to ride. We have just invested $1 billion in the
Northeast Corridor. We just had the Northeast Corridor
designated for rail. We are paying attention to it.
Look it. When we started this 3 years ago, there were
different Governors in different States. I don't have to tell
all of you that. You know that. There is a new Governor in New
York. He wants high-speed rail. That didn't exist when we
started 3 years ago. There is a new Governor in Connecticut.
And I have met with these Governors. These Governors are our
partners. We need partners.
Amtrak has been a good partner. For all the criticism and
how people love to decry Amtrak, Amtrak is making money,
ridership is up. I was on a train to New York City this
weekend, from Washington to New York, completely full. From New
York to Washington on Sunday, completely full. Ridership is up
on Amtrak. We are making investments in Amtrak. They are as
good a partner as any State that has stepped up and wants to
get into the passenger rail business.
We are not going to just invest every dollar in one part of
the country. That is not fair. It is not fair to people who get
elected to this House who have people in their States that want
to get into the passenger rail business. That is simply not
fair.
Mr. Shuster. You make my case for me. You were on a train
from Washington to New York. It was full. Absolutely. That is
why we need to focus there.
Secretary LaHood. And it was on time. And they made money.
Mr. Shuster. The train that exists in California between
San Francisco and Los Angeles isn't full. I don't believe there
is enough money in California to ever complete that project.
You have got a State that is as close----
Secretary LaHood. Well, I----
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Close to being bankrupt as you
can, and so why don't we--look. I am for passenger rail in this
country. I am just not for spending this money on high-speed
rail lines that aren't going to be built, that the American
people aren't clamoring for.
My good friend from West Virginia said there are people in
this country that are aching for relief. You know where they
are aching for relief to have passenger rail, where we should
be spending some of this money? Los Angeles to San Diego. For
half of what we are investing in the central corridor they
could have significant improvements to move people around.
And anybody--Mr. Secretary, I know you have been to
southern California. All you have to do is walk out the front
door of your hotel and you see massive congestion. So, why
aren't we really focusing on these places that really have
tremendous needs? As far as I can tell from San Francisco to
Los Angeles, the roads are not backed up. They are not sitting
in tremendous traffic jams. That is occurring in southern
California and northern California.
So, I encourage you--again, I am in favor of high-speed
rail where it makes sense. I am in favor of improving passenger
rail systems. As I say, I use it all the time as an example. I
hope you do. I know Mr. Szabo and I have spoken about it. The
Keystone Corridor. That is an example of passenger rail, it is
not high-speed rail, and people are getting on it.
I am the poster child for railroad passenger rail service.
Twenty years ago, as you know, my father sat on this committee
and I told him, ``I will never get out of my car and ride in a
train, because I want the freedom, as most Americans do.'' But
today, if I am going to Philadelphia from Washington or from my
district, I go to Harrisburg and get on the train, because I
don't want to deal with the traffic.
And I think American people--when you have frequency and
reliability you don't have to go 150 miles, 180 miles an hour.
And it is a lot less expensive to upgrade those, as we are
seeing in some of these corridors in the Midwest. I think that
is really where our focus should be.
And I see my time has expired. One other thing I just want
to bring up, not to get a response from you, but there is a
procurement issue that is coming up. Mr. Szabo and I have
talked about it. This is not the right venue, but I hope to
stay engaged with you on a procurement issue--Mr. Szabo is
shaking his head back there--that is important to the United
States when it comes to purchasing locomotives for some of
these different routes around the country.
So, again, thank you for being here, and I would urge you
to go back and reevaluate the Northeast Corridor and some of
these other corridors that have a desperate need today, and we
can be successful. And with that I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentleman. Yield to the subcommittee
Ranking Member, Ms. Brown.
Secretary LaHood. Mr. Chairman, if you wouldn't mind, he
just----
Mr. Mica. Did you want to respond? I saw you----
Secretary LaHood. I do.
Mr. Mica [continuing]. Nod your head affirmatively, and Mr.
Szabo----
Secretary LaHood. I was not agreeing with him.
Mr. Mica. Oh, OK.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mica. Oh, I am sorry.
Secretary LaHood. Which I will----
Mr. Mica. I apologize. Mr. LaHood----
Secretary LaHood. Which I will be very clear about.
Mr. Mica [continuing]. I apologize, go right ahead.
Mr. Shuster. I am glad you cleared that up, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Mr. Shuster, we don't make this stuff up.
The ideas for this map that was included in my testimony today,
these corridors, Ray LaHood didn't make this up. These
corridors came from people who live in these States who want
passenger rail.
So, if you don't like the idea where a rail line is going
in California, then you need to talk to the people in
California who have been working on high-speed rail for 15
years, including some Members of Congress who have personally
come to me and told me where they think there would be a good
investment of money, just like the people in the northwest,
just like the people in the Northeast Corridor, just like the
people in the Midwest, and all--this is a reflection of what
people in America are asking for. It is not a reflection of
President Obama sitting down at a map and drawing a line, or
Ray LaHood.
This came from the people, and the people want this,
irregardless of whether you think they do or not. The people in
California want this, people that have been working on it for
15 years. People in Mr. DeFazio's area in the northwest want
this corridor. We didn't make it up. And we are making
investments where we think they are good investments where over
time, over a period of time--it took 50 years to build the
interstate. We are not going to build high-speed rail
overnight. It is going to take some time. We are doing what the
people want.
Mr. Shuster. Well----
Secretary LaHood. And also elected representatives of the
people, by the way.
Mr. Shuster. With all due respect, Mr. Secretary, my
daughter wants a brand new Jeep Grand Cherokee luxury SUV. She
can't afford it, nor can I afford it.
Secretary LaHood. Well----
Mr. Shuster. And that is part of the problem in this
situation.
Secretary LaHood [continuing]. I am glad you didn't think
that when you came to me about the Keystone line, because you
thought it was a good idea and we thought it was a good idea,
and we found the money to make the investments. And that is
what we are doing for other representatives in Congress.
Mr. Shuster. You are absolutely right. Where it makes
sense. I am not coming to you asking you to invest in high-
speed rail from Harrisburg to Pittsburgh. That goes right
through my district, and I haven't done that. Where it makes
sense I support it. Where it doesn't make sense, again, I think
we are wasting our money. And we should be focused on areas
where we can see tremendous success stories that are out
there--that we will be able to see that.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman, I thank the Secretary. And
now we will go back to Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, thank you, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you so much for being here. You are just such a bright
spot. I have to tell you.
In 1980, Senator Graham--then Governor Graham--appointed me
to a committee to bring high-speed rail to Florida. In other
words, in Florida we have been working on it for over 30 years.
It has been on the ballot, the people passed it, the House of
Representatives and the Senate and the Governor at the time
signed the bill supporting it.
What I want to know is how can we protect the taxpayers,
the Federal taxpayers' dollars, when you have the kind of
investments that Florida have made over the years? And how can
we--and I am looking at it--how can we recoup? We can't have
one Governor coming up and saying, ``Well, I don't want it,''
and all of the investment that we made over the years--how can
we get the Federal taxpayers' dollars back? Because regardless
of what my colleagues who don't understand say--some of them
clearly don't understand--we applied for the funds. No one
asked us to apply. And it was extensive--we did environmental
work, and studies, and partnerships.
I mean someone thanked you a few minutes ago for a project
in Florida--by the way, it was stimulus--you know, we hate the
word stimulus, but it was stimulus dollars that put people to
work. Thank you, thank you. Florida, that was Florida.
So, can you tell us how can we deal with these States that
are causing overall problems, as far as taxpayers' dollars are
concerned? I want my money back.
[Laughter.]
Secretary LaHood. Well, look it. There was only one person
in Florida who didn't want high-speed rail, Congresswoman.
Ms. Brown. I understand that.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you for your leadership, thank you
to Mr. Mica for his leadership. I am not going to go into
political science 101 about how you get your money back. I
think you know more about that than probably anybody on the
committee here. So, good luck.
Ms. Brown. Would you like to talk about--you know, there
has been a lot of discussion about where these projects should
go, and basically that, you know, it should go to the Northeast
Corridor. I support that. This area is already developed. And
when you go to Europe, I mean, there are different forms of
speed, as you mentioned. And then there are some areas in this
country that we can develop that will be true high speed.
But how can we educate people who have, clearly, no
understanding of the process? They come here, their vision is
one route from one area to the other. They don't understand the
importance of getting people out of that little car and getting
them into other modes of transportation. I mean that is the
future of our country. We are the caboose----
Secretary LaHood. Well----
Ms. Brown [continuing]. And we started the train system.
Secretary LaHood [continuing]. We have to continue to make
progress. As we make progress, we will show success and we will
prove that the vision that we all have about passenger rail is
a good vision, and it is one that the people want. It will take
some time to do that. We will continue to invest in those
places in the country that are ready, willing, and able to move
ahead with it. And as we have success, I think that will tell
the story.
Ms. Brown. And all the hearings that we have had here, when
people come from other countries, they have indicated once you
have some success then the other part of the country will
demand it.
Some people that live in some areas have not even gone to
the outskirts of their town. So, they have no idea of the
freedom--for example, being able to get on a train in Orlando
and go from Orlando to Tampa, or from Orlando to Miami, 200
miles, 1 hour and 15 minutes.
I mean that is the future of our country. It is going to
happen. And it is going to happen for Floridians. One person
will not stop us. It is going to happen.
I mean the amount of people that could be working now. I
saw a ``60 Minutes'' piece where a person was unemployed,
living homeless, a construction worker. How many jobs would
that project have generated in Florida, construction jobs?
Secretary LaHood. Thousands of jobs for the people that
were going to build the rail lines, thousands of jobs for
people that were going to build the cars. And all along the
corridor, all of the small businesses that would have
benefitted from that, that would have hired people. Thousands
and thousands and thousands of jobs.
Ms. Brown. You know, I have heard people say, ``Well, those
are temporary jobs.'' What are they talking about?
Secretary LaHood. Every job in America is important. And
the idea that people that were going to build the rail line was
a temporary job--it was an important job, and it was a job that
would have paid a good salary and given people the opportunity
to get experience and then--you know what the plan was. Once
the Orlando to Tampa, then Orlando to Miami. That would have
been the next leg, and would have provided more jobs, with
experienced workers who built the Orlando to Tampa.
Ms. Brown. Well, tell me about the study that was done that
we paid for, the Federal Government paid for. Can you just
briefly--we had it up on the----
Secretary LaHood. The ridership study?
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Secretary LaHood. Yes, the ridership study showed that the
ridership would be there for the rail plan from Orlando to
Tampa. And everybody, including the newly elected Governor,
knew that. He knew the ridership would be there. On the day
that the Governor made the announcement in Florida there were
nine companies----
Ms. Brown. Yes.
Secretary LaHood [continuing]. From foreign countries who
were ready to invest in Florida high-speed rail. As soon as the
agreement was signed they were ready to invest in American
jobs, and Built-in-America in Florida. And that all went away.
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir. In closing, I understand the day that
he made the announcement members of the Chinese Government were
in Tampa with CSX, and they wanted to know what was the
problem, when money was not the issue. If money is not the
issue, what is the problem? Why it is that we turned back $2.4
billion? It is a disservice to this country.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentlelady. Mr. Denham.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Happy birthday, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you, thank you.
Mr. Denham. I don't think anybody has said that to you yet
today. Thank you for sharing your birthday with us today.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you. My birthday present will be
when I win you over, Mr. Denham.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Denham. I hope the facts can win me over. That is my
biggest concern right now.
And, you know, I agree with you, that you know, these
projects, these roads, these high-speed rail, they are not
Republican or Democrat. But the question is, are they good
investment or bad investment? And that is where I have been
trying to get the proof on.
California, you know, you continue to talk about that being
a good investment, although the numbers have ballooned to $98.5
billion. So my question to you is, sir, where does that money
come from?
Secretary LaHood. There is not enough money here in
Washington to do what the people in California want to do. And
so we have encouraged companies that were going to invest in
Florida and other places to go to California. I have had a
couple of meetings with Governor Brown about this. I have
arranged meetings with Governor Brown and investors from China
and Japan that could possibly--discussions are still going on--
come to California, establish opportunities for jobs to build
the infrastructure, to build the train sets so that these
Californians can go to work. They are doing them.
It is going to take private investment, there is no
question about it. And there are companies that are in
discussions with California officials to make investments.
Mr. Denham. But you do agree with the $98.5 billion number,
that at least that--we are dealing--we are starting with a
factual baseline of that was going to be the true cost.
Secretary LaHood. It is going to be expensive to build the
high-speed rail. If that is the figure today, that is the
figure today. It will be different tomorrow. Look it. The
longer----
Mr. Denham. Well----
Secretary LaHood. These--there is an inflation factor here.
When this project started it wasn't $95 billion, it was less
than that.
Mr. Denham. No, it was $33 billion.
Secretary LaHood. And when----
Mr. Denham. Now it has over tripled.
Secretary LaHood. When we are here 3 years from now, it is
going to be higher than that. So the answer is you got the
right figure today.
This is an expensive project. But all of the money is going
to American workers to build American infrastructure. It is not
as if the money--it is going to our people. It is going to your
friends and neighbors. It is going to your constituents to pay
their salaries, to build the train sets, to build the
infrastructure. That is where the money is going to.
Mr. Denham. At what----
Secretary LaHood. And if we can get private investors--
pardon me?
Mr. Denham. At what cost? So I am with you. I want to
create American jobs, too. The shovel-ready projects that we
talk about, I would love for the shovel to actually be in the
ground creating these jobs. But at what cost?
I mean if it is a $98.5 billion project, are we saying $1
million a job is a good job, $2 million a job is a good job? At
what price do we throw money at a project that you can't define
numbers on?
Secretary LaHood. This money is going to small businesses,
going to big businesses, going to contractors, and going to
American workers.
Mr. Denham. Yes, sir.
Secretary LaHood. That is where the money is going.
Mr. Denham. I understand that. And my time is limited. My
question is the American public wants to know at what cost. Is
it $98.5 billion? And if that is really the cost, where does
that money come from? Because right now, California voters that
approved a $9.95 billion bond, 10 percent of the overall cost,
they want their money back. Today's Sacramento Bee shows that
64 percent of the people are now opposed to it. People that
went to the ballot box and voted for the $9.95 billion bond are
now opposed to it, and want that pulled back.
So, if the Federal Government's commitment is $3.6 billion,
which they have already allocated as stimulus dollars that
haven't put a shovel into the ground, where does the other $95
billion come from? If there is a private investor out there
that wants to spend $95 billion, bring them on. Give me their
names, I would love to see the plan that they have. I would
love to see them not only invest, but I would like to see them
get a return on their investment. But we continue to talk about
investing with no plan on what the return to the taxpayer is.
So, you know, every transportation project we look at, we
have a plan. We know what it is going to cost in the
environmental phase, the planning phase, construction phase. We
know how many jobs we are going to create. But yet, this big
picture of high-speed rail, which sounds warm and fuzzy, isn't
sounding warm and fuzzy any more, because we don't have any
concrete numbers.
So I would assume that, if you are going to throw more
stimulus dollars, if you are going to throw more of the
taxpayers' dollars at this project, that you have to have some
kind of plan, other than maybe there is a private investor out
there that might want to put some money into this.
Secretary LaHood. California has a plan. I will be happy to
share it with you. I would suggest you talk to Jim Costa about
it. He has worked on it when he was a State assembly person, he
has worked on it since he has been a congressman. Governor
Brown has a new team of people in place. California has a plan.
That is why we are funding it.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Secretary, do you have a plan?
Secretary LaHood. Absolutely. Here it is in pictures. And I
can give it to you in writing, too, if you like.
Mr. Denham. I would--I am here to not debate you, but to
understand what the Federal Government's obligation is. Right
now you have obligated $3.6 billion of stimulus dollars to a
project that is not shovel-ready. If California has a plan,
they must be relying on the Federal Government somewhat for an
additional lump sum of money above the $3.6 billion. What is
that number?
I think not only as a member of this committee I should
have that number, but my taxpayers in the district that have
committed $9.95 billion should understand what that number is.
Secretary LaHood. We will share it with you.
Mr. Denham. I look forward to seeing it.
Mr. Shuster. [presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, Mr. Secretary,
I would like to congratulate you. You mentioned Buy American.
But I would point out that the Federal Transit Administration,
under the leadership of the former Secretary and President
Bush, was actually using Federal taxpayer dollars with routine
waivers to build prototype transit vehicles overseas. That came
to an end with this administration. We are not funding research
and development for manufacturers in other countries. That was
crazy.
I appreciate the tightening up the Buy American, and we
have some of the tightest rules here in rail, and we need to
tighten up elsewhere. Like what happened in California, I hope
the gentleman shares the same sense of outrage about the so-
called segmentation of the Oakland Bay Bridge and the Chinese
getting a new factory paid for by U.S. taxpayers. And we will
offer him an opportunity to cosponsor a bill that will fix that
loophole in the future.
I just want to talk, and I don't have many questions. I
have been quiet, which is unusual for me. But, look, these
things take a long time. I remember talking to former Senator
Hatfield, a good friend, about him riding an electric train in
Oregon over to the main electric line and being able to go to
Portland or down to Eugene when he was a kid in times that
rivaled today's interstate highway, without an accident or an
interruption.
We lost that. We are trying to get it back. We have been a
little slow coming up with the funding in Oregon, but we have
now bought two Talgo train sets with help from the Federal
Government. Washington State has two. We have a plan partnering
with Washington State--and we have been working in partnership
with the mainline rail roads to build sidings and things so we
can move our trains more quickly. And the biggest problem is
at-grade crossings, and it takes a long time and a lot of money
to deal with at-grade crossings. But we have a plan that is
feasible, with a little Federal help, to get to 79 miles an
hour going to Portland.
Now, that doesn't sound like any big deal, but guess what?
If we can do that, I won't be driving my car to Portland any
more because about every other time now there is an accident,
there is a delay, it is so congested. That will be faster than
I could make it on an optimal day. That is a viable plan. But
it is going to take continued partnership with the Federal
Government, and more planning.
This is where we are looking for some Federal help. We are
looking at using that old electric rail line, our heritage,
which is now a Class II railroad and not very frequently used,
and upgrading that to have true high-speed rail. So we have a
short-term plan with the power, with the plan to do the at-
grade crossings, with the plan to partner with the main line to
improve the speeds.
And we have had growing ridership, despite the pathetic
speeds we get now. I rode the train up to Portland last year.
It took 2\1/2\ hours. If we get to 79 miles per hour, we are
going to do it in an hour and 30 minutes or less. So, you know,
we cannot break faith.
I got this corridor designation working with a guy named Al
Swift who used to be in Congress. We were one of the first of
five high-speed rail corridors proposed in the country, back
when nobody wanted one. Well, guess what? Everybody wants one
now. It is kind of funny that this is such a bad idea, yet
everybody in America wants one of these things. My State has
finally gotten on board with some investment, in partnership
with the Federal Government. Washington State has done a much
better job. And it isn't just the Portland to Vancouver, to
correct one thing; it is the Eugene to Vancouver, B.C., vision
that we put in place back then.
But it is going to take a little patience, and a little
more time. We spent 70 years ignoring and destroying the rail
system in this country. And we are only in the second year of
trying to rebuild it. Now, I don't want to just throw money
willy nilly, but for people who have good plans in a region
that isn't only the Northeast United States--which, by the way,
last time I checked has relatively declining population
compared to States in the West; I think they are losing
representatives all through that region, so I think that means
we are growing faster.
Yes, it is congested, and yes, I want to help them. But we
got to help the rest of the country, too, especially the parts
that are growing faster, where the problems aren't as expensive
to deal with before we become that congested.
So, Mr. Secretary, if you have any response to any of that,
I would be happy to hear it.
Secretary LaHood. Well, Mr. DeFazio, on the Buy American,
we certainly thank you for your support and your leadership on
high-speed rail. On a number of other transportation issues you
have been an outstanding leader, and we appreciate your
support.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio. And again, the
gentleman from New Jersey piped up down there and said,
``Congestion, density, population density, that is where high-
speed rail needs to focus on.'' And I have no--if you have a
good plan, as I said to the Secretary, and as the Secretary
pointed out, the Keystone Corridor makes sense. I went to the
Secretary because I support that and said, ``Let's spend money
where it makes sense.'' So it is about where--making sense. And
I don't hear people all over the country clamoring for high-
speed rail. In some parts they do, but it is not something that
is a phenomenon happening all around the country.
And with that, who is next in the lineup? The gentleman
from Minnesota.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. LaHood.
I appreciate your passion today.
A big thing I have got a question on. I agree with you 100
percent. This is not a Republican issue, it is not a Democrat
issue, it is an American issue. Because it is the American
taxpayer that has to foot the bill, and that is one of the big
things. To pay for these jobs and projects, to pay for these,
the money has got to either be taxed, or it has got to be
borrowed to pay for these projects.
The high-speed rail makes sense where it is, you know,
high-density areas. It doesn't make sense in other areas. The
high-speed rail is what the people want. I have heard you say
this again. But we have to discern wants versus needs. It is
imperative that we do that.
How do you set your priorities? Especially when we have
decaying roads, we have decaying bridges--in Minnesota we are a
little sensitive to that--and we are trying to get NextGen off
the ground, as well. How do you set your priorities of where we
are going to spend the precious taxpayers' dollar, and to which
project?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we set our priorities with our
partners, and that includes the Congress, people that sit on
this committee, people that sit on committees in the Senate,
and our partners in the States, Governors and transportation
officials. That is how we set our priorities.
And, look it, we know there is not an unlimited amount of
money. But in a country where you have a $3 trillion budget,
over $3 trillion, you have to have priorities. And the purpose
of the Transportation Committee is to set those. And we follow
the guidance of Congress in--when you write a transportation
bill, when you hopefully some day pass an FAA bill we can get
to NextGen, which is a priority for us. That is our number one
priority, when it comes to the FAA. We need a bill.
So, I would encourage all of you, before the next deadline,
pass a 5-year bill. We haven't had a long-term plan for 5\1/2\
years. We set our priorities with you. That is where we get our
priorities.
Mr. Cravaack. You said a $3.5 trillion budget; $1.6
trillion of that money is borrowed. Forty-seven percent of our
debt is foreign-owned. Thirty percent of it just ticked up
recently to the Chinese. You say you are concerned about the
next generation, but you seem to have no problem about putting
the burden of the expense of these projects on the back of the
next generation. That is what I am very concerned--that is why
I came to Congress. I am concerned about how much money that we
are placing on the next generation.
In 2025 Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, and the
interest that we pay on the debt is going to take 100 percent
of the revenue incurred by the United States. So my question
is, do we want to increase--are you saying to pay for these
projects we should increase taxes to pay for it? Should we
borrow more from foreign entities that really don't like us
that much? Or should we be able to analyze what is a need and
what is a want in this great United States, and make sure we
take care of our roads, make sure we take care of our bridges,
and make sure that we don't have airplanes flying into one
another and congested airports.
Now, I understand the difference between a want and a need.
And right now, what I don't see is a dramatic need to create a
high-speed rail system throughout the United States at this
point in time in some rural areas, where they just don't need
it.
For example, in between Duluth and Minnesota, if you want
to--Minneapolis. If you want to put a high-speed rail that goes
in between there, you better leave another car for a boat,
because every third car that is on that 35 Highway that is
going up and down between Duluth and Minnesota has a boat
behind it, because people go up there for tourism. They are not
going to take the train between Minneapolis and Duluth for
that.
Now, I understand it is a sensitive issue. My--again, sir,
as a leader, as the Secretary of Transportation of this great
country of ours, I ask you to put that in part of your purview
in making a package of what we, as the American people, need to
spend our money on, and what we are willing to ``indebt''
future generations of this great country to pay for, because
that is exactly what we are doing. A newborn baby born today
this very second, their part of the bill is 50 grand. Since I
started campaigning about 2\1/2\ years ago, that has gone up
$5,000.
So, that is just my message to you, sir. I look forward to
any response you may have.
Secretary LaHood. You have--you all decide what the
priorities are, pass the transportation bill, figure out where
the money is coming from, and we will follow your guidance on
this.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you very much, sir. And I will yield
back.
Mr. Shuster. Thank the gentleman. And Ms. Johnson from
Texas.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
and thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here.
I have listened with interest and understand full well
these are very, very austere times. But I am also trying to
find a project that yields response before investment. In my
judgment, you have to make the investments first, but there has
to be some project that this--especially the Republicans--think
we can do without revenue first.
Can you give me an example of how we can enhance revenue
and create jobs without first making an investment?
Secretary LaHood. Well, if we continue to make investments
with transportation dollars, we know that that creates jobs. It
doesn't just create projects, and it doesn't just solve
transportation. It does create jobs. The one thing we know
creates jobs would be a transportation bill, an FAA bill,
either one of those. And we hope you all will pass both of
those, soon, so we can get America back to work. We know what
we do puts America to work.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Thank you. I believe that very
sincerely. But it appears to me that many of the people on this
committee think that we can get all that done without first
making an investment.
Secretary LaHood. You have to make the investment.
Ms. Johnson of Texas. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Mr.--oh, excuse me.
Ms. Brown. Do you yield the rest of your time?
Ms. Johnson of Texas. I would like to yield the remainder
of my time to Congresswoman Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, yesterday I mentioned
in my presentation that Talgo announced that they were closing
down the Wisconsin manufacturing plant because of what has
happened in Milwaukee. Is there anything that we can do to
encourage them to relocate in areas where we are making some
investments?
Secretary LaHood. Well, I know there are a lot of Governors
that are trying to encourage them to come to their States. So
we will see where they end up.
Ms. Brown. But, do you think at this point they are just
going to shut down?
Secretary LaHood. I didn't see that news account,
Congresswoman, so I don't know much more than what you have
just told me. But I know there are Governors that have talked
to Talgo about relocating.
Ms. Brown. Yes. I mean the point is when you have these
companies that want to invest, invest in the United States,
they want to partner--I mean we talk the talk, but the point
is, when we are shutting down and cutting programs, it is just
not worth the investment. That is what they are telling me--
particularly what has happened in Florida--over and over again,
where it costs money to even apply to be partners.
And, you know, it is a long-term investment. And when we
cut it off, it is a problem for them. They can't trust the
Federal Government as real partners--or necessarily the Federal
Government; it is the State, you know----
Secretary LaHood. I think that these companies that I have
talked to from China or Japan or other places in Europe, they
think we are pretty good partners at the Federal level.
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir.
Secretary LaHood. And I think, as these Governors approach
them from different States, they will have to make a judgment
about whether it is in their best interests to do that.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. OK, I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. The gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Mr. Secretary, first of all, let me just say I
never had the pleasure of serving with you here. But now that
you are here, and your passion and determination and your
commitment to transportation, it is commendable.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. I wish I had served with you.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. And I have to say that, as someone who has been
a local official and worked on a local issue of transportation,
I hope the--this focus on speed rail does not take us away from
passenger rail. It seems to be a big focus. Because in my
district, passenger rail has been a godsend.
I remember being a local official in what they call the
Hudson Bergen Light Rail. And all the comments that were made
about where we were going to get this money, how long is it
going to be, I have to tell you it has been the best thing that
has happened in my district. Because growth along all the
stations is immense. Jersey City has just--it is the gold
coast. And it is all because the light rail--Hoboken, New
Jersey, there was just one part was developed, now the west
part of it, because of the light rail, that moves people around
and takes you into the city.
I know we had a little incident with the tunnel going into
New York recently--I hope you don't hold that against us when
we do the next tunnel, because the driving engine in my region
is New York City, in terms of creating jobs. People come as far
back as Pennsylvania into New York City.
And one of the things--you know, people talk about debt. I
have to tell you. I was sick when I first got here, voting on--
there was a vote for the war in Iraq, where we were placing
$100 billion for 5 years, infrastructure construction in Iraq.
And my district, it needs all the infrastructure money it can
get. And we are spending $100 billion when they are going to
blow it up 3 months later, and not paying for it.
I mean those are the kind of things that just make me sick,
you know, when we talk about this debt that we incurred. I just
feel that, you know, the creation of jobs, transportation,
areas that really need it certainly are a worthwhile
investment. And, obviously, what is $50 billion today is going
to be 60 tomorrow. But if it creates jobs, it brings business
to the area, where the business hire people, I think it is an
investment that America cannot miss.
So, I don't really have a question. And I love the fact
that we are buying stuff made in America. I think that really
tops it off. So let's invest not only in passenger rail, but
also freight. You know, the Lincoln Tunnel in New Jersey now is
$12 to get through. And they had a big billboard--and I think I
told this to the chairlady--just before going into the tunnel,
and it had President Lincoln on it. And you know what the
billboard said? It said, ``President Lincoln. A great
President. Lousy tunnel.'' And now it is $12. So you can
imagine how important this was to have light rail, passenger
rail bringing people into the city.
So, I commend you for your determination. I commend you for
your--you know, I can see why the President picked you. Thank
you very much.
Secretary LaHood. Look it. New York and New Jersey are the
transportation Meccas in terms of airports, in terms of rail,
in terms of highways, and also in terms of light rail. We are
going to continue to make investments.
One of the things that I told Governor Christie, when he
and I finally agreed on how we were going to resolve the ARC
project, is--because he said something that--similar to what
you just said. We have big transportation needs, what he said,
and he said, ``I hope you don't--this issue with the ARC and
our disagreement doesn't disadvantage us.''
And my statement back to him was, ``Absolutely not. Where
we have Governors and mayors and congressmen and Senators that
want to get something done on transportation, we will be a
partner.'' And we are going to continue to be partners in New
Jersey, because New York and New Jersey has huge, huge
transportation issues. And where we have leadership, like we
have now in the New York Governor's office, and in the New York
mayor's office, and in offices all over New Jersey, including
Members of Congress, and in the Senate and in the House, you
will have good partners with us.
Mr. Sires. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shuster. Just--you talk about New Jersey and New York
and some of the problems they face there. Seventy percent of
the chronically delayed flights come out of that air space
across the country. So high-speed rail in the Northeast
Corridor, getting some of these flights out of the air from
Washington to Boston, Washington to New York, would be a great
help to the air space.
Secretary LaHood. Mr. Chairman, you just made the case for
passing an FAA bill.
[Laughter.]
Secretary LaHood. If we want to get to NextGen, we don't
need any more extensions.
Mr. Shuster. I am all----
Secretary LaHood. We have had 22 extensions. We have gone
5\1/2\ years beyond the time of the last bill. We need an FAA
bill. I hope you will pass it.
Mr. Shuster. We did pass it in the House. I think a couple
of times we have tried to do that. But we are all committed to
passing that, because I agree with you 100 percent.
And with that, I yield to Mr. Denham 5 minutes.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, again,
thank you. I am looking forward to getting the plan on how this
money is going to be invested. I would ask that you submit that
to us before next week's hearing, which is specifically on
California high-speed rail.
On the overall picture of transportation funding, you had
said something I found interesting. I am a freshman here. This
is my first year, my first transportation bill. I do believe
that Congress should have a set of priorities. And certainly
Congress should have a pool of money for transportation
projects. I do believe that improving our infrastructure can
create American jobs.
But you had mentioned Congress presenting that, coming up
with the presentation. I would assume, just like in California,
when I served in the State Senate, the Governor comes up with
his proposal on priorities, that the administration would come
up with a list of priorities on what you think the
transportation projects should be across the Nation, and how
money should be best spent, as well as where the revenue for
that would come from. Do you have a plan on the overall
transportation project?
Secretary LaHood. Yes, sir. I will be happy to share it
with you. It is a $550 billion plan that the President has put
forth. It is a comprehensive transportation program, and we
will be happy to share it with you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And the pay-for on that?
Secretary LaHood. The pay-fors will be included.
Mr. Denham. So there is a revenue stream for----
Secretary LaHood. Absolutely.
Mr. Denham. And do you----
Secretary LaHood. You want--do you want to get into great
detail? I think it would be better if I just--I will share it
with you, and then if you want me to come and visit with you
about it, I will be happy to do it.
Mr. Denham. I would love to see it. I would love to--I
would welcome the meeting. Can you give me just an example of
the broader aspects? Are we--I don't need to go line by line on
the revenue, but I would like to at least get a good
understanding of whether or not----
Secretary LaHood. Use of the highway trust fund, which has
been diminished over the years, but is set aside for the use of
transportation. It is the way we have always paid for it. And
then there are some other provisions in there. And I don't have
them at my fingertips, but I will be happy to share them with
you.
Mr. Denham. How much is in the trust fund, currently?
Secretary LaHood. How much is the trust fund? Well, look
it. It fluctuates. I mean I don't have the figure today. I will
get it. I will put it on the record for you. I am sure one of
those smart staff people up there knows exactly what the figure
is.
Mr. Denham. He says 220. So, ballpark, where does the other
330 come from?
Ms. Brown. Excuse me----
Secretary LaHood. Congressman, I will be happy to share the
revenue part of it with you, as well as the plan. Look it, if I
say something here on the record and it is not quite accurate,
somebody is going to point that out. I will share it with you,
so I can get it accurate.
Mr. Denham. OK. But are we looking at--I mean that is a big
number. Are we looking at bonding? Tax increases----
Secretary LaHood. If--you asked me if the President has a
plan. The answer is yes. Does he have the revenue to pay for
it? The answer is yes, and I will be happy to share it with
you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Secretary LaHood. Actually, the committee has it. I mean we
have submitted it.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate the gentleman's questions. And
again, we are going to have a hearing on California next week.
And so, we certainly would look forward to making sure we
have it. I don't know for sure, but we would like to have it in
our hands before next Thursday's hearing.
And with that, Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, again,
thank you for coming and doing this today.
I want to be real clear. I am a big supporter of high-speed
rail. I particularly like the national long-term vision. I
think it is the right vision, and I think it is the right goal
to have. At the same time, it is also a goal, like anything
else, that you and I both know can't be achieved quickly. It is
going to take some time, as the interstate highway system was
done. It was done over a long period of time. And we are now
into the next round of repairing some of the things we have.
And for me, that is where the Northeast Corridor comes in.
I understand fully well and support the concept of bringing
rail all across this country, including intercity and
everything else. But when it comes to the Northeast Corridor,
the only way--and I guess here has been my concern--the
problems that I have found on the Northeast Corridor are like
anything else. It is already in a--the most heavily congested
area in the country, it is difficult to deal with some of these
issues.
Right now you are dealing with one of the most important
ones, it is that junction in New York City. We talked about how
New York impacts air traffic, but it also impacts rail traffic
to a great degree. I will tell you. I ride the rail from Boston
to New York, and as often as I go I don't do it from Boston to
DC because of the holdup in that New York area. It just makes
the ride too long and too unpredictable.
Some of the things you are doing are fine. Some of the
things, however, will need national leadership from the FRA and
others, which is not the natural bent. And I will give you an
example.
I mean if there is a stretch of rail in Connecticut that
needs to be addressed, some people in DC want to see it as a
Connecticut problem, when the fact is it is not. It is national
problem, because it prevents Amtrak and others, the high-speed
rail, from actually being a high-speed rail.
Even as we have now, I will tell you--I guess they have
stopped doing it, but I laughed the first time that I rode the
high-speed rail, when they announced for a matter of 30 seconds
that the train had hit a speed of 100 and whatever miles an
hour, and then we slowed right down. And then we sat outside of
Penn Station for an hour. Now, this is several years ago and,
again, that is being addressed.
But what I guess I want to say is as you are doing the
long-term vision--and I also want to say one other thing before
I forget it. As far as the amount of money that goes, you are
never going to have enough money to do it. You know it and I
know it. The demands we have for transportation are
significant, we will never meet them. So I am not worried about
how much. We will debate the how much in the greater scheme of
things. But to me, the questions to you are most properly
addressed in whatever it is you get, if it is $1, $1 billion,
or $10 billion, what will you do with it? Priorities, that is
the issue.
Some of them you do need to come to us for, and I
appreciate that and I agree with it. Some of them you don't.
And for me, the question is--and it is not really a question
but a comment--when you do these things, I would strongly
encourage you to talk to your people to let them know that
sometimes a Federal vision, a national vision, requires
national muscle to tell local and State people that these are
the priorities you are going to have.
If you have to go to a given State or a given region and
say, ``This is what we are doing, because this is a problem''--
again, this junction that you are doing in New York, I can't
remember the name of it, is a classic example. It may not be
seen as a problem by the very people in that State--in this
case it would be New York--who say, ``Well, it is not a problem
for us, it is your problem.'' It is the same thing--and I think
that is the problem all along the Northeast Corridor, is that
it was built not as a national rail. It has kind of become one
over the years.
But the only way to get through some of these things, and
to make this money worth spending, is for the Federal
Government to get in there and say, ``Here is what we are
doing. Here is what we are doing now. This is the tunnel we are
going to fix. This is the intersection we are going to fix.
This is the holdup we are going to fix,'' to actually take what
we already have and make it into what it could be, which is a
true--maybe not true, but as close as we can get to a true
speed rail. And I know you are doing it, but I really just
wanted to take my time to encourage you to do it more.
And as far as the other projects go--and I am not even
kidding--it is going to take many, many Members of Congress
from my seat, and many, many Members--and many Secretaries of
Transportation to get this done. In the meantime, as you are
fighting, trying to get the California and the northwest and
all the other projects done, as they get held up, as you have
debates in California--the truth is, I don't know how I feel
about the California rail. I know there is issues, I have heard
some of them. But rather than sitting and just pushing it,
which you should do, in the meantime don't let the others go
south.
And a classic example is the northeast rail. We had to
wait, really, to get the scraps from other States to get much
done. And there is still money that is not obligated, and there
are projects on the Northeast Corridor that need to be done.
And all I am saying is while you are fighting the--which I
agree with--don't let the existing structure go unimproved when
we know what to do, and we know how much it is going to cost.
And with that, Mr. Secretary, it is not really a question,
more of an encouragement.
And also a thank you. You have done it, I just want you to
do it even more.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. I know the Secretary had a hard stop about an
hour ago, he got twice what he bargained for. But I just want
to encourage them----
Secretary LaHood. Donna has been here from the beginning.
Mr. Shuster. I know she has. And I just want them to know
the Secretary has been here an hour longer than he--than we
negotiated. So if you would ask your questions, we want you to
have that time. But if you can put anything in writing to
shorten it, I am sure he would appreciate it.
Secretary LaHood. Take your time.
Mr. Shuster. Go ahead.
Secretary LaHood. Take whatever time you want.
Mr. Shuster. Ms. Edwards, one of the great players of the
congressional football team.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. She played football, too.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. And--middle linebacker, thank you
very much.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I appreciate
your time and your passion, and I really do share it.
I was looking at, you know, some of the numbers, and
appreciate also that Maryland was a recipient of about $90
million for bridge work and tunnel work, as part of the
Northeast Corridor. And while I share the view and the passion
of so many of our colleagues on this committee for the
Northeast Corridor, I also understand the importance of
creating a national vision. And we wouldn't want to take away
from that.
I looked at the numbers for the initial grantmaking. First
of all, about--you had $57 billion in requests for $8 billion
that was available. I happen to have believed, at the time when
we created this, that we needed to have more of an investment,
because I knew that the demand was there. And I think that,
from your testimony as well, speaks to the demand.
I also note that of the $8 billion, the overwhelming
majority of it actually did go to the Northeast Corridor, if I
am correct in looking at those numbers. And so I am a little
bit unclear--and I will just go right to the question--when the
interstate highway system was developed, and the vision had to
spread out across the Nation, I remember looking at a
documentary several years ago about a small--the story of a
small town that had fought tooth and nail not to be part of
that highway system. And this documentary told the story of
that town and how it died over time, because it wasn't included
in the vision.
And so, I wonder if you could talk about the vision for a
national rail system, with that in mind, and understanding that
it is going to take us some time to get there, even though
there are some profitable corridors in which to invest.
And then, secondly, I would like you to address, if you
would, why it is you think that the Northeast Corridor didn't
receive an application for private investment. I find that
curious because, frankly, I have always thought that, really,
if you want infrastructure as a Nation, that the citizens of
Montana and Maryland ought to invest in our infrastructure as a
Nation, and not necessarily be dependent on private investment.
And so I am curious as to why the most profitable and dense
corridor of our rail system didn't receive applications for
private investment.
Secretary LaHood. I think that during the last 3 years
there has been new leadership at Amtrak, and they have put a
team of people together. And I think during that process maybe
they were busy trying to straighten a few other things out. But
now they have straightened things out. Ridership is way up,
profits are up. They are making money. And I think that they
understand that they need to find some other partners that can
be helpful to them.
But--and the other part of it is that the Federal
Government has basically been the only partner that Amtrak has
really had. And--but I think Amtrak now understands that they
need to look around and see what other opportunities are there.
I can--Congresswoman, I can cite you examples of light
rail, bus service, streetcars, high-speed rail. If you build
it, they will come. The ridership will be there.
And all along these corridors, what happens is what
happened along the interstate system. Lots of small businesses
that hire 4, 5, 6, 12 people. And these really become the
opportunities for people all along these communities. These
corridors, whether they be rail or streetcar or light rail or
bus or high-speed rail become economic corridors, once they are
there, because of all the people that are using the services
and the small businesses that pop up along train stations or
next to train stations.
And the classic example here in Washington, DC, is Dulles
Airport. I am sure people thought whoever had an idea to build
an airport out there, they thought that person was crazy. Why
would you do that 50 miles from Washington, when you have an
airport right in downtown Washington? And look what happened?
Look at the corridor that exists there now.
The Silver Line will be complete. But the Silver Line will
be used mostly by working people who can't afford a car or a
gallon of gasoline, but are going to the airport to work, or
going to one of those businesses that are along the corridor
there. That corridor is a corridor of economic development, and
those exist all over America, where people had good visions for
what happens when you build a road, build a bus line, build a
light rail, build a streetcar line, or whatever.
Ms. Edwards. Mr. Secretary, thanks for your leadership.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Richardson. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr.
Secretary, let me start off by saying you looked quite dashing
last night.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Ms. Richardson. Three quick questions for you, and one
comment to my colleagues.
First of all, I just want to remind everyone that all roads
to glory always lead west. So we appreciate your efforts. And I
thank Ms. Edwards for at least allowing California to stay on
the map.
Mr. Shuster. Will the gentlelady yield? Did you mean
western Pennsylvania when you said that?
[Laughter.]
Ms. Richardson. No, sir. I meant the real west, where the
gold was found, and----
Mr. Shuster. Just want to check.
Ms. Richardson [continuing]. And you know, the shores of
California.
But my three questions are very brief. First of all, sir,
my question is I know Mr. Denham--I had an opportunity to
participate in a hearing with transportation with Mr. Mica. And
initially in our proposal in California it started off that the
segment would be in the Central Valley. There has obviously
been multiple discussions. And it is my understanding that any
future proposals has to include the Central Valley.
Are you still, you know, committed that it has to be the
Central Valley? Or is there openness to other potential routes?
Secretary LaHood. It is the Central Valley. And again, this
is not stuff we make up. We go to the stakeholders that have
been involved in these projects for 15 years, and we take our
cues from them.
But we also have made investments in--we made a $450
million investment in Transbay. That is not in the Central
Valley, by the way. It is at the other end. It is at the start.
So the idea that we are just--this is kind of a dead-end
thing in California is not accurate. We made a half-a-billion-
dollar investment in Transbay, which is in San Francisco, in
downtown San Francisco, which is one of the demarcation points
for the high-speed rail. Everything is not in the Central
Valley, but we are in the Central Valley. We have made a
commitment there. That is where people want us to be. And so
until somebody tells us differently, or they have a different
plan, that is where we are going to be.
Ms. Richardson. OK. I just wanted to clarify. My other two
questions were not related, but I think very important, timely.
If we have a CR, one of the things I found with the
airports is that some jobs are not considered essential
positions. And I went to a particular room where people, if
there is an accident or a major issue--one lady was retiring
and I was told that they weren't able to backfill her position.
Have you had an opportunity to reevaluate if there is any
positions that are currently not listed as essential that could
be included if--in the event our budget success is not as we
hoped?
Secretary LaHood. We need for Congress to pass an FAA bill.
We do not need any more extensions. We simply do not. We need
Congress to pass a transportation bill. We have gone 2\1/2\
years beyond the last bill. There is nothing that we can do
creative right now in transportation, because we are operating
on a bill that expired 2\1/2\ years ago.
There are certain provisions that OPM uses to define
essential employees, and that is what we go by.
Ms. Richardson. OK. And then my final question is regarding
TIGER funding. I know we are in our second round here, and it
is very positive, and State and local governments are excited
about the opportunities.
I just wanted to point out to you in my particular region
it is my understanding that--like, let's say if the Port of Los
Angeles receives TIGER funding, then the Port of Long Beach,
because it is within the same region, even though on its own
merits they are the two largest ports in the country, Port of
Long Beach would be somewhat in a disadvantage, because of some
of the wording. Are you familiar with that concern?
Secretary LaHood. Well, a port would not be disadvantaged
if another port got a TIGER grant.
Ms. Richardson. OK. It is my understanding in the funding--
--
Secretary LaHood. You know, I would just say this. We are
right in the middle of our deliberations. I don't know if these
ports have submitted TIGER grants or not. But I really
shouldn't be talking about specific projects, but I will say
this. A project will not be disadvantaged because of its
proximity to another project.
Ms. Richardson. OK. That was not what was communicated to--
--
Secretary LaHood. Well, if I have it wrong, I will correct
the record and I will get back to you this afternoon. I will
check it out.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you sir, and thank you for your
service----
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. And if--the gentlelady from Florida has one
question I believe she wanted to----
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Thank you again, Mr. Secretary, for
coming, being so gracious with your time, particularly on your
birthday. I want to say happy birthday.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. And I do want to mention--I didn't mention it
earlier, because I didn't think it was appropriate, but you did
look very nice last night.
Secretary LaHood. Oh, thank you, Ms. Brown.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Brown. Goodness. But the last question. The GAO report
mentioned that the good grantsmaking process was very
transparent, and you all did a good job. They did make some
recommendations. Many of my colleagues want to tell you where
to put different, you know, funds and how to do the grants, and
we don't like the way you've done it, then we have some
problems with it.
Do you want to say anything to that? Because I think you
all did a yeoman's job. And I mean you have been just such a
bright spot, I have to tell you----
Secretary LaHood. We have tried to make these decisions
based on the merits of the projects. And--but look it. As a
former Member of Congress, I know these projects are important.
And I am not offended at all when a Member of Congress calls me
to put in a plug for their project. And--but they all get fair
consideration.
And I am very proud of the fact that the $48 billion that
we got under economic recovery has all been spent. And there
hasn't been one bad story about this money. There were no
boondoggles, no earmarks, no sweetheart deals. We created
65,000 jobs with 15,000 projects. I am proud of that.
It goes to my point: Transportation creates jobs. You pass
a transportation bill, a lot of friends and neighbors will go
to work. We proved it with $48 billion, all spent correctly,
all spent by the way Congress told us to spend it.
Ms. Brown. I think one of the problems is for the first
time ever in the history of the United States you have people
that really don't want America to succeed, really don't want to
put people to work, because we know that if we invest in
transportation for every billion dollars we spend, we generate
44,000 jobs. And for the first time ever, we have a committee
that is just not committed to putting people to work.
And my position is let's get to work. Like you say, let's
pass the FAA bill. Let's pass the transportation bill. Let's
put American people to work. Thank you so much for your
leadership.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you, thank you.
Mr. Shuster. It is always good to have the gavel, because
you get the last word. And there are people in this Congress
that want to put America back to work, we just don't think that
the Federal Government spending money helped to create jobs. In
fact, we have got a tremendous debt crisis. You know, our
financial house is in disarray. There is incredible uncertainty
out there amongst our small businesses. That is why they are
not investing in their businesses.
So, you know, there is a group of us up here that really
want to see America succeed, because we know that the Federal
Government is not going to be the job creator, it is the
private sector. But there are things the Federal Government is
charged to do that we should do and we should invest in, and
one of those is transportation. That is why I am on this
committee, because I believe.
If only that stimulus bill that was passed would have
really been serious about creating jobs, serious about
rebuilding our infrastructure, we wouldn't be having this
discussion here today. We would probably be slapping each other
on the back and saying what a great job it was we rebuilt this
highway, we rebuilt that, we expanded this, we built that. I
mean it would have been a tremendous story to tell, if we would
have spent just maybe $250 billion out of the $800 billion,
instead of $60 or $70 billion, depending on how you calculate
it.
So, again, there are those of us in Congress that really
want to put the American people back to work in a meaningful
way that will be sustainable, and that is by keeping taxes low,
putting regulatory certainty out there, and investing in
transportation and infrastructure.
So again, Mr. Secretary, thank you for spending your
birthday with us. You got twice what you bargained for. And
again, I will have to concur with my colleagues. You did look
dashing last night.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. So again, happy birthday, and thanks for
coming.
And the next panel, as soon as the Secretary makes his way
from the table, we will get you set up for the next panel.
Ms. Brown. Excuse me. I do want to tell you that the Talgo
news--yes.
Mr. Shuster. Are we missing Mr. Geddes? Mr. Geddes missing
in action out there? Well, we are going to go ahead and get
started. But yes, we are going to go ahead and get started with
our second panel.
And then our second panel is made up with the Honorable
Joan McDonald, who is the chairperson of the Northeast Corridor
Infrastructure and Operations Advisory Commission; Mr. Ken
Orski, editor and publisher of Innovation NewsBriefs; right on
cue, Mr. Richard Geddes is the adjunct scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute. And Ross Capon, the president and CEO of
the National Association of Railroad Passengers.
Thank you all for being here with us today. And with that,
we will start with Ms. McDonald. You may proceed. And please
keep your testimony to 5 minutes. Thank you.

TESTIMONY OF JOAN MCDONALD, CHAIR, NORTHEAST CORRIDOR
INFRASTRUCTURE AND OPERATIONS ADVISORY COMMISSION; KENNETH
ORSKI, EDITOR AND PUBLISHER, INNOVATION NEWSBRIEFS; R. RICHARD
GEDDES, ADJUNCT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE; AND
ROSS B. CAPON, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
RAILROAD PASSENGERS

Ms. McDonald. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Brown, and members of the committee. I am Joan McDonald,
commissioner of the New York State Department of Transportation
and chair of the Northeast Corridor Infrastructure and
Operations Advisory Commission.
The commission is made up of 18 commissioners representing
8 States, the District of Columbia, U.S. DOT, and Amtrak.
Another five States, four freight railroads, and one commuter
agency are nonvoting representatives. We all bring unique
perspectives to the table. We all agree the Northeast Corridor
and its connecting feeder services are critical transportation
assets, and are closely tied to the economic future of the
entire northeast region.
As has been mentioned earlier today, the Northeast is the
densest region in the Nation. It is home to 4 of the 10 largest
metropolitan areas, generating 20 percent of the U.S. GDP.
However, this density creates significant transportation
challenges for the region.
Some 260 million commuter and intercity riders, and an
estimated 30 million ton-miles of freight are moved over the
corridor each year by more than 2,200 daily trains. The service
we have today is not enough to meet the future needs of our
region and our Nation. The corridor is congested in many
locations, and demand for rail service is growing.
For much of its history, the Northeast Corridor has
suffered from underinvestment. We now face a considerable
backlog in state-of-good-repair needs that require billions of
dollars of investments. Amtrak's Northeast Corridor master plan
estimated that $52 billion is needed over the next 20 years,
just to maintain reliable service for all users of the
corridor.
Addressing capacity needs beyond 2030 will add
substantially to that total. While our corridor's needs are
significant, there is not a clear consensus long-term vision
for the future of the corridor. The charge of the commission,
as we see it, is to bring together diverse interests, develop a
unified, long-term vision for the corridor, and establish that
consensus on a plan to secure the public and private
investments needed to implement the vision. By coming together
to coordinate these activities, the States, Amtrak, and the
Federal Government can achieve a level of success that far
exceeds the potential reach of any individual entity.
Critical to the process is the passenger rail corridor
investment plan being led by the FRA in cooperation with the
commission, the Northeast States, and Amtrak. The Northeast is
a compelling market for high-speed rail service, and compares
favorably to other nations that have successful implemented
high-speed rail. The question we need to answer is: What is the
right path forward? And how do we fund it?
The commission's approach is cooperative, fact-based, and
nonideological. We will look to do what is best for the long-
term economic growth of the northeast region. We will seek
opportunities to partner with the private sector, while
ensuring that the public interest is protected.
The Northeast Corridor benefitted from the $1.3 billion in
capital funds appropriated to Amtrak in the economic recovery
act, and received another billion dollars in high-speed rail
program grants. And I must add that during that process each
State endorsed the other States' proposals for consideration to
U.S. DOT. These projects are creating jobs and helping to
improve rail service.
In my home State of New York, under the leadership of
Governor Cuomo, we are advancing a number of important projects
on the Northeast Corridor mainline, and our empire corridor, an
important feeder. One of my short-term goals, as chair of the
commission, is to facilitate close cooperation between FRA, the
States, and Amtrak, to ensure that all of these projects move
forward as quickly as possible.
Despite the importance of the funding we have received so
far, much more is needed. The commission is working to identify
priority projects that need to move forward as soon as
possible.
On behalf of my fellow commissioners, we appreciate this
committee's strong support for the Northeast Corridor, and look
forward to working with you. A strong Federal partnership is
critical to our success. Thank you, and thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Ms. McDonald.
And with that, Mr. Orski.
Mr. Orski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
testify before you. As requested, I shall only briefly
summarize the key points of my testimony. The committee, I
believe, has my full statement.
Mr. Chairman, let me state at the outset that I do not
question the merits of or the need for the intercity passenger
rail service, nor do I question the desirability of high-speed
rail, a technology that I believe we should pursue in this
country. What I do question is the manner in which the
administration has gone about implementing its $10 billion
initiative.
The administration's first misstep, in my judgment, has
been to misleadingly represent its program as ``high-speed
rail,'' thus conjuring up an image of bullet trains cruising at
200 miles per hour, just as they do in western Europe and the
Far East. In reality, the administration's rail program will do
no such thing. A close examination of the grant announcements
shows that, with one exception, the program consists of a
collection of planning, engineering, and construction grants
that seek incremental improvements in existing facilities of
Class I freight railroads in selected corridors used by Amtrak
trains.
Now, those improvements may result in some cases in top
speeds of 110 miles per hour. But the average speeds will
increase only modestly. Average speed is a more accurate
measure of performance and service quality than top speed, for
it determines trip duration, which is, after all, what really
counts, from a traveler's perspective.
Had the administration candidly represent the HSR program
for what it is--and that is an effort to introduce useful but
modest enhancements in existing intercity Amtrak services--it
would have earned some plaudits for its good intentions to
improve train travel. But by pretending to have launched a
``high-speed renaissance,'' when all evidence points to only
small incremental improvements in speed and trip duration, the
administration, I believe, has suffered a serious loss of
credibility. Its pledge to bring high-speed rail to 80 percent
of Americans is not taken seriously any more.
The administration's second mistake, in my opinion, has
been to fail to pursue its objective in a focused manner.
Instead of identifying a corridor that would offer the best
chance of successfully deploying the technology of high-speed
rail, and concentrating resources on that project, the
administration has scattered $9 billion on 145 projects in 32
States. Indeed, the program bears more resemblance to an
attempt at revenue sharing than to a focused effort to pioneer
a new transportation technology.
Ironically, the Northeast Corridor has received scant
attention. And yet, as other witnesses and members of the
committee have pointed out on repeated occasions, this is where
high-speed rail has the best chance of succeeding. It is
probably the only rail corridor in the Nation that has all the
attributes necessary for viable high-speed rail service, and it
is also the only corridor where passenger trains do not have to
share track, and thus are not slowed by freight traffic.
Now, to its credit, the administration belatedly recognized
the potential of the Northeast Corridor, and made some useful
grants. Now, these grants are a small beginning in what will
hopefully become a restructured high-speed rail program
refocused on the northeast program--corridor.
Finally, a comment about the role of the private sector. As
Chairman Mica and you, Mr. Chairman, have observed more than
once, there is a clear need for substantial financial
participation by the private sector, in view of the constraints
of the Federal and State budgets. The density of travel in the
Northeast Corridor and its continued growth should, in
principle, generate sufficient stream of revenue to attract
private capital.
However, this is still an untested hypothesis. We simply do
not have enough experience with public-private partnerships in
the passenger rail sector to confidently predict the response
of the private investment community, its assessment of the
risk, rewards, and expected rate of return on investment in
such an enterprise.
Thus, I believe that an early step, Mr. Chairman, in the
process should focus on thoroughly exploring the potential of
private financing and ascertaining the private investors'
interest in this venture, both domestically and
internationally. And this, I might add, should include an
examination of the lessons learned from the Channel Tunnel
project, the largest rail infrastructure project totally
financed by the private sector. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Orski.
And with that, Mr. Geddes, you are recognized.
Mr. Geddes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all the members of
the committee, for inviting me to once again appear in this
hearing. My name is Rick Geddes, and I am an associate
professor in the department of policy analysis and management
at Cornell University, and a visiting scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute.
Let me state from the outset that I am a firm supporter of
high-speed passenger rail in the United States, and those
corridors and on those routes where it makes economic sense.
Such corridors are likely to have the population densities, the
proven ridership or the indications thereof, and the public
transportation options at stations necessary to yield positive
social benefits to additional investment.
The hearing today focuses on concerns about recent attempts
to expand high-speed rail through the High-Speed and Intercity
Passenger Rail Program. I believe that two errors were made.
The first, which has been highlighted, is the issue of trying
to spread taxpayer funds out over too many projects across the
country, rather than focusing resources on improving existing
corridors with demonstrated demand. The second was in not
creating the institutional structure and public policies
necessary to attract and retain private investment. I wish to
discuss each of these in turn.
The social returns on investing in high-speed rail are
likely to vary widely across different possible routes. In
particular, the market population must be sufficiently dense to
support high-speed rail. And for several reasons, the Northeast
Corridor is likely to yield the highest social returns to
additional investment.
First, population densities in areas served by the
Northeast Corridor are very high, with over 50 million people
living in the corridor, even though it represents only 2
percent of the Nation's landmass.
Second, one of the main concerns in constructing any new
high-speed rail line is forecasting ridership. This issue has
not been discussed today, and I think it is critical. How is
ridership going to be forecast? The record of ridership
forecasting for new passenger rail lines around the world is
very poor. The estimates typically are overestimated, while the
costs of construction are typically underestimated. This has
been documented in detail by a professor at Oxford University,
Bent Flyvbjerg. Ridership in the Northeast Corridor is known.
So only changes in ridership induced by new investment need to
be estimated. A major hurdle is thus already overcome.
Third, much of the necessary right of way is already in
hand. Although additional right of way may be needed to
accommodate improved high-speed rail service, this greatly
reduces uncertainty regarding the cost of installation.
Uncertainty surrounding both the costs and the benefits of
additional investment in the Northeast Corridor are low,
relative to new lines.
Fourth, cities along the Northeast Corridor, such as
Washington, New York, and Boston, feature well-developed local
transit systems that facilitate passengers' use of intercity
passenger rail systems.
These considerations all suggest that scarce public dollars
should be directed first to making much-needed improvements to
high-speed passenger rail in that corridor. That is likely to--
where the marginal returns are the highest.
In my view, the second concern was a failure to create the
institutional structures necessary, and to focus on those
structures to attract private investment to high-speed rail,
and instead relying almost exclusively on taxpayer funding.
There are many advantages of including private participants,
which I outline in my written testimony. Private investment, I
believe, can play a major role in improving passenger rail on
the Nation's entire network. But I believe it is important to
separate the Northeast Corridor financially from the rest of
the system, because that corridor is most likely to be able to
operate without subsidies, without operating subsidies, and
because the rest of the system operates mainly on freight train
tracks, unlike the Northeast Corridor.
On the Northeast Corridor I believe a public-private
partnership should be structured so that firms wishing to
operate passenger rail service would bid against one another on
the basis of the size of an upfront concession payment for the
right to operate. That upfront payment could then be used to
help fund necessary improvements to the infrastructure on the
corridor.
This approach is also fair, since future riders would
effectively be paying for the physical infrastructure
improvements that they would be using. Private investment in
passenger rail infrastructure can also be used on other parts
of the network. But the nature of the bidding must change. That
is why I believe it is important to do the Northeast Corridor
separately. I am happy to explain that later.
Future efforts to improve high-speed passenger rail in the
United States should focus on attracting private investment and
on first renovating existing routes, where I believe the social
returns to the next dollar of investment are the highest,
rather than on constructing a--or trying to construct a number
of new lines. Those returns are likely to be highest for
renovations and improvements on the Northeast Corridor.
To mitigate taxpayer costs, improve performance, and
enhance innovation, the private sector should be engaged as a
full partner through public-private partnerships, and I believe
that is possible.
Thank you once again, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Geddes.
And with that, Mr. Capon, who has been here before a number
of times. Good to have you back. You may proceed.
Mr. Capon. Thank you for having me back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Ms. Brown. I wanted to acknowledge the presence of
the volunteer chairman of our association from Fort Myers,
Florida, Bob Stewart.
Perhaps the most singular ``lesson learned'' is that it
takes a Federal partner to advance passenger train
improvements. In our view, it was essential that a substantial
part of the funds in this program go to upgrading conventional
services. In spite of pleas from the States for over 15 years,
Federal funds generally have not been available to support
State investments in conventional intercity passenger trains.
One exception, a happy exception, is the Keystone Corridor,
where Amtrak was able to match, dollar for dollar, I believe,
Pennsylvania's investment. And that became a success story.
But back in 2002, AASHTO put out a fairly thick book, their
first report on intercity passenger rail transportation, that
documented the many conventional corridors around the country
that were crying out for investments. President Obama, when he
launched this program, made it clear that part of the funds
would go to upgrading conventional service. The administration
also, of course, made an effort, in Florida, California, and
more recently the Northeast Corridor, to do ``true'' high-speed
rail.
But back to conventional rail. The need for conventional
rail as an important part of the transportation network is
illustrated both here and abroad. There is a table on page 2 of
my statement that shows that in France, where they have a well-
developed TGV high-speed rail system, the non-TGV share of
intercity rail is 70 percent. That reflects the fact that it is
the network that counts, and high-speed rail works, as I think
the chairman has pointed out, where there is a network not just
of commuter trains, but also of connecting intercity trains.
In this country, California's three conventional corridors,
the ones that exist today, account for 18 percent of all Amtrak
passengers. The Downeaster, I think, deserves particular
mention--this is the train between Boston and Portland. Before
this train started running, so many people said it would be a
flop. It was too slow. It wouldn't go to Boston's South
Station, it wouldn't go beyond Portland. It makes too many
stops. And today, it is considered very successful. In fact, I
have heard that a major reason that--the second major reason
that Massachusetts students go to University of New Hampshire
is because of the accessibility that the Durham station on the
Downeaster line provides to the university.
The conventional rail projects also improve the freight
network because the added track capacity that results from
these projects is available 24/7, whereas the passenger trains
are not using those tracks 24/7.
The elimination--the trends in the aviation industry
underline the growing need for passenger trains. And just on
November 29th it was reported that as Southwest Airlines gets
out of the Pittsburgh-Philadelphia market, the nonrefundable
round trip fair for US Airways apparently is going to jump from
$118 to $698.
I have heard people talk in Ohio about how they really wish
there was a train to take from Columbus to Cleveland,
especially when they are trying to drive on a nasty day.
Nearly 90 percent of the portfolio, as the Secretary's
written statement points out, is invested in five key
corridors. So I don't see this as revenue sharing. I see this
as being concentrated, for the most part, on conventional lines
that desperately need and have been waiting for improvements. A
lot of this investment is just beginning to take place. And the
silver lining, as I point out in my written statement, is that
at a time when a lot of cries are heard for more stimulus, the
rail program is just starting to generate valuable jobs in a
much bigger way. In fact, North Carolina DOT has a chart that
shows that 2013, 2014 is going to be when employment for its
rail projects peaks.
The GAO report said that the administration ``established a
fair and objective approach for distributing these funds and
substantially followed recommended [grantmaking] practices used
throughout the Government,'' and that ``an application's
technical review score was largely the basis for the selection
deliberations.'' So we think that the administration did, on
balance, a good job.
The fundamental problem that we have, as you have pointed
out, is the shortage of money. But that is just as much a
problem with the Northeast Corridor. If 100 percent of the
money had gone into the Northeast Corridor, people would still
be looking at the price tag on getting the job done, and they
would see a gap between needs and available funds perhaps even
bigger than the gap that has already been observed with regard
to California.
But we commend the committee for holding this hearing and
for its tremendous interest in intercity passenger rail, and we
look forward to working with you as the program goes forward.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you. Thank you very much. And with
that--before I go to Ms. Brown--let Ms. Brown start the
questioning--just your last, very last point there. I believe
that if you take care of the bridges that cross New Jersey to
New York, you take care of the Baltimore Tunnel, and you take
care of the catenaries on the Northeast Corridor, I have been
told you can reduce the time from New York to--from Washington
to New York by 15 or 20 minutes. And if you are--when you get
15 or 20 minutes, you get more--I think you start to
incrementally also get more people riding the train. So I think
that that is a step in the positive direction.
You know, obviously, it is going to be a big bill to do the
Northeast Corridor the way it is. But I think along the way--
and I will give you a chance to rebut that, if you want to,
but----
Mr. Capon. OK.
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Let me get Ms. Brown first to go
ahead.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much. I am going to start with
Ms. McDonald. I think this is the second time I have heard you
or someone from your organization this year, because I came up
to New York for the hearing. And let me just thank you all.
You know, when I listen to my colleagues, or experts that
is, they call themselves experts on the discussion, they act as
if the Northeast Corridor is just one area. How many different
cities, communities, groups are involved? And they act as if
they can just go into these communities that are already
developed and just say, ``Well, we are going to run through
there at 200 miles an hour.'' They don't have a clue. And it is
not my job to give them a clue.
Ms. McDonald. Well, you know, we are in a Federalist
country, and we have--as I stated, the commission has 18
members. It is a collection of eight States, the District of
Columbia, U.S. DOT, and Amtrak. And I think, you know, in a
part of the country that is very much home rule-oriented, the
fact that these States come together, and major cities in this
country--Boston, Philadelphia, New York, Washington,
Wilmington, Baltimore, and work collectively for the corridor
is extremely important, because when you get on a train you
don't know when you are crossing a State line.
You know, when you get on a road, you don't know if it is a
State road or a local road. It is the transportation network.
And the Northeast Corridor commission is looking at it as a
network, and it is highly critical that we keep that message
clear.
Ms. Brown. And I agree with you. I mean I was in
Connecticut, I was able to get on a train at 5:00 in the
morning or 6:00 in the morning and go to New York. The key is
not just how fast it will go. In the testimony that I have
heard, it is knowing that it is going to be there at a certain
time every day. Reliability.
And that is--and it is also homeland security. I mean when
we had 9/11 or other incidents, the only thing that was moving
was the train.
Ms. McDonald. And to that point, reliability is a key
factor on determining whether someone will take a train or not.
And as I mentioned in my testimony, on the corridor it is 2,200
trains a day. And that includes freight rail, commuter rail,
and intercity passenger rail.
Ms. Brown. And the key is to keep it separated. Keep it
safe.
Ms. McDonald. The key is to keep it reliable and safe. That
is correct. And it is--and as many people have said today, when
the goal on a high-speed rail line--it is an average speed--is
to make sure that when you say you are going to leave your
destination at a certain point in time and arrive at your final
destination, that that reliability is there.
Ms. Brown. Yes. And of course, when I have been on trains
in other countries, that has also been the key. They run a
certain speed going into the cities, but it is different when
you are out in the countryside. But they also have it separated
so that cars can't integrate into the system. There are many
factors.
If we could fix some of those tunnels, which is very
expensive, that would cut down on the time. And bridges.
Ms. McDonald. Yes, in the Northeast we have some of the
oldest infrastructure in the country, and--except for the
tunnels, which have their own interesting challenges, we suffer
from severe weather changes. So all those are factors. And, as
I mentioned, the disinvestment that has occurred over the last
decades contributes to why the need is so great.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Mr. Capon, I have a question about
the Talgo--the announcement that I mentioned. Talgo is shutting
down its Milwaukee train. This was announced yesterday in the
Milwaukee paper. And we are going to lose 4,700 jobs because
Governor Scott Walker rejected Federal funds for the high-speed
rail line between Milwaukee and Madison when he took office. It
is worth noting that he went back and tried to apply for a
portion of that $810 million he had earlier rejected.
Can you give me some insight as to what we need to do,
dealing with the politics of the time and the investment that
let's say this company made or the community made in bringing
this, the Talgo, to this community?
Mr. Capon. Yes. Well, I was actually at that plant within
the past 2 months. And I believe the city of Milwaukee put $22
million into restoring it. It was an old automobile plant, I
believe. And obviously, we disagreed with the Wisconsin
Governor's decision.
I think that one of the things--one of the most encouraging
things that I have seen in the 30-plus years I have been doing
this job--is the number of places where trains have become
established and accepted where they didn't exist 10 or 20 years
ago. And in fact, we earlier this year gave our Golden Spike
awards to the two Republican Senators from Maine, because of
their strong support of Amtrak and the Downeaster.
Downeaster is a classic example of a service that did not
exist before 1991. Mainers were watching the legislation that
the House Appropriations Subcommittee had this year that would
have eliminated the ability of Amtrak to provide any support
for the State-supported trains. I got a phone call on Sunday
night November 13th from a Portland, Maine, reporter--just
before the appropriations deal was announced--who was--you
know, just wanted to get any glitter of information he could,
because the Downeaster is such an important fixture up there
now.
So, my theory, the best success is success. In other words,
if we have more and more Downeasters, more and more people that
have trains in their lives, that makes it much harder to turn
it into a partisan issue, which--I think really did happen in
Florida, because we heard, you know, about high-speed rail for
15, 20 years.
Ms. Brown. Thirty, sir.
Mr. Capon. Thirty.
Ms. Brown. Thirty.
Mr. Capon. Excuse me. And then all of a sudden in the
last----
Ms. Brown. I was--30.
Mr. Shuster. Could you wrap up, please? We want to get to
the next questioners.
Mr. Capon. The last X months it was no longer ``high-speed
rail,'' it was ``Obamarail.''
So I think that getting more of these projects going, and
getting more satisfied customers is the key, ultimately, to
getting more support.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brown. I agree with you, and thank you very much.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. And let me just say I am going to figure out
what we are going to do. Because when we invest taxpayers'
dollars, we have got to make sure that we have a way of
recouping, and taking the politics out of it.
Mr. Shuster. That is awfully tough to do, but we will work
with you on that.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. A question for--first of all, the--my
colleague from Florida brought up that it is not always about
speed, it is about reliability. And I was--related to me that
the folks at Virgin Rail that run one of the western rails from
Manchester to London, they--it is--one of their lines, it was
about an hour and 15 minutes, and they thought they could get
it down to 55 minutes by some improvements. So as any good
company that provides a service to people, went to their
customers and said, ``Hey, we want to reduce the time from an
hour and 15 to 55.''
And overwhelming, the response came back as, ``No, we don't
want it to be less than that,'' and it perplexed them. So they
looked at it even closer. Well, why, exactly? And the average
commuter said, ``An hour and 15 minutes gives me time to get on
the train, get my coffee, set up my computer, and I get about
an hour's work done. If you have 55 minutes, I get my coffee, I
sit at my computer, I got maybe 40, 35 minutes.'' So they
rejected it.
So, it is not always about speed. It is about the service,
the reliability, what makes sense to the traveling public. So
you know, I think that is an important point that my friend
from colleague pointed out--or my friend from Florida pointed
out.
My question first is just a yes or no to all of you, just
yes or no. Do you believe that Amtrak needs significant reform?
It is a yes or no. If you don't think--it is a question of
significant reform. I will take that as a----
Ms. McDonald. I can't say maybe?
Mr. Shuster. No.
Ms. McDonald. Yes.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Orski?
Mr. Orski. Yes.
Mr. Shuster. Geddes?
Mr. Geddes. Yes.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Capon?
Mr. Capon. No.
Mr. Shuster. I believe it does. And you know, it is--and we
can talk about a lot of the underinvestment over the years, and
there has been some significant underinvestment. But we still
need to find ways--one of my colleagues today pointed out about
the fact that you buy a hot dog for $4.50, and it costs them $6
to produce it. I mean that is just stupid, if we are operating
a business like that. So, I believe that it needs significant
reform.
Mr. Orski, you have said--and I agree with you, and I
wonder if you could talk a little bit about the administration
25 years, 80 percent. That is really a false expectation. Based
on what they have been doing over the past year, can you--do
you still have that same thought, or do you think it is worse?
What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Orski. Yes, Mr. Shuster. I do think that, had the
administration candidly represented the HSR program for what it
is, it could have earned some credit for doing useful things by
improving rail service incrementally. Its biggest mistake has
been to really hype the program to represent it for what it
really is not. It is not a high-speed rail program, it is a
program of passenger rail improvements which, in themselves,
are a useful measure. But it is certainly not what the
administration and the President himself had represented from
the very start.
Mr. Shuster. I agree with that. Mr. Geddes, in your study--
one question I ask. I don't know if you have looked at this,
but you talked a little bit about forecasting, its poor
forecasting. Do you know and have you looked at when they are
forecasting, do they take price elasticity into their equation
to determine if people are going to ride or not ride? At what
price they are going to ride or not ride?
Because I have been on the Keystone--I ride the Keystone
Corridor. And in prime time it is $39 one way and in off times
it is $29. And I have just, you know, sketched out the cost for
me to go to Harrisburg to Philadelphia, what it costs me in the
car with parking and all those things. And it seems to me that
they could raise the price. And especially the business--the
traveling business people are going to pay $5, $10, $20.
So, in your looking at Amtrak and pricing and forecasting,
do you know if they take price elasticity into figuring that
out?
Mr. Geddes. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that
there are actually two different academic literatures that we
would be referring to. One is the literature on forecasting
ridership for a new project, sort of a mega-project, and what
would the likely ridership be on that. The other literature
would be regarding exactly what you are referring to of price
elasticities on existing lines. And suppose we were to raise
the price by 10 percent. How many riders would we lose? And
would that increase or decrease our revenues? So I am certain,
you know, there is a literature for passenger rail on
elasticities.
But there is this other literature that I am referring to
in my testimony that has been reviewed exhaustively by Bent
Flyvbjerg at Oxford about we are going to build a new big
project. What do we expect the ridership to be? And then he
goes back and looks at what the actual ridership was. And he
finds that many of the ridership projections were wildly
overstated. And particularly relevant for today's discussion is
that they were most overstated on a lot of the passenger rail
projects. So you have to be very, very careful about the
ridership projections for new passenger rail projects.
Mr. Shuster. Right. And I think you were all here for the
Secretary. I don't believe the Secretary is making up any of
his numbers, but I believe the folks in California on the high-
speed train, they are making stuff up. Because I have seen, you
know, their--the price they are charging is low, the numbers
are inflated. I mean it is crazy. So I think that is a real
problem, and across the board with Government. When the
Government is involved in pricing things out, they never get it
right.
Mr. Geddes. I am happy to follow up with any elasticity
information----
Mr. Shuster. Sure.
Mr. Geddes [continuing]. That would be helpful.
Mr. Shuster. I thank you. I appreciate it. Now, you
mentioned about bidding, the bidding process. Can you expand
upon that?
Mr. Geddes. Yes, certainly. So one of the key things in
public-private partnerships is how the bidding is conducted,
what the nature of bidding is. And what I was suggesting in my
testimony is that a logical approach to bidding for the
Northeast Corridor on the right to operate the trains--a
concession--you mentioned Virgin Rail in the UK, and you know,
that would be an example of a private operating company that
could come in. And Amtrak could be another bidder, as well.
Perhaps a concession might last 10 years, or something of that
nature. But you would lay out all the terms of service in
detail.
Reliability has been a point of emphasis here. You could
lay out exactly what schedule you want, with enforceable
penalties and rewards for bad or good performance, and then bid
on the basis of which company will give you the biggest up
front concession payment.
I am thinking about some lease--this is not fantasy, this
has been done on toll roads around the world where, you know,
there is an existing toll road. You get an upfront lease
payment in exchange for a private operator to operate the road.
And I am suggesting in this case to use that lease payment to
help improve the infrastructure in the Northeast Corridor. And
the effect of that is to have future riders paying for the
infrastructure improvements that they will be using, which I
think is an inherently fair approach.
Now, bidding off the Northeast Corridor may have to take a
different structure, because I don't believe that the other
non-Northeast Corridor routes are self-sustaining, even in an
operating cost type of a sense. Some people would say, ``Oh,
well, you can't use a public-private partnership in that
case.'' Well, that is false. You can still use a public-private
partnership, even if it requires an operating subsidy. It is
simply that the nature of the bidding for the PPP has to
change.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Geddes. You bid on the basis of the lowest subsidy you
will accept, rather than the biggest payment you will make. And
that has a wonderful, I think, public policy outcome, in that
you get not only transparency in exactly what the subsidies
are, but you get the least subsidy, the smallest subsidy you
need to operate that route. So taxpayers, in effect, get the
most value for money through this bidding type of approach,
even on non-Northeast Corridor routes.
Mr. Shuster. Well, thank you for that. And I am going to
have another round of questions for myself. So, Mr. Capon, I am
going to give you, the next time, an opportunity to rebut me.
And with that, Mr. Cravaack, if you----
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Shuster. Mr. Capon, you claim
that if--in your testimony--that if the high-speed rail program
focused solely on the Northeast Corridor, national support and
enthusiasm for the program could not have been sustained.
So, are you saying that the program was correct to spread
the money thinly over numerous projects in the interest of
garnering political support, rather than focusing on the
Nation's best opportunity to actually have a high-speed rail
system?
Mr. Capon. Well, I am saying two things. I am saying if all
the money had gone to the Northeast Corridor, you would not
have begun to address the list of projects that Mr. Shuster
just asked me about. The magnitude of the needs in the
Northeast Corridor are that great.
Number two, I am saying that, as the Secretary said, 90
percent of the money went to five major projects. There are
small amounts of money that went to States to start rail plans
that don't have rail plans, which I think is worthwhile. But
that was a tiny fraction of the money. The 90 percent of the
funds, the five projects are the Pacific Northwest, the
Cascades, the California routes, the Midwest, the Northeast to
North Carolina. These are all projects--these are all lines
that are heavily used, heavily used trains where the
improvements are needed.
And I can agree that some of the rhetoric that the
administration has used does not track, as he said, with all of
these projects. But that does not mean that the projects are
not worthwhile.
Mr. Cravaack. Fair enough. And I am all for making sure
that our Federal dollars are spent in the right places.
Whatever makes sense, let's go into--explore that. What doesn't
make sense, I think, we are wasting the Federal dollars.
And I have a--I am kind of curious. In March of 2011 the
GAO noted that the Federal Railroad Administration applied its
established criteria for weighing the merits of rail projects
during the eligibility and technical reviews. But the GAO could
not verify if this criteria was used for the final selection
process, because the rationale given for the final selection
was typically vague.
In your testimony, you described how the GAO found that the
FRA established a fair and objective approach for distributing
act funds and substantially followed recommended discretionary
grand award practices used throughout the Government.
To clarify, or perhaps reconcile, do you know how these
priorities were set in this administration's decision to award
high-speed rail funding?
Mr. Capon. First of all, the stuff that I said was--were
quotes from the report. But I realize that----
Mr. Cravaack. Right.
Mr. Capon [continuing]. It was also the points that you
made. I do not know the details of that. I know, from having
worked this job for over 30 years, where the States had
established successful programs, and when the money goes to
those programs and I see the ridership generated--intuitively,
it looked like commonsense good decisions. But I can't give you
the nuts and bolts answer that I think you were looking for.
Mr. Cravaack. Right. OK, great. This fiscal climate kind of
alluded to Secretary LaHood. Where do you propose the Federal
Government obtain the funding for this ongoing Federal
commitment? I mean we committed $1 billion to Amtrak. I mean
that is a commitment, as far as I am concerned. But where you
find, in regards to what our debt is, how do we justify
spending hard-earned American taxpayer dollars into rail
projects--and I don't mind doing that, providing it makes
common sense. And that is my--so where do you think we should
be able to get the funding?
Right now we have a $3.5 trillion budget. And
unfortunately, $1.6 trillion of that money is borrowed. In 10
years we are handing our children a $23.5 trillion debt. That
is what we have done.
Mr. Capon. Right.
Mr. Cravaack. So we have to be very judicious with our--
with the American taxpayer dollars, and not spend ourselves--we
are in the shadows of Greece. We are in the shadows of Italy.
And if we don't have a viable economy and we do not have a
Government that is not imploding, I mean these trains aren't
going to mean a thing.
So, where do you see this funding coming from?
Mr. Capon. Yes. First of all, I heard two parts of the
question. One is how do we justify the expenditure. And I think
the justification for the expenditure goes to some of the
points the Secretary made, in terms of the population growth
that is expected, the fact that we can't pave over the country
and try to do this all with highways and aviation and still
have a quality of life that is worth living. So I think that
the justification is there.
Now, where do you get the money? Everyone says that the
gasoline tax increase is a nonstarter. But it is worth noting
that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce is in favor of a gasoline tax
increase. Also, Maryland just opened this toll road, the
InterCounty Connector. I bought an E-Z Pass for my car, even
though I only use it twice a year to cross the Bay Bridge. I
firmly believe that tolling highways is another source of
revenue that is going to be used a lot more.
I am not necessarily in favor of what is entrapment, speed
traps that are designed to raise revenue, but that is another
issue.
I could create, I guess, a lot of enemies by getting beyond
transportation and talk about the subsidies in the energy field
and agriculture. I mean I guess everyone has their list of
somebody else's ox that they would like to gore. But from a
good Government standpoint I would say that, as an automobile
driver, we are not paying our full share, and that that is one
of the major potential funding sources.
And there was a TRB report, Transportation Research Board,
from about 12 years ago that said where you could show impact
on aviation congestion that you could justify using aviation
user funds on high-speed rail development.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, sir. My time has expired, I yield
back.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you. And with that, Ms. Brown for
another question.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, thank you. I would just like to
continue to say that this is transportation, and this is
investment, and that is what we need to be doing here. I mean
the fact is we have our debt--we ran two wars on the credit
card, and all of a sudden we want to pay for it out of social
security and transportation. And transportation is what puts
people to work. And all of the economists indicate that what we
need to do is invest and put people to work to grow the
economy.
But Ms. McDonald, let me just ask you a question. There has
been a lot of criticism regarding the transparency of the
program. Can you describe the New York experience? And would
you agree that this is an example of good grantsmanship?
Because basically, what experience did New York have in
applying for the grant? The stimulus money, I think that is
what we are talking about.
Ms. McDonald. Sure.
Ms. Brown. That, you know, we need shovel-ready projects,
as if you can go out and start digging before you do the
environmental studies and other things that go into it. I don't
have time to educate the Members about what goes into having it
ready. But if it is ready, then if there is funding, when it
comes along, there is a lot of prior planning. None of this
happened overnight. In Florida we have been working on high-
speed rail for 30 years. All right.
Ms. McDonald. Sure. New York State DOT released a rail plan
which covered all aspects of rail, both freight rail, intercity
passenger, and commuter rail in 2009. And that served as the
basis of our requests for funding from Federal Railroad
Administration.
We actually found--and most of this process was initiated
before my tenure began on February 1st of this year--we found
the process extremely--I won't say easy, but extremely
straightforward to navigate, putting in the grant applications
to the Federal Railroad Administration. What I applaud FRA on
was the fact that for each grant that you were requesting, you
had to identify service outcome agreements. And those are tied
to whether they claw back the money or not in the future.
And in New York's instance, particularly on the Empire
corridor between New York City and Albany, New York, that right
of way is partially owned by Metro North Railroad, our commuter
railroad, and partially owned by CSX. We had----
Ms. Brown. I know.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. A very intense negotiation
with----
Ms. Brown. I know.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. CSX, Amtrak, and New York State
DOT, and I am here to tell the committee that it was an
extremely favorable outcome. And----
Ms. Brown. Well, I can tell you it took a lot of work.
Ms. McDonald. It did take a lot of work.
Ms. Brown. It really did.
Ms. McDonald. But I will quote our colleagues in FRA and
some of my new friends at CSX Railroad that said this agreement
that normally takes--a negotiation that normally takes 3 to 5
years we completed in 4 months. And it was with the guidance of
FRA all along the way. So it was a very productive process. It
will result in improvements to freight rail, and it will result
in improvements to passenger intercity rail and commuter rail
all along that corridor.
Ms. Brown. OK. Mr. Capon, I want to ask you that--you know,
there is a lot of discussion about high speed, as if it was
just one grants program. But it was high-speed and intercity
passenger rail. Can you talk about the difference between the
two?
And do you happen to know how much the United States has
invested in passenger rail compared to highway and aviation?
Because it is just a lot of discussion about how rail doesn't
pay for itself. No form of transportation pays for itself, the
last time I checked. It is the Government deciding that we are
going to compete. And we are not competing in Florida with
Mississippi and Alabama, we are competing with people from
other countries. And it is important for us to understand the
importance of moving goods, people, and service, and keeping
them separated, and keeping it safe.
Mr. Capon. Difference between high-speed rail and what some
people call higher speed rail, which is, you know, improving
conventional, I guess there are different definitions. I think
there is one in the Federal statute that is 110 miles per hour.
The point I was going to make is that for the traveler,
they are not necessarily looking at the top speed or the
average speed, they are just looking at the running time. How
long does it take me to get there? What does that tell you?
That tells you that you can get a Seattle-Portland businessman
on board a train at a lower speed than a Chicago-St. Paul
businessman.
And, by the way, when I first came to Washington, 3 hours
was the limit. You know, you couldn't get a businessman to ride
more than 3 hours. I think the tolerance is now more than 3
hours.
You asked also about funding. I think that there was
actually an article yesterday where Senator Lautenberg said
that the Federal highway spending last year of $40 billion was
more than the Federal Government had spent on Amtrak in its
entire history. And I think during that same period the Federal
investment in highways was about--over $1 trillion. And there
was actually a fact checker that said--check with the FAA--and
gave the approval for the accuracy of what the Senator had
said.
Ms. Brown. Well, sir, just don't confuse us with facts up
here. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentlelady for pointing that out
to the witnesses.
First of all, I will go to Mr. Capon, and you can rebut. As
I think you said, talked about the Northeast Corridor, it is a
massive bill. And my response was it is massive, but it is
beneficial, I think, to take--if you are able to reduce it by
20 minutes with several billion dollars, let's do it, and that
will improve ridership and hopefully revenues. I believe it
will.
So, you can rebut that----
Mr. Capon. Yes, well----
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. But you can't take my whole 5
minutes. I know you are passionate about trains, but be
succinct.
Mr. Capon. No, I certainly support the investments in the
Northeast Corridor. My point was the projects that you listed
will go well beyond the $10 billion.
And probably job one over everything is that some of the
investments, including ones that you mentioned, if they don't
get done within our lifetimes, the corridor is going to
collapse and shut down, and that would be the worst outcome
possible.
Mr. Shuster. Right. And that is why I think spending this
money all over the country was wrong. It should have been
focused where we get the best bang for the buck.
And with that, I forgot Mr. Hanna. I apologize. I yield you
5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Geddes, what is the
rationale behind allowing a company that is not financially
stable, like Virgin Rail in Europe, of course, to bid on a
project where you can't predict the stream of income, either
positive or negative, whether it is a subsidy or a pay-in by
the company? How can you justify that when the--at the end of
the day, the only backstop is the U.S. Government?
Mr. Geddes. Sure. I don't want to comment on Virgin Rail's
financial condition, specifically, but----
Mr. Hanna. Better than Amtrak's.
Mr. Geddes. Right. But in general, in terms of private
involvement, I think your point is very well taken, because
there is inherent risk in any investment, whether it is
investment in maintenance and upgrades in a track, or
investment in an entirely new high-speed rail line. It is
always risky.
The question--and the risk doesn't go away simply because
it is entirely public investment. The risk is simply borne on
the back of taxpayers. The risk is still there. That is a
critical point. It is just borne by taxpayers. When you include
the private investor, you get equity investors, typically, who
bear some of that risk in return for an expected rate of
return. But they take some of the risk off of taxpayers and
bear it themselves. Some projects will perform well, some
projects will perform poorly.
Mr. Hanna. Right, I get that. And that is kind of obvious.
The point is, where do you go when the money is gone? How do--
where--shouldn't there be some threshold of capacity, some
bond, some potential to go somewhere for that amount of money?
Mr. Geddes. You mean if the project fails----
Mr. Hanna. If the----
Mr. Geddes [continuing]. And the private investor----
Mr. Hanna. If the project fails to make money, and the
public demands the service, the Government is left with its
back against the wall to pay the bill.
Mr. Geddes. Well, first, I mean, it would be like any
typical hierarchy in a bankruptcy proceeding, where the first
people to go are these--like equity investors.
Mr. Hanna. But the point is--excuse me--you typically don't
let people in on a project that aren't viable, regardless. To
bid something--Ms. McDonald would not let a--someone bid a DOT
road that didn't have a bond, that wasn't bondable. How do you
come up--shouldn't we be looking for companies--multinationals,
perhaps--that are large enough to actually be the backstop, as
opposed to the U.S. Government, over some----
Mr. Geddes. Oh, sure----
Mr. Hanna [continuing]. Period of time?
Mr. Geddes [continuing]. Absolutely. Yes. I think you and I
are in complete agreement on that. I believe we should be. And
there are--I mean a lot of them are outside the United States.
But internationally, there are very large companies that are--
Transurban and Fluor are building the hot lanes on the DC
Beltway. So they are the backstop.
Mr. Hanna. Mr. Capon, do you--can you tell me how you would
estimate the value of the pressure it would take off--and I
apologize, as I am late, if you have already discussed this--
the pressure this high-speed rail project would take off of,
say, LaGuardia and Boston and the Thruway, and all the roads in
between?
I mean how do you add that value into what we can use to
justify doing this?
Mr. Capon. You asking me?
Mr. Hanna. Yes, sir. I am sorry.
Mr. Capon. Well, the overall transportation efficiency of
the network becomes greater to the greater extent that air
traffic--short distance air traffic is inefficient. The airline
executives know it. And they are--they would love to have the
slots at LaGuardia for longer flights. And if--so that if the
proportion of short trips on taking on rail dramatically
increases, that increases----
Mr. Hanna. No, obviously. But I am talking about the math
itself.
Mr. Capon. OK.
Mr. Hanna. How do you attach a value to that? Have you ever
looked at that side of the equation?
Mr. Capon. The only thing I can tell you off the top of my
head is that I know the German Government about 10 or 15 years
ago did a fairly elaborate and forward-looking analysis of the
rationale for their rail investment that I think guided some of
the kinds of things that you are alluding to.
Mr. Hanna. But it has not been done, that you know of? Do
you know--something to look at, maybe. Thank you.
Mr. Capon. Thanks.
Mr. Hanna. I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman. I think that is an
interesting point you bring up, and something we ought to look
into.
Ms. McDonald, I want to make sure I am clear. Your position
on public-private partnership with the Northeast Corridor, is
that something you support?
Ms. McDonald. I do. I support looking at all alternatives--
--
Mr. Shuster. OK.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. For making it viable.
Mr. Shuster. So I think it is--you are obviously--New York,
you are on the commission--it is critical to make sure that New
York is on board. Because I think, in the end of the day, it
is----
Ms. McDonald. Yes.
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Something we have to do.
Ms. McDonald. And, you know, we--I think we, all of us that
are in the transportation industry, we will be able to see the
benefit of----
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. Of some of the successes and
failures over the last 10 years of these public-private
partnerships that----
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. Really looking at the revenue
stream, and what it can generate, and what impact that has on
fares. You know, some of the experience on the automobile toll
side, the revenues haven't realized--so a lot of interesting--
--
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Ms. McDonald [continuing]. Issues that would need to be
addressed.
Mr. Shuster. And Mr. Orski, private companies being
involved is critical?
Mr. Orski. Yes. Very much so, Mr. Shuster. Nevertheless, I
think this is still an untested hypothesis, that the private
sector is willing and able to participate, let us say, in the
Northeast Corridor.
There is some experience, however, internationally. And I
did cite to the Channel Tunnel, a project that was supported
totally by private capital. So I would suggest that in any
analysis of private participation in the Northeast Corridor,
one of the first things we should do is investigate the
interest of private investors, both domestically and
internationally, in participating in the project.
Mr. Shuster. Well, you are absolutely right. And that leads
to my next and final question to Mr. Geddes.
In your research, have you found out there are companies,
private companies, interested in investing not only in the
Northeast Corridor, but some of these other rail lines that
we--I put in some language in legislation to go and find some
of these nonprofitable lines and see if there is interest out
there in the public sector--in the private sector.
Mr. Geddes. Yes. My research indicates to me that it is, in
some sense, very mechanical. If the private sector investors
are compensated for the risks that they are assuming, they will
invest. And if they are assured of getting that--we are--
typically here we are talking about long-term investment. This
is not 1 or 2 years, this is a long-term investment. They have
to be assured of getting that investment over that long period
of time. That is why I emphasized the institutional structures
that you need to make public-private partnerships work,
particularly in something like passenger rail.
But I believe it is almost mechanical, in the sense that if
that return is offered to compensate for the risk that you are
assuming, they will invest. And if it is not, they won't. They
will go look overseas, which is what--tragically, in my view--
infrastructure investment in the United States, with the
deepest and broadest capital markets in the world, is going to
other countries.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Geddes. China and India, we talk about them
constructing infrastructure. They are building it through
private investment, largely.
Mr. Shuster. Right. And I have talked to some of these--
Herzog is a company that is interested in the United States. Of
course, Virgin Rail, they have been in to see me. Veolia,
Keolis, all doing that. All--some of them have operations
already in this country and they are up and running.
So, again, I have got to get to another meeting, so I am
going to end this. I appreciate all of you being here today.
As long as you don't filibuster me, Mr. Capon. I know you
have a passion for passenger rail. Thirty seconds, go.
Mr. Capon. OK. I just want to make clear that my no answer
to your question on Amtrak reform does not mean I regard Amtrak
as a perfect organization.
Mr. Shuster. That is----
Mr. Capon. And I would like also to put something in the
record for--in response to Mr. Hanna's question. I think I may
have something that----
Mr. Hanna. OK.
Mr. Capon [continuing]. That deals with that.
Mr. Shuster. That would be great. Again, thank you very
much. And I appreciate with respect to your passion for
passenger rail. But you sometimes go on like a Senator.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. And in the House we have got the 5-minute
rule, which I try to adhere to.
Again, I want to thank all of you very much for coming
today. I really appreciate you taking the time and helping to
educate us here and bring us up to speed on some of these
issues that we are discussing.
So, again, thank you very much. And it is--I ask for
unanimous consent for Members to submit statements and
questions for the record within 3 business days.
And with that, the meeting is adjourned. Thank you very
much.
[Whereupon, at 2:17 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


