- CREATING U.S. MARITIME INDUSTRY JOBS BY REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CREATING U.S. MARITIME INDUSTRY JOBS
BY REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS

=======================================================================

(112-32)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 24, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-528                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
VACANCY

(ii)

?

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
Vice Chair                           (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Cook, Rear Admiral Kevin S., Director of Prevention Policy,
United States Coast Guard......................................     4
Lederer, Calvin M., Deputy Judge Advocate General, United States
Coast Guard....................................................     4

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Cook, Rear Admiral Kevin S., and Lederer, Calvin M., joint
statement, and chart entitled, ``Coast Guard Rulemaking Actions
Related to Outstanding Statutory Requirements (by Age)''.......    45

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Request by Rep. Landry to submit written statement from Horizon
Lines, Inc.....................................................    35

United States Coast Guard:

Chart entitled, ``Active Rules at Start of Fiscal Year''.....     6
Chart entitled, ``Final Rules Published''....................     8
Correction to RADM Cook's statement about the amount of
additional billets hired...................................    15
Response to Rep. Larsen's inquiry about the Coast Guard's
status on implementing the following provisions of the
Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2010: expanding the
definition of ``higher volume port area,'' initiating
negotiations with Canada to require tugboat escorts for all
laden tank vessels transiting the northwest straits region
of Puget Sound, and issuing recommendations for the full
range of options for the management of maritime traffic and
to enhance spill prevention and response systems...........    21
Response to Rep. Harris's request to move the channel buoy at
Rock Hall Harbor...........................................    23
Response to Rep. Cravaack's inquiry about fees associated
with an Operator of Uninspected Passenger Vessels (OUPV)
(``Six-Pack'') license.....................................    24
Response to Rep. Cravaack's inquiry about the place closest
to Minnesota at which Six-Pack license applications are
accepted...................................................    24
Response to Rep. Cravaack's inquiry as to why the Coast Guard
has determined that Mille Lacs Lake is a navigable waterway
of the United States.......................................    25
Correction to RADM Cook's response to Rep. Larsen's inquiry
about when the Coast Guard will publish a notice of
proposed rulemaking on the Cruise Vessel Safety and
Security Act...............................................    30
Response to Rep. Landry's request for a list of Members of
Congress who have inquired about notice of arrival and the
date of the inquiry........................................    32

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.007

CREATING U.S. MARITIME INDUSTRY JOBS BY
REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 24, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Howard Coble
presiding.
Mr. Coble. The subcommittee will come to order. As you all
know, there is a joint session scheduled for 11:00. Hopefully
we will be finished prior to then, but if we are not through,
say, by 10:45, I suggest that we recess and then come back here
immediately after the joint session concludes.
Chairman LoBiondo, by the way, had a conflict and asked me
to stand in. So it is good to be with you, Mr. Larsen, this
morning. It is good to have you all here.
The subcommittee is meeting today to review the Coast
Guard's regulatory program to examine ways to improve the
Service's rulemaking process. We are also interested in the
status of pending rules and the impact they will have on
maritime safety and commerce.
The Coast Guard has brought authority to regulate maritime
commerce, including establishing and enforcing rules to ensure
mariner safety, vessel and facility safety and security, and
the protection of the environment. With such mass authority
comes great responsibility to regulate industry in a fair and
reasonable way. This hearing will focus on ensuring that Coast
Guard rulemaking is just that, fair and reasonable.
It is important to remember that the United States economy
is fueled by maritime commerce. While regulations must address
concerns relating to safety, security, and stewardship, they
must also balance the importance of maintaining the free flow
of maritime commerce.
Domestic shipping alone is responsible for over 500,000
American jobs and $100 billion in annual economic output.
Additionally, 90 percent of all global trade and over 25
percent of our gross domestic product moves via sea. With the
economy still in a fragile state and unemployment at record
levels, it is imperative for the Federal Government to foster
an atmosphere where our maritime industry can compete and
expand. To that end, I am concerned about the cost and impact
of several forthcoming Coast Guard rulemakings. Specifically,
rules requiring fishing vessel examinations, the purchase of
automatic identification system for small vessels, and the
installation of ballast water treatment systems aboard vessels
could have tremendous impacts on the economy. If these and
other rules are not done in a commonsense manner, I am
concerned they could drastically increase operating costs for
businesses, hamper growth, and kill jobs at a time when our
Nation can ill afford economic setbacks.
Finally, just as we are facing tough decisions on how to
cut the deficit, these and other pending regulations will
require additional personnel and funding for the Coast Guard. I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how the Coast
Guard intends to find the resources to pay for the expansion of
its regulatory mission as well as what steps it is taking to
ensure rules are put forth in an efficient and commonsense
manner.
I thank you all for appearing today, and I am now pleased
to recognize the distinguished gentleman from Washington for
his opening statement.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. And
thank you for convening today's hearing to examine the status
of major rulemaking activities by the U.S. Coast Guard and
their impact on job creation in our domestic maritime
industries and the overall economy.
Revitalizing and growing our maritime economy is a high
priority for me, and I want to thank you for taking interest in
this matter this morning, Mr. Chairman. The Coast Guard is a
multimission maritime military service of the United States. It
is the principal Federal agency responsible for ensuring marine
safety, preserving maritime and port security, enhancing
maritime commerce, and protecting the marine environment.
Not surprisingly, rulemaking is a prominent Coast Guard
activity. In light of the Service's broad portfolio,
regulations issued by the Service affect and enhance virtually
every sector of our domestic maritime economy.
Mr. Chairman, we should examine whether regulatory burdens
adversely affect job creation. In today's economy we in
Congress have no greater responsibility than to focus on
protecting and creating jobs in the private sector. However,
the Coast Guard is one agency whose regulatory portfolio can
enhance jobs.
The Coast Guard's regulations ensure that vessels are safe,
that workers in maritime-based industries are protected in
their lives and in their livelihoods, that water-run commerce
can move efficiently and, should an accident occur, that there
will be an effective response.
Without the certainty afforded by the Coast Guard, our
maritime commerce and the economy would suffer. Our domestic
maritime industry significantly impacts the overall U.S.
economy. According to recent figures published by the American
Maritime Partnership, the U.S. domestic maritime industry moves
over 1 billion tons of cargo annually, with a market value of
$400 billion; sustains 500,000 jobs in total, including 74,000
jobs on vessels and at shipyards. It generates annually $100
billion in economic output and $11 billion in tax revenue, and
pays $29 billion in annual wages. By any measure these numbers
verify the importance of our responsibility in Congress to
ensure that the regulations issued by the Coast Guard are fair,
are targeted, and support our maritime industries, which, by
extension, will be good for job creation, good for the U.S.
economy, and good for the American people.
Of course, as with most Federal agencies, there are some
instances where the Service's rulemaking or lack thereof have
created jobs. For example, as was noted in the recently
released GAO report, efforts to issue regulations to fully
implement the Transportation Worker Identification Credential,
or TWIC, remain woefully behind schedule and over budget. Not
only has this rulemaking process created uncertainty about the
reliability and effectiveness of TWIC cards, it has spawned
delays and frustration for mariners, boat operators, and
longshore workers nationally as well as in my district. Because
a TWIC card is a prerequisite for the issuance or a reissuance
of a merchant mariner credential or license, overlapping
administrative processes have increased costs, prompted delays,
and created confusion in what otherwise should be a fairly
routine process. Such inefficiencies are unacceptable. With the
current need to get people back to work, we simply can't afford
to strand qualified, able-bodied people on the dock because the
Federal Government has been unable to effectively and
efficiently coordinate the TWIC and mariner credential
programs, which are vital to port security and marine safety.
With that, Mr. Chairman, we ought not to forget that under
the present budget framework, budget cuts will impact the
ability of the Service to promulgate regulations in a timely
manner. As much as we might like the Coast Guard to do more
with less, the reality is that the Coast Guard will be doing
less with less in the current budget environment.
According to the latest rulemaking summary issued by the
Coast Guard in January, the Service reported that internal
planning and administrative reforms implemented through its
Marine Safety and Security Council and additional resources
provided in fiscal years 2008 and 2009 budgets enabled the
Service to reduce its regulatory backlog by 35 percent by the
end of 2010. Despite this progress, however, the Service
unfortunately reports that recent efforts to work down the
backlog may be offset this year by the approximately 20 new
rulemaking requirements included in last year's Coast Guard
authorization, which passed this House of Representatives by
unanimous consent, and by a new rulemaking to address safety
shortcomings revealed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, among
other new issues.
Only time will tell, Mr. Chairman, if the Service's
forecast is accurate. Nevertheless, it does serve to remind us
that before we look to cast blame on the Service for creating
burdens, we may want to examine the requirements that we in
Congress have imposed upon the Service.
Thank you again Mr. Chairman, for holding this morning's
hearing, and we look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
You mentioned doing more with less. I guess the Coast
Guard, probably more than any other Federal entity known to me,
has come close to mastering that technique. You have come close
to making it clear that you can do more with less, and we hope
that won't be too burdensome. Thank you, Mr. Larsen for your
opening statement.
Our witnesses today include Coast Guard Rear Admiral Kevin
Cook, Director of Prevention Policy; and Mr. Calvin Lederer,
who is the Deputy Judge Advocate General of the United States
Coast Guard. We welcome the witnesses for participating today,
and we appreciate your presence here.
Admiral, if you and Mr. Lederer could, if you could confine
your statements to on or about 5 minutes, that will assure us
of meeting the deadline for the joint session. You will not be
keelhauled if you go past the 5 minutes, however.
We will start with you, Rear Admiral Cook.

TESTIMONY OF REAR ADMIRAL KEVIN S. COOK, DIRECTOR OF PREVENTION
POLICY, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD; AND CALVIN M. LEDERER,
DEPUTY JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD

Admiral Cook. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Larsen. And with your permission, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
have my written testimony entered into the record.
Mr. Coble. Without objection.
Admiral Cook. As you mentioned, I am joined here by Mr.
Lederer, and I can assure you that we will be brief, sir.
I would like to highlight two main points in my testimony
today: first, the impact of Coast Guard regulations, and
second, the results of investments that Congress and the Coast
Guard have made to our regulatory development program.
Regarding my first point, the impacts, the Coast Guard has
and continues to focus on regulatory efficiency and
effectiveness, which was reinforced with the recent publication
of Executive Order 13563. Of the 19 significant rules published
since 2003, the median first-year cost was approximately $4.5
million. But upon closer review, we note that three of the
rulemakings were required by the Marine Transportation Security
Act of 2002, and these account for nearly 95 percent of those
total costs. Therefore, typical Coast Guard rulemakings are far
less burdensome on an industry due in no small part to the
efforts that go into development, including maximizing the use
of industry consensus standards, pursuing international
regulations, the use of performance-based regulations, and
other measures.
Benefits of Coast Guard rulemaking are widespread,
including enhanced safety for our mariners and the boating
public, protection of our marine environment, and strengthened
security of our ports and waterways. The Coast Guard will
continue to seek new means of achieving regulatory benefits
without undue burden on industry.
Second, regarding the improvements made to the Coast
Guard's regulatory development program, I would like to start
by thanking Congress for the investments made in fiscal years
2008 and 2009, as Congressman Larsen alluded to in his opening
statement. This investment brought the number of personnel
dedicated to rulemaking development to 82 full-time personnel,
nearly a 50-percent increase. In addition, there are dozens who
participate as subject-matter experts in specific projects.
In conjunction with your congressional investment, the
Coast Guard is undertaking a series of improvements, including
refining overall processes using an ISO 9001-compliant
framework, investment in information technologies to streamline
planning and management, and in training.
If I could have the first slide, please.
As a result of these combined investments, the Coast Guard
has significantly reduced the overall workload as shown in this
chart.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.008

Admiral Cook [continuing]. While some of the reductions in
backlog have been offset by congressional requirements from the
authorization act, we are confident that the efficiencies we
have gained will enable us to make similar reductions in the
near term.
Next slide, please.
As an example of the efficiency, we have increased the rate
at which final rules have been published since 2008.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.009

Admiral Cook [continuing]. The slide highlights our
continued progress up to the present date. The increase in this
rate has directly impacted our overall backlog. In addition, in
fiscal year 2010, public milestones were achieved for 18 Coast
Guard headquarters rulemaking projects, with all top 50
projects showing progress.
Finally, since fiscal year 2009, we have reduced the
average age of rules under development from 6.2 years to 5.3
years, with further reductions anticipated.
So in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I want to assure you, other
members of the subcommittee, that the Coast Guard makes every
possible effort to ensure that regulations we publish are
timely, effective and efficient. I thank Congress again for the
investments you have made in improving our capabilities and
look forward to continued gains as a result of these.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Admiral Cook.
Mr. Lederer.
Mr. Lederer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Larsen.
In addition to the efforts described by Admiral Cook to
reduce the impacts of our rules and improve our regulatory
development processes, the Coast Guard has aggressively pursued
rulemakings required by the 2010 authorization act. We have
identified in the act 11 requirements that are self-executing,
another 14 we are absorbing in existing projects, and 18 that
require new rules, as Mr. Larsen was pointing out. We have
started regulatory projects for all 18, and they are under way,
and we are cognizant of the deadline specified by Congress.
With the addition of these projects, our active rulemaking
projects will number 78, up from 60. Half of them are
statutorily driven. We take very seriously the direction
provided by Congress, and that direction is a significant
factor in the priorities we set among regulatory projects.
While we work diligently to move all regulations along,
those with higher priority, such as those with a statutory
mandate, are addressed ahead of others and move more quickly.
Statutorily mandated rules take an average of 1 year or less to
move from concept to final rule than do discretionary
regulations, which originate from sources such as our
international work, accident investigations, risk analysis, and
changes in technology. As Admiral Cook noted, we make a major
effort to ensure that the regulations we promulgate are
effective and an efficient use of societal resources. This is
particularly important when so many of our partners in the
industry and voting public are struggling in this current
economic climate, as both of you pointed out.
In our written testimony we highlight the series of layered
reviews used by the Coast Guard and the administration to
ensure that the regulatory policy we have is sound, feasible,
and does not place undue burden on the regulated community. For
significant rules, those are the ones that are reviewed by the
Office of Management and Budget, this includes a review of each
document in the rulemaking process before they are published by
the Marine Safety and Security Council, which brings together
under the leadership of the Judge Advocate General every Coast
Guard flag officer and senior executive with substantial
responsibility for rulemaking.
The MSSC is a significant investment of flag officer and
SES time and attention to ensure we get it right the first
time. The review of rulemaking documents as rules progress is
in addition to review by the MSSC at the outset of every
regulatory project to improve the project in the first instance
and placing it on the regulatory agenda. These reviews ensure
that all the Coast Guard's regulatory actions work holistically
and without unduly burdening industry.
President Obama's January Executive Order 13563 requires a
retrospective review of already issued regulations. DHS asked
the public to identify regulations that should be included in
the retrospective review. We were pleased that public comments
only identified three about the Coast Guard, and only one
comment described the regulations as overly burdensome, and
that was the MTSA regulations that Admiral Cook referred to. We
think that this is one indicator that Congress and the Coast
Guard together have made sound rulemaking decisions.
I also want to thank Congress for the investments made in
improving our capabilities, which we see every day and look
forward to the continuing gains as a result. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Coble. Thank you both.
Gentlemen, you have complied with the 5-minute rule. We
thank you for that.
Mr. Lederer, last year a coalition of U.S. flag vessel
operators, maritime unions, and domestic shipbuilders
petitioned the Coast Guard to initiate a rulemaking to clarify
the extent to which a vessel can be rebuilt in a foreign
shipyard and still at the same time maintain its eligibility
under the Jones Act. When will the Coast Guard issue a notice
of proposed rulemaking in response to this petition?
Mr. Lederer. Mr. Chairman, with respect to that, the
petition--I would want to point out one thing at the outset.
With respect to petitions for rulemaking, we have received
around 50 of those since 2002, and 9 out of the 50 actually
resulted in a notice of proposed rulemaking, which is, I think,
another indicator of the responsiveness of the Coast Guard to
petitions from the public and from industry.
With respect to foreign rebuilds, we put that petition out
for public comment, and that period of public comment ends
shortly, this week, I believe. So we will have to review the
comments that have come in. So far we have received only one
comment on it. We will have to assess at that point and decide
whether or not if that makes sense to proceed with a notice of
proposed rulemaking in response to the petition, which is
principally sponsored by the Shipbuilding Association of
America, and we will see where we go from there.
I would point out that last fall, or last August actually,
the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals issued a decision in a
hotly litigated case concerning a foreign rebuild, and that
case essentially sustained our current regulatory scheme.
The Coast Guard is very supportive of the Jones Act scheme
that Congress has given us to enforce in how we document
vessels, but at the same time one of the things that we have
seen over the years, and particularly in these recent cases--
and there were two cases that were litigated recently--is that
these regulatory schemes are very difficult to construct in a
way that is equitable and understandable by industry and then
to actually make it work. So in terms of changing the current
regulatory scheme, that is something we need to approach very,
very carefully, and we will be doing that once the comment
period closes.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Lederer.
I have one more question, and then I will recognize Mr.
Larsen.
Admiral, the FAA and other Federal agencies allow private
physicians to conduct examinations of licensed workers, such as
airline pilots, and then determine if the worker meets the
medical fitness requirements to be licensed by the Federal
agency. The Coast Guard, however, I am told, has chosen to put
in place a system in which a government health care bureaucrat
does not conduct the medical examination of the worker, but
nonetheless makes the medical fitness determination.
My question, Admiral, is why does the Coast Guard follow
this process when other Federal agencies rely on the expertise
of private physicians who have actually examined the worker in
question to make final fitness determinations?
Admiral Cook. Mr. Chairman, if I could start from--in our
authorization act, we now have the authorization for a medical
advisory committee, and that is going to be their first task.
We have just gotten the appointments approved through the
Department, and the Medical Advisory Committee will be meeting
this summer.
But if I could--and then I will go back and put it in
perspective--we used to do all of the licensing through our 17
regional exam centers. We did not have a true medical component
represented in each of those regional exam centers, so we had a
wide variety of decisions that were being made based on
mariners visiting their own doctors and making recommendations.
So we thought that in centralization, as we have done with the
National Maritime Center, that we would provide medical
expertise to provide consistency across the Nation in
continuing that practice, and we thought that that would lead
to a significant improvement.
And I think it has led to improvement as far as
consistency, but what it has demonstrated is that the other
modes that you have mentioned have something very viable in
their program as they look at national consistency. So we are
going to put it up to our Medical Advisory Committee and ask
them to help us find a way to get to that solution. And in the
interim we will continue to use our government doctors.
We have added and we have a very significant staff now of
three medical doctors, six physicians assistants all reviewing
these. They are getting much more--I would say they are very
agile now in discussing cases with the mariners' doctors. So
there is a number of hopeful signs even within the current
system, but we do think that ultimately the registry of doctors
will be the solution, and we will be working towards that.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir.
And I will recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Washington Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lederer, lawsuits challenging proposed regulations are
quite common, certainly at Federal regulatory agencies. For
example, EPA has over 600 active lawsuits. NOAA has nearly 200
pending. U.S. Fish and Wildlife reports over 100 lawsuits filed
against the agency. How many lawsuits have been filed in
Federal court challenging a proposed or final rule published by
the Coast Guard?
Mr. Lederer. Sir, the last time we had a lawsuit
challenging a regulation itself was a challenge to the MTSA,
Maritime Transportation Security Act, provisions concerning
searches or searches that were conducted pursuant to those
regulations in 2006.
We have no pending cases, and we have very few cases that
challenge regulations directly. We have some litigation from
time to time that will challenge application of regulations,
such as the recent first circuit decision in the last couple of
weeks involving the regulated navigation area in Buzzards Bay
off of Massachusetts. But that is again how we actually apply
regulations. So we don't, fortunately, have the same experience
other agencies like EPA does where policymaking is done to a
large degree through litigation. And we have no cases currently
pending challenging any regulations.
Mr. Larsen. It sounds like you said one.
Mr. Lederer. One, sir, yes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you. I think that does show the work that
the Coast Guard does with the industry partners to try to craft
something, and sometimes they are pretty tough, but the
industry partners make their way through it as well.
In my opening comments, I mentioned TWIC. And as part of
last year's authorization, the Coast Guard, Congress included
section 809 to clarify the requirement to carry a TWIC card
would not apply to licensed captains of passenger vessels who
are not required to have a Coast Guard security plan, or to
persons holding a Coast Guard document who are not authorized
to have unescorted access to a designated secure area of vessel
or the facility.
It has been 7 months since that provision became law, but
nothing has happened. Furthermore, it is my understanding that
the Coast Guard's National Maritime Center is still telling
mariners they need to get a TWIC before they can be issued
Coast Guard credentials.
Mr. Lederer, is it the Coast Guard's interpretation of this
provision that it is self-executing?
Mr. Lederer. Sir, our belief is that it is not self-
executing, and that does require a rulemaking because of the
structure of the original Maritime Transportation Security Act
as the basis for it.
Mr. Larsen. So the next question is when does that start?
When does the rulemaking start? Why is there still confusion
out there among mariners?
Mr. Lederer. If I may defer that to Admiral Cook.
Admiral Cook. Mr. Larsen, I think that the fundamental
issue is our need to have mariners enroll and provide their
identification information so we can do safety, suitability, or
in some cases security checks. So the system, in order to gain
efficiencies, was revised so that the TWIC enrollment centers
would be the location where that would be done.
I know I am doing a retrospective, but eventually I will
get to the point.
So we now have 130-some enrollment centers versus 17
regional exam centers where mariners can go, and the equipment
that we were using at that time, even when the TWIC enrollment
center was being stood up, was not really compatible with our
new electronic way of producing mariner credentials. So that is
a key input to our system, the information is gained, the
picture that is taken at the enrollment center, those items.
So what we are trying to do is to move forward in kind of a
three-stage way: first, some policy relief where we think we
have the ability to do that, and it is being closely
coordinated with TSA and with the Screening Coordination Office
at DHS. The direction of that policy would enable mariners who
already have been enrolled in TWIC, they wouldn't have to
revisit an enrollment center. They could just get a new
credential if they serve on a vessel that doesn't have a
security plan. So, for example, a small passenger vessel
captain, when his TWIC expires, he can still go ahead and get a
new credential. It wouldn't be required. But if we added
somebody new into the system where we don't have that baseline
information security, we still need them to go to the
enrollment center and provide that information so that we can
issue their initial transportation worker identification card.
So there is some relief, but, you know, not as much as we would
like as far as providing instantaneous relief.
And then we wanted to look at the cost that the mariner
incurs. We are going to consider whether we can reduce some of
that cost through regulatory changes. And, of course, those
have to be approved all the way through. We would like to do
that.
And then there has to be a fundamental change of
regulations with TSA so that the enrollment center can become a
more versatile place that enrolls people for different
purposes, charges fees that are appropriate.
It is really a three-staged approach, the policy relief
that we can give for folks that are already in the system;
regulations that we will try to promulgate which will impact
and reduce costs; and then thirdly, a more comprehensive
regulation package which would provide the ability to hit the
various levels of enrollment.
Mr. Larsen. That is fine. But I am sure you can understand
the gist of my question being some of frustration being
reflected back to us from mariners about the uncertainty here.
And the point being, it has been 7 months since the provision
has been passed, but what has been done since in order to
decrease some of the uncertainty that the lack of regulation
has caused to the industry? From what I hear you saying is that
you have a plan. I am even more excited to see that get
implemented.
Admiral Cook. I understand that, Congressman. I certainly
understand the committee's impatience.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Chairman, I see other Members here, and I
didn't have a clock on, so I will yield back to you. I have
another set of questions for the second round.
Mr. Coble. Admiral, if you would pull that mic a little
closer to you.
We have been joined by the distinguished gentleman from New
Hampshire and the distinguished gentleman from Maryland. I
think Mr. Cummings came in first.
Mr. Cummings, do you have any questions?
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for calling this hearing.
Admiral Cook, I apologize for not being here earlier. I am
now the ranking member of a full committee, so it gets kind of
busy here.
According to documents provided by the minority staff, the
Coast Guard published 26 rulemaking documents in fiscal year
2010. These documents pertain to 18 separate rulemaking
projects. Utilizing the funding increases of additional
personnel allowances provided to it in fiscal years 2008 and
2009, increases which I strongly supported, the Coast Guard
reduces regulatory backlog by 35 percent, and that is pretty
good. While the Service has a pending backlog of more than 60
rulemaking projects, that is far below the more than 90 pending
projects back in 2007. I applaud your diligence in working
through the backlog.
Can you please comment on whether you now have the staff
and resources necessary to work through the remaining backlog
and to begin to tackle the rulemakings required by the 2010
Coast Guard authorization as well as cruise vessel safety
legislation?
Admiral Cook. Good morning, Congressman. I am disappointed
also that you weren't here for my opening remarks. As we are
very, very thankful for the support that the committee gave us
in 2008 and 2009, and especially for the regulation-development
staff, which really has increased about 50 percent, up to 82
full-time positions in addition to the various subject-matter
experts that we bring in. So I think we are on a trajectory
that will enable us to sustain that continued progress, sir. So
I am confident that we have what we need in order to go ahead
and meet the rules that you laid out.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
As you know, finalizing the towing vessel safety
regulations required by the Coast Guard legislation in 2004 has
long been a key priority for me. What is the status of that
rulemaking process? Will the Coast Guard meet the October 15
deadline for issuing the final rule, given that the deadline
for the NPRM was not met?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, the rule is now under review at
OMB, and typically that signals the final stages for us. So if
they stick to the 90-day review time that they typically take,
we should see that rule back to us in July. So assuming that we
don't have any additional work by nature of that review, we
would see it published soon after that.
Mr. Cummings. Well, one of the changes I am going to do is
I am going to, of course, consult with our chairman and our
ranking member to do what we used to do, and that is set some
deadlines for these things so that we can bring you back. Maybe
in November, if we are here, so that we can follow up on these
things, because, as you know, when we set these deadlines, it
seems like we get more done. So I will have to consult with
them and see--you know, it is their committee, so we have to
figure this out.
Admiral Cook. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. One last thing. As you know, during the 110th
and 111th Congresses, we closely examined how the Coast Guard's
ability to carry out its traditional mission areas, such as
marine safety, including both inspection and investigation
activities and search and rescue, had been affected by the
Service's assumption of significant homeland security
responsibilities after the terror attacks of September 11,
2001. Our examinations found that the Coast Guard's expertise
in highly technical traditional missions had frequently
suffered as the Service struggled to balance these many mission
demands with an end strength that had not expanded to
accommodate the increased workloads created by the new
missions.
Against that background I am deeply troubled by the
findings of the Coast Guard's own post-Deepwater Horizon
preparedness review, which indicates that many of the
challenges we found, particularly in the marine safety program,
also affect the Service's implementation of the environmental
response mission. Thus, the report states, and I quote, ``It
appears that the Coast Guard marine environmental response''--
``preparedness and response programs have atrophied over the
past decade, possibly as a result of competition with program
development and resourcing challenges to meet the Service's
enhanced homeland security responsibilities.''
It goes on to say, ``Additionally, the move to the Coast
Guard's current Sector organization displaced the MER function
from the legacy marine safety community into a new response
community paired with law enforcement and search and rescue
activities. This new construct created the unintended
consequence of changing the existing MER community and placed
many new people with little or no program experience into MER
positions.''
You see where I am going? Where are we? Because one of the
things that I have said over and over again is that we cannot
be lulled into a culture of mediocrity. There are too many
people depending on us. And this is your own report. So I just
want you to comment very briefly, and then I am finished.
Admiral Cook. Well, Congressman, first off, I think the
Coast Guard, we certainly are a learning organization. So the
fact that we did that report and pointed out things we need to
improve on, we are going to improve on it. A very concrete
step, we are forming an incident management directorate within
the headquarters. It is going to be headed up by a senior
executive. That certainly demonstrates the organization's
commitment to improving that area.
We have also got some additional billets this year, I think
it was 35, related to follow-on from Deepwater Horizon, but
related for just incident management.

CORRECTION: The Coast Guard was provided funding to
hire 20 additional billets in fiscal year 2011 for
marine environmental response and incident management
purposes. Additionally, 33 billets were funded to
support the marine safety program.

So the message internally is received, and we are starting
to redirect our resources in order to make sure that we have
the response and incident management skills that we need.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guinta. [presiding.] The gentleman from Minnesota Mr.
Cravaack, do you have any questions?
Mr. Cravaack. Yes, Mr. Chair, I do.
First off, I would like to thank Admiral Cook for being
here today and Mr. Lederer thank you for being here today as
well, and thank you for all of the great service those in the
Coast Guard provide us each and every day. Thank you, sir.
First off with that, sir, Coast Guard regulations have a
tremendous and a negative impact on Minnesota. Admiral Cook, as
you well know, the Coast Guard is requiring fishing guides on
nonborder landlocked lakes deemed navigable by the Coast Guard
to obtain Federal Operator of Uninspected Passenger Vessels
license, otherwise known as a Six-Pack. This is incredibly
burdensome, a requirement on a wide range of tourism-related
jobs. Basically you are making high schoolers go out and get
these licenses.
Now, unfortunately, I have been unable to find out exactly
how much these Six-Packs cost these young people that are
looking for summer employment. And you have got to remember, in
Minnesota, the summer is about 3 months long. So it is a very
short period of time that they are going to require these
licenses. To me, this is extremely unacceptable.
The other aspect is I am very interested, sir--let us
comment on that, sir. Could you comment on the Six-Pack for us?
Admiral Cook. Well, Congressman, a number of inputs
regarding the TWIC have been received, and they are a
fundamental piece leading to the Six-Pack license. When we are
looking across the board, though, we need to validate both
safety and security, and in doing so, we continue to look for
refinements of that. And we are in the process of refining the
TWIC requirements.
But as far as the licensing, all we can offer--and we
continue to work with the locals--is a restricted license,
which makes it easier for them to obtain it, but not less
costly.
Mr. Cravaack. TWIC and the Six-Pack are completely
different things, so realize that. But I would like to just
focus on the Six-Pack. Where is the closest place--can you tell
me where the closest place you can get a Six-Pack license in
Minnesota?
Admiral Cook. Well, they are all done through the National
Maritime Center in West Virginia. And if we are going to get a
restricted license, they can work with their local OCMI, but
the actual document is produced in West Virginia.
Mr. Cravaack. As I understand it, the closest place you can
apply for actually a Six-Pack is like in Ohio. So you are going
to have a 17-year-old kid that wants to be a fishing guide in
the summertime have to go to Ohio to get a Six-Pack license. As
I understand it, that is how this is supposed to work. If I am
wrong, please correct me on that. But as I understand it, you
are making a kid who is going to be a boat guide for less than
six people--has probably been fishing that lake all his life--
go to Ohio to get a Six-Pack card.
My time is quickly depleting. But one of the big things I
want to know, sir, is why has the Coast Guard all of a sudden
in March, I guess, of last year decided to make Lake Mille Lacs
now a navigable water when it is an inland lake and has had no
Federal jurisdiction on those waters since God created it?
Could you explain that, sir?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, I understand that it was
reviewed again recently, and it has historically navigable
roots, and nothing has changed that. I know Mr. Lederer may
have the background from a legal foundation standpoint, but
essentially it had roots as a waterway. And the way the law
goes----
Mr. Cravaack. March 10 of last year, sir. Now you are
putting Federal requirements on an inland lake, State lake,
and, quite frankly, I find that a huge overreach of Federal
authority on a State's rights. This is not a navigable water.
This has been a fishing--it is a large body of water. But I
find that to be unacceptable, and I have asked the Coast Guard
to also comment on that as well. I have not received anything
from the Coast Guard yet. You are placing Federal restrictions
on a lake that is a State lake. It is totally landlocked. It
does not have any title tributaries, any mention like that. I
think this is a huge overreach of the Federal Government. 2010,
that lake has been in existence since God created it, and all
of a sudden the Coast Guard deems it a navigable water. Could
you explain that?
Admiral Cook. Sir, I would like to defer to Mr. Lederer. I
know we have discussed this previously. There is a legal
foundation for this.
Mr. Lederer. Sir, very frequently, we are regularly around
the country, there are bodies of water that may not appear to
be navigable, the issue is raised to the local district. I
don't know what triggered it in the case of this lake. But this
does happen from time to time, and then the local district must
then look very carefully, and does look carefully, at the
historical use of the body of water, and a navigability
determination is based upon that.
My understanding is that the ninth district went through
that process and came to that conclusion. The best I can tell
you is that this is not unprecedented or unusual. And in terms
of the Coast Guard's responsibilities, we have to take them
very seriously.
Mr. Cravaack. Mr. Chair, I am out of time, but I would like
a second followup of questions later, sir.
Mr. Guinta. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Landry.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Cook, with respect to your rules regarding a notice
of arrival, could you tell me--I had sent a letter over to the
Coast Guard concerning a notice of arrival, and a lot of my
supply vessel owners are having difficulty trying to understand
exactly what the official position is, I guess, of the Coast
Guard. You all do a tremendous job down in Louisiana in
regulating our offshore supply vessel industry. They always
have compliments for you all. And it seems from the
correspondence that I have gotten back and forth from you all
and from industry, that this is an issue that you all agree is
an unnecessary burden to the industry.
So I was wondering how you can take a step forward in
showing the rest of these agencies around this city how you can
take a regulation that is causing industry some pain, causing
you some pain, and just clearing it out once and for all? Could
you update me on that?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, first off, the SAFE Port Act
required us to institute the notice of arrival on the Outer
Continental Shelf, consistent with other notice of arrival
requirements that we have. So we went through the standard
rulemaking process, and we did not receive any adverse comments
to that docket, so we anticipated that the offshore industry
would be ready for that.
The reason that the Coast Guard looks at the rulemaking as
a benefit is that it provides safety and security situational
awareness for us, or maritime domain awareness out on the Outer
Continental Shelf. But since the rule was published, the
Offshore Marine Safety Association also came to us and asked us
to reconsider different ways we could implement it that
wouldn't be burdensome to them, but would also provide us the
additional maritime domain awareness that we think is important
both from a safety and security standpoint. So we are working
currently with OMSA to do that.
Mr. Landry. How did you go from regulating foreign vessels
to become a regulation against domestic vessels as well? It
seems to me from the discussions that I have had, the way the
regulation is set up, it is nearly impossible for our industry
down in the gulf to comply with because they are going back and
forth so often.
Admiral Cook. Congressman, the U.S.-flagged vessels are
exempt if they are--suppose they are leaving Port Foshan and
are going out to work in a block and then coming back, there is
no reporting required then. But there is reporting required
when they go from block to block. And I think that is the point
at which the industry is saying they can anticipate those
moves. But the legal fundamentals were there to bring in other
OSVs in order to accomplish the full visibility.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Lederer?
Mr. Lederer. Mr. Landry, the only thing I would add to that
is that the SAFE Port Act requirement was to complete the
rulemaking, and it did specify foreign vessels. The way we
looked at that was that these notice of arrival provisions had
to fit within the fabric of the notice of arrival regulations
that we had at the time, because, again, in terms of protecting
maritime security as well as marine safety, we need to have
full maritime domain awareness. So we are relying not just on
the SAFE Port Act provision, but on a preexisting Ports and
Waterways Safety Act provisions that are the support for the
preexisting notice of arrival regulations.
So the bottom line is that we were working on our
preexisting legal authorities to develop a notice of arrival
scheme that would work across the board.
Mr. Landry. How are we going to fix this problem? Because
my mariners, I think, have always upheld themselves to work
very well with the Coast Guard, and they are just saying this
is simply something that they can't comply with, and I agree.
The traffic on the Gulf of Mexico amongst those offshore supply
vessels is heavy. I mean, it is outstanding. I really wish we
would bring this thing to a head so that we can just continue
to move forward in the work that they have to do down there
without having to worry about an unburdensome regulation that
no one can comply with and you can't enforce.
Admiral Cook. Congressman, I will commit that we are going
to continue to work with OMSA, and we have a formal
partnership, and we have a charter for this particular group.
So it is recognized on both sides as an issue that needs to be
resolved.
Mr. Landry. Thank you.
Mr. Guinta. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Cook, to the ballast water rule, the one major rule
presently under consideration would amend the Coast Guard's
existing regulations on ballast water management. What is the
timetable for completion of this rulemaking at this point? Is
it possible to develop new standards that are technically
feasible, economically viable, and environmentally effective?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, if I could briefly answer that
and then also ask Mr. Lederer to join in on part of the
response.
Mr. Larsen. Absolutely.
Admiral Cook. The timeline is certainly complicated by the
technical nature of what we are trying to achieve and whether
that technology actually exists and can be employed in the
marine environment. So that makes it doubly challenging to
commit to a timeline in addition to any of the administrative
reviews, because there were--after we published the notice of
proposed rulemaking, there were comments in the thousands. From
500 or 600 individual commenters, there are 2,000 or so
comments. There is a wide range of opinions, and then beyond
that there is also a range of scientifically supportable
information that we have to factor into our overall rulemaking.
Mr. Lederer. Sir, with respect, there is a short answer and
a long answer. I will give you the short answer in terms of
just the timing. I think we are well positioned right now with
respect to getting this out. Really a remarkable amount of
discussion that has gone on within the executive branch to move
this rule forward, and it has been very productive. So, one,
more probably discussion on this rule than any I can recall in
the last several years, and productive discussion. I think we
have a way ahead, and I think you are going to see something
published in the next several months.
Mr. Larsen. I will certainly task the staff to track that
as well.
Mr. Chairman, am I on the clock or not? I want to clarify.
Mr. Guinta. You are not on the clock, but I will allow you
to continue.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you. I will try to be expeditious then.
With regards to vessel weight and stability requirements,
the Coast Guard recently amended its regulations governing the
maximum weight and passenger capacity on vessels. It is my
understanding that some boat operators have expressed their
concerns these new requirements have reduced the number of
passengers allowed onboard, and that, in turn, could impact the
profitability of their operations, thereby fitting right into
the concerns of the heading of this particular hearing.
So, Admiral Cook or Mr. Lederer, can you explain various
factors that have been taken into consideration by the Coast
Guard when it establishes new weight and stability
requirements? And could a rule have met its intended goal to
enhance marine safety if it had not considered a factor of an
assumed average weight per person factor?
Admiral Cook. Well, Congressman, really that is the central
piece. We went back with our national centers for disease and
also looked at some of the other scientific data that showed--I
mean, just generally, people are bigger. And the only thing
that we can do as far as providing stability on these vessels
is to take into account the weight that is already there from
the vessel and then how it might be positioned in terms of
people as they are located in different locations. So we have
made it as straightforward as possible to have simplified
stability tests where we go out and witness the weights being
moved around so that the industry doesn't have to go through a
full inclining test, which is much more expensive. But
ultimately, the amount of weight and where it is moved has to
correspond to people and the growing size of Americans.
Mr. Larsen. As uncomfortable as that might be to say, is
that a consistent approach? Has that been a consistent approach
regardless of the year? The same approach in 2005, same
approach in 2000, same approach in 1995 that the Coast Guard
takes to determine weight and stability requirements?
Admiral Cook. The approach is consistent, although we had
not raised the weight in a very large number of years. I can't
recall the exact number of years, but we have gone from an
average weight of 140 to an average weight of 185. But we have
built into the standard such that we will continue to be tied
into the national database, and if weight goes up or down for
average Americans, the rule will adjust.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Chairman, I have one more question now, and
then I will follow up, I am sure. But I will ask one more
question now. And then, if you don't mind, we will go to the
other Members, if that is all right with you.
Admiral Cook, two provisions were included in last year's
authorization act regarding the modification to oil spill
emergency response activities and traffic management in the
north Puget Sound region in Washington State, probably right
outside my window. The first provision would expand the
definition of ``higher volume port area,'' found in section
155-1020 of the Coast Guard's regs, to now include the Strait
of Juan de Fuca out to Cape Flattery. The second provision
encourages the initiation of negotiations with Canada to
require tugboat escorts for all laden tank vessels transiting
the northwest straits region of Puget Sound. It would also
require the Coast Guard to issue recommendations for the full
range of options for the management of maritime traffic and to
enhance spill prevention and response systems.
So what is the status of the Coast Guard's efforts to
implement these provisions? And has the Coast Guard revised its
definition of ``higher volume port area'' as required?
Admiral Cook. Mr. Larsen, I would like to be able to take
that back and give you a detailed answer for the record, if
that would be acceptable to you, sir.
Mr. Larsen. That would be acceptable.
Mr. Larsen. What would be the timeline in terms of how soon
you can get back with an answer?
Admiral Cook. I will get back to you by the middle of June.
Mr. Larsen. The middle of June. How about June 15? That is
my birthday on June 15.
Admiral Cook. June 15 it is, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Great. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

The Coast Guard has initiated the rulemaking proceeding
required by section 710 of the Coast Guard
Authorization Act of 2010 to change the definition of
the ``higher volume port area'' in the Strait of Juan
de Fuca. The Regulatory Identification Number is 1625-
AB75.

The Coast Guard continues ongoing preparedness and
response efforts with Canada under the Canada-United
States Joint Pollution Contingency Plan and
geographical annexes. For example, there is a pollution
response exercise planned in June 2011 in Seattle that
will focus on international cooperation. Additionally,
in August there is a national level convening planned
for the Joint Response Team, which will include
regional participation and address national and
regional issues.

Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you.
Before I go to the next Member, Admiral, thank you very
much for being here.
And I had a quick question regarding the fishing vessel
safety rulemaking. My district of New Hampshire is greatly
impacted by any type of new or additional regulatory
requirement placed on the industry. While we all agree that
safety needs to be foremost in our minds, I wanted to follow up
with you about the authorization act, section 604, regarding
dockside fishing vessels requirement undergoing the safety
examination every 2 years. The first question I have is this:
Are you able to complete it by October 2012?
Admiral Cook. A lot of it will depend, Congressman, on how
the industry comes back to us. For example, you know, we have a
program now that has voluntary exams, and probably in the
neighborhood of 8,000 of those done each year. We anticipate
that--although we don't know for sure whether--the exact number
of vessels that are going to fish 3 miles beyond the boundary
line, so we anticipate that will be about 30,000 to 35,000. So
just as kind of a test bed, we have done a lot of outreach, and
then we have seen how many more voluntary exams we have gotten.
So since we started the outreach in October, we have only got
really about a 10-percent increase in the number of voluntary
exams.
So I think it is going to be difficult to get the industry
to the table. Our regulatory experience in significant
rulemakings like this or changes in the dynamics of the way an
industry is regulated is that they will wait until very near
the end of a perceived deadline. So I think the challenge is
going to be more from the industry side in getting them lined
up so that we can do a systematic dockside safety program.
Mr. Guinta. And if you are not able to complete all fishing
vessels by that date, what would occur at that point? Would you
prevent those vessels that had not been inspected from going
out? Or how would you interpret the law in that sense?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, I think, rather than give you
like a very definitive answer like that today, what I would
like to do is just commit to being in contact with the
committee staff and let you know how it is going so that maybe
you can help us avoid a situation like that where it is a
showdown. But ultimately, if they are not in compliance with
the law, that would be really the only sanction that we could
provide is that they wouldn't be able to go out and fish.
Mr. Guinta. Assuming both sides are diligently trying to
meet this deadline, and just due to the number of vessels we
have and the resources that you have doesn't allow us to meet
that deadline, would it be appropriate for us to consider an
extension?
Admiral Cook. I think an extension would enable us to be
able to put in a more systematic way to reach the final goal.
And as an added comment, this is a very significant thing
to bring an industry in that has not previously been, in
quotes, ``inspected,'' although this is called a compliance
exam. So if you look at what we are doing with the towing
vessel industry, we have a full bridging program that is based
on voluntary examinations, and that is because those towing
vessel organizations are just a little bit more systematically
organized under the American Waterway Operators, who provided
us that opportunity.
But we need some kind of parallel structure that enables
the fishing community to be more comfortable with the Coast
Guard coming down, and our Coast Guard compliance inspectors
understanding a lot of the issues that are facing the fishing
vessel community as far as the particulars of their vessels,
the different types of installations that are on the ships. So
if there was an additional time, we would be able to develop a
more systematic program.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you very much, sir.
Mr. Harris, do you have any questions?
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you very much, Admiral Cook, for coming before the committee.
Channel buoys probably aren't your shop, but maybe you can
get word back to them we are waiting for those channel buoys in
Rock Hall Harbor to get moved so that we can get our tourism
business going for the deep-draft vessels.
Anyway, Admiral Cook, does the mariner medical fitness
determinations, does that come under your jurisdiction in the
rules? Let me ask you a question. Could you just outline to
me--because my understanding is that it is conducted
differently from FAA and highway folks how they do the medical
examinations and get someone determined to be fit. How does the
Coast Guard do it?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, the way we do it is that the
mariner goes to their own doctor and then provides that
information to a medical review staff in our centralized
mariner evaluations in West Virginia.
What I would say, the thing I guess that I also want to add
to the answer, is that we just got authorized for a mariner
medical advisory committee from the authorization act, and we
have just now gotten departmental approval for membership. And
that is going to be a prime tasking for that advisory committee
to help us look at how we can bring the Coast Guard to view the
physical exams, kind of a registry of doctors, the way the FAA
does in particular. We like the way they do it.
But the reason that we are using the current system goes
back to the legacy of the 17 RECs all doing things differently,
and we thought by centralizing and providing a robust medical
staff that we could eliminate a lot of those issues. And many
of them we have, but we still see that further progress could
be made if we were to go down a different route.
Dr. Harris. So when you say the medical staff, what is the
level of the person who is making that determination? The
centralized person.
Admiral Cook. The head doctor is an occupational medical
doctor.
Dr. Harris. I know. But that doctor is not reviewing every
examination, I take it; is that right?
Admiral Cook. There are three medical doctors, six
physician's assistants, and then some medical techs. So it is a
staff of just over 20.
Dr. Harris. Staff of over 20. And what you are suggesting
is that you might go the way of the other administrations and
actually just have a register of physicians whom, if they sign
off on the individual, then they don't have--you can kind of
eliminate a lot of those 20 staff, I take it?
Admiral Cook. Well, some of them, sir. But the challenge
would be--you really have to do a lot of audits in a case like
that. And FAA has a full staff of doctors on the FAA staff that
go out and audit their registry of doctors to make sure that
they are complying with the rules as the FAA understands them.
Dr. Harris. But you are willing to look into that other
option and actively investigate that?
Admiral Cook. We are.
Dr. Harris. Well, thank you very much, Admiral, again for
appearing before the committee and getting word back about Rock
Hall.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

The channel buoy in Rock Hall Harbor was moved on June
1, 2011.

Mr. Landry. [presiding.] Mr. Cravaack.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry to belabor this, but, Mr. Lederer, can you tell me
how much a Six-Pack costs?
Mr. Lederer. I cannot, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. Can you tell me, a Minnesota kid goes up
to be a fishing guide for 3 months in the Mille Lacs Lake,
where he needs to go to get a Six-Pack license?
Mr. Lederer. I cannot, sir, but we will get that
information to you.
[The information follows:]

In accordance with the regulations in Title 46 Code of
Federal Regulations 10.219, the fees associated with
obtaining an original Merchant Mariner Credential with
an officer endorsement as operator of uninspected
passenger vessels (OUPV) are:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evaluation fee.............................................        $100
Examination fee............................................         $95
Issuance fee...............................................         $45
------------
Total....................................................        $240
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Other costs incurred by an applicant associated with
obtaining an endorsement as OUPV include:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
TWIC Fee...................................................      $132.50
CPR/First Aid Training.....................................       $60
Physical Exam..............................................      $100
Drug Test..................................................       $49
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total costs associated with obtaining an original
credential as OUPV is $581.50 for a credential good for
5 years.

Credentials issued by the Coast Guard expire 5 years
from the date of issue. Finally, costs associated with
the renewal of an endorsement as OUPV would include:
the evaluation fee; issuance fee; physical exam; and
drug test for a total of $244 for a 5-year credential.

Mr. Cravaack. OK. I was told by a Coast Guard Toledo, Ohio.
So we have got to get a kid from Minnesota to Toledo, Ohio.
Can you tell me, do applicants need to pick up their
license in person?
Mr. Lederer. Let me pass that to Admiral Cook.
Admiral Cook. They do have to pick it up in person, but it
doesn't have to be back in Toledo.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. Do you know, sir, where the closest Six-
Pack license place would be to apply for a license in
Minnesota?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, I would like to get back for the
record to you, because we have a number of electronic features
that we offer now, and I am just not sure whether the Six-Pack
license falls under that or not.
[The information follows:]

If an applicant for an officer endorsement as operator
of uninspected passenger vessels has provided their
biometric and biographic information through a TWIC
enrollment center, they are able to apply for the
endorsement through the mail. They may apply in person
or through the mail to any of the Regional Examination
Centers, per 46 CFR 10.209(d).

The two closest Regional Examination Centers to
Minnesota are those located in Toledo, Ohio, and St.
Louis, Missouri. For an original issued credential, an
applicant would need to travel to a Regional
Examination Center to take the appropriate examination,
unless they make alternative arrangements for a
traveling examination team to proctor the exam at a
closer location.

TWIC enrollment centers are located in Duluth,
Minnesota, and Roseville, Minnesota.

Mr. Cravaack. I was told they were not. So I was literally
told that a kid from Minnesota has got to go to Toledo, Ohio,
to pick up a Six-Pack. So just food for thought. That is where
I am coming from.
Admiral Cook. OK.
Mr. Cravaack. Now, let us get back, Mr. Lederer, you told
me that because of the historical use of the waterway was why
Region 9 has gone ahead and deemed Mille Lacs Lake, right
basically in the center of Minnesota, a navigable water. Can
you expound upon that?
Mr. Lederer. Only to say, sir, that the historical use of a
body of water is a significant factor in making a navigability
determination. I have not seen the ninth district opinion that
I understand has been written concerning this, and I will be
glad to do that when I get back to the office, and take that
for the record if I could as well.
[The information follows:]

As a result of the increased focus nationwide on
passenger vessel safety including licensing of
operators of uninspected passenger vessels, the Ninth
Coast Guard District and Eighth Coast Guard District
determined they needed a navigability determination for
Mille Lacs Lake in Minnesota. Portions of Mille Lacs
Lake are in both Coast Guard Districts so the
navigability determination was coordinated between the
districts with the Eighth Coast Guard District actually
issuing the determination as the majority of the lake
is within its boundaries. The navigability
determination was made on March 3, 2010, with a copy
attached along with the supporting memo.

The foundation for Federal authority and subsequently
Coast Guard jurisdiction over navigable waters of the
United States traces back to the Commerce Clause of the
Constitution and a series of cases decided by Federal
Courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court. Regardless of
the State or the waterway, the Coast Guard has applied
the same basic tests in determining navigability for
the past 50 years, with the exception of jurisdictional
issues involving the Clean Water Act which have
continued to significantly evolve. Our test is
published in the Title 33 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) Section 2.36.

2.36 Navigable waters of the United States, navigable
waters, and territorial waters.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this
section, navigable waters of the United States,
navigable waters, and territorial waters mean, except
where Congress has designated them not to be navigable
waters of the United States:
(1) Territorial seas of the United States;
(2) Internal waters of the United States that are
subject to tidal influence; and
(3) Internal waters of the United States not subject to
tidal influence that:
(i) Are or have been used, or are or have been
susceptible for use, by themselves or in connection
with other waters, as highways for substantial
interstate or foreign commerce, notwithstanding natural
or man-made obstructions that require portage, or
(ii) A governmental or non-governmental body, having
expertise in waterway improvement, determines to be
capable of improvement at a reasonable cost (a
favorable balance between cost and need) to provide, by
themselves or in connection with other waters, as
highways for substantial interstate or foreign
commerce.

No Federal statute specifically addresses the
navigability of Mille Lacs Lake, and no Federal court
has made a specific determination of the navigability
of this waterway. The navigability determination is
based on the historical use of the waterway as a
highway for interstate commerce. In the late 1800s and
early 1900s, millions of feet of timber were towed
across the lake to the Rum River by steamboats. At the
time, the lake opened directly to the Rum River and the
timber was then floated down the river to various
sawmills. Consequently, in 1981, based upon the
historic use of the lake, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers determined that Mille Lacs Lake is a
navigable waterway of the United States. In 2010, the
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) came to a similar conclusion.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.012

Mr. Cravaack. The State of Minnesota has been in existence
for 158 years, 153 years. So what I am trying to figure out is
why all of a sudden now? Why all of a sudden is the Coast Guard
coming in last year and deeming a body of water which is in the
center of our State navigable waters when I--according to the
records, I see no substantial--the word ``substantial''--
interstate and foreign commerce on the Lake of Mille Lacs. So,
sir, you are going to definitely have to justify those words to
me because, quite frankly, again, this is bureaucratic
overreach on a State's lake. So could you explain, sir?
Mr. Lederer. Sir, we will definitely get back to you on
that.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you very much. And with that and high
hopes of hearing back, I yield back, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Landry. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Cook, Congress passed the Cruise Vessel Safety and
Security Act last year to enhance the safety and personal
security of all U.S. passengers aboard cruise ships. The Coast
Guard was directed to develop regulations to implement several
important provisions of this law, yet statutory deadlines have
come and gone, and proposed rules have yet to appear.
When can we expect to see the Coast Guard publish a notice
of proposed rule on the Cruise Vessel Safety and Security Act?
Admiral Cook. Congressman, I want to assure you that we are
working hard on that one and coordinating with the FBI and some
other interagency coordination that we think is essential to
the foundation of that rule. And it is our desire to have
something published by the end of the year.
Mr. Larsen. By the end of the calendar year?
Admiral Cook. Calendar year, yes, sir.

CORRECTION: The Coast Guard plans to publish the notice
of proposed rulemaking on cruise vessel safety by the
end of 2012, not 2011 as implied in the witness'
response.

Mr. Lederer. And, Mr. Larsen, if I could also add, tomorrow
there is a notice that will be going out to the public seeking
available technologies, so you will see a publication in that
respect in terms of forward motion.
Mr. Larsen. So that will be a step forward. But what steps
is the Coast Guard taking with the FBI or any other law
enforcement agencies to ensure that reporting and enforcement
actions will be seamlessly coordinated? Have the agencies
entered yet into any agreements that clearly articulate
responsibilities and lines of communication?
Admiral Cook. I am not aware of any formal agreement on
that yet, Congressman, but I would anticipate, just the normal
context of how we do business, it will be codified when the
rule comes out.
But from what I have been told by my staff, the FBI is
working with us as a good partner, and they understand that
that part of where U.S. citizens go out on cruise ships, you
know, hasn't really been charted very well before, and it is
important to them to get it right, too. So I think you are
going to see fruits of good cooperation and a rule that is both
enforceable from a cruise ship standpoint and something that is
meaningful from a law enforcement standpoint back here.
Mr. Larsen. Well, you know that in the past we have had
hearings both in the subcommittee and in the full committee on
the issue of cruise vessel safety and security, and members of
this full committee and subcommittee who are extremely
interested in seeing progress being made on this issue.
Admiral Cook. Yes, sir. I think this is one where the
progress is behind the scenes, but it is real.
Mr. Larsen. All right. Well, we will look forward to that
end-of-the-calendar-year movement. Thank you.
Mr. Landry. Admiral Cook, I want to go back to my issue on
the--that I talked about earlier, and I want to make sure that
all of my colleagues understand the problem that we are having.
I really enjoy pizza. I am a big pizza guy. I eat it all the
time. I order it, the delivery guy. You have used pizza
deliveries before, I am sure? All right. OK. Do you think that
this morning if you called up your favorite pizza parlor, if
you called the guy that delivers the pizzas to you, if he could
tell you where he would be delivering pizzas to, you know, in
case maybe you wanted one at your house?
Admiral Cook. I don't think he could do that, sir.
Mr. Landry. OK. That is the problem we are having in the
Gulf of Mexico. You see, those supply vessels, it is hard for
them to be able to forecast where they are going to be in that
24-hour window in order to make that reporting to the Coast
Guard. It is not like a vessel coming in internationally which
they know what ports it is going to, where the cargo is going
to be unloaded, what cargo is going to be loaded onto it, and
then leaving the country again. We have hundreds of vessels
going back and forth from various ports all up and down the
coast of Louisiana. So that I just wanted to make sure you
understand the gravity of the problem.
Do you think that we can fix this through the regulatory
process, and that we don't need to fix it legislatively?
Admiral Cook. Well, we would like to be able to fix it
through the implementation of the regulation. I don't know if
Mr. Lederer has any comments about that. No.
Mr. Landry. So the regulatory fix is certainly more
conducive than a legislative fix, because we would probably get
it wrong up here, I am guessing.
Admiral Cook. Well, I think in this case, Congressman,
since we are aligned with OMSA in working this--you know, we
are not aligned exactly what the solution is yet, but we are
aligned that we both need to work on it. I think it would be
fair to give us a good chance in the regulatory arena first.
Mr. Landry. OK. Great.
Just one last thing. Could you provide for the record, just
supplement, a list of the Members that have inquired about
notice of arrival and when they may have made any inquiries so
I can try to figure out who our friends are out there?
Admiral Cook. We will do that, Congressman.
Mr. Landry. OK. Thank you so much.
[The information follows:]

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Member                Request Received          Notes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sen. Mary L. Landrieu...........  May 25, 2011......  Question for the
Record following
Secretary
Napolitano's May
25th hearing
before the Senate
Committee on
Appropriations.
Rep. Don Young..................  May 24, 2011......  Engaged RADM Cook
and Mr. Calvin
Lederer in a
discussion
regarding OCS
Notices of
Arrival during
the same hearing.
Rep. Jeffrey M. Landry..........  March 15, 2011....  Letter citing
specific concerns
with the Coast
Guard's published
regulation for
Advanced Notice
of Arrivals on
the U.S. Outer
Continental
Shelf.
Sen. David Vitter...............  July 21, 2010.....  Question for the
Record following
ADM Papp's July
21st hearing
before the Senate
Committee on
Commerce,
Science, and
Transportation.
Rep. Frank A. LoBiondo..........  June 22, 2010.....  Letter regarding
the rulemaking
project for
Notice of
Arrivals on the
U.S. Outer
Continental
Shelf.
Rep. Elijah E. Cummings.........  June 22, 2010.....  Letter regarding
the rulemaking
project for
Notice of
Arrivals on the
U.S. Outer
Continental
Shelf.
Rep. Elijah E. Cummings and Rep.  June 17, 2010.....  Both Congressmen
Frank A. LoBiondo.                                    engaged RDML Cook
in a discussion
regarding OCS
Notices of
Arrival during
the hearing held
this date.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mr. Landry. The chair now recognizes the Honorable Don
Young.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is such an honor to
see you sitting there. I think you have probably inquired in my
main interest.
Where did this regulation proposal come from, as far as the
ships that go across 4 and 5 different--14 different plats?
Whose bright idea was it?
Admiral Cook. Well, Congressman, I will just say that it is
rooted--the reason for the rule is rooted back in the SAFE Port
Act and a requirement to align----
Mr. Young. I wrote that rule. I was chairman of this
committee, and that was to be applied only to foreign vessels
that are in ports, never to the oil industry, the crew vessels,
et cetera. Now, where did it come from?
Admiral Cook. In trying to align it with the notice of
arrival requirements that were already standing in our
regulations, which was another part of the task.
Mr. Young. Wait a minute. I am being argumentative right
here, but never in the discussion that we wrote that bill was
it to be applied to cruise ships, et cetera, that were doing
the oil industry's work. Never. Now, if you want to bet on
that, I will bet $1,000 right now. Now, where did it come from?
The Coast Guard is getting like the other agencies now. You
have got these little minions down there doing this type thing.
Now, why was it put in there?
Mr. Lederer. Sir, I can't tell you whose brain it came out
of, but I can tell you that as we sit here today in 2011, and
having talked with OMSA about the impact of it, the Coast Guard
as an entity saw that rulemaking as part of the fabric of our
notice of arrival system across the country, and that was an
area that we thought was a gap that needed filling. And the
SAFE Port Act language urged us to complete the rulemaking.
And, yes, it did say ``foreign vessels,'' but the
rulemaking that we were working on was broader than that and is
based on the Ports Waterways Safety Act, consistent with our
notice of arrival fabric that we have across the country,
because the gulf was a major gap both for maritime security and
for safety.
Mr. Young. If I am not mistaken, you know, you had to go to
the TWIC program, right? Who are you protecting us from? Every
crewman is already cleared by the Coast Guard. I mean, do you
know how hard it is to get a TWIC card?
Mr. Lederer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. Very hard. And you made it harder, especially in
Alaska. Yet now you are going to have a ship that is trying to
do the job.
See, my frustration--and I am a big supporter of the Coast
Guard. I don't believe you should be in this business. I really
don't. You have the TWIC. You have made sure these people can
turn around and get cleared. And now you are imposing, as
agencies have done in this administration, imposing the
restriction on the development of our fossil-fuel industries.
Now, tell me where is the justification for it? I mean, who is
the threat here?
Mr. Lederer. Well, sir, the distinction is to be drawn
between somebody, an individual mariner who holds a TWIC, and
vessels that are operating in the Gulf of Mexico.
Mr. Young. You clear that vessel. You have to clear the
vessel.
Mr. Lederer. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Young. You have to clear the vessel before it sails,
right? But you can't have him clear when he crosses. Like you
say, I am an oil rig, and I need some work right now. I need
somebody to service me right now. He doesn't know that, the guy
running the ship. He has got to notify you 24 hours ahead of
time? How are you going to do that?
Mr. Lederer. Sir, before you came in, we were discussing
with Mr. Landry that question of how do we operationalize it,
and I will defer that back to Admiral Cook. But the notion of
having maritime demand awareness within the gulf to know who is
there who is supposed to be there and who isn't there who isn't
supposed to be there is what we are trying to get at there. And
it is a significant concern. And we can see the kinds of things
that happen in looking at Deepwater Horizon in terms of if an
evildoer was to get to a rig, and I think that is the concept
behind it. And so that is what we are trying to get at.
Mr. Young. Don't say ``try.'' Let us do it, because I don't
want to impose this type of restriction when I am on a rig and
I need help right now, and he owns the ship, and he has to
notify you 24 hours or he could be possibly fined. You see the
ridiculousness of the situation? They are there to service the
rigs.
So I still want to know what brainchild--there is no
pregnancy without somebody being involved. Where did it come
from? I would like to find out--in fact, I will make that an
official request. What brainchild in the Coast Guard did it
come from? Because that shows, for me, a lack of knowledge of
what the industry is doing. That is my concern.
You know, we charge you with search and rescue and drug
interdiction, et cetera, and now you are involved, and I don't
see how you can possibly do it unless you change the
regulation, or the proposed regulation. I don't see how you
have the manpower to do it, especially with this type of budget
we are facing right now. I want you to put money in something
that does the service that is necessary, and I don't believe
this is necessary.
Mr. Chairman, I am over my time right now, but, you know,
just do me a favor, guys. Don't get caught into this bogged-
down EPA, Corps of Engineers, the rest of this. We have got to
get this country back on the role of industrial might again,
and then we are stopped by regulations that do no good for
anybody. You don't need to do that. You are a better agency
than that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Landry. All right. Are there any other further
questions?
I would ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
statement from Horizon Lines. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6528.021

Mr. Landry [continuing]. Before I thank you again, you
know, I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and the
Members for their participation. As you can see, look, I am a
big proponent of the Coast Guard. I think you guys do a
wonderful job. I think you all can do a little bit better of a
job and lead here in Washington and show other agencies how we
can get rid of some of these unnecessary regulations.
And so with that, this subcommittee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

