- STIMULUS STATUS: TWO YEARS AND COUNTING

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STIMULUS STATUS:
TWO YEARS AND COUNTING

=======================================================================

(112-28)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 4, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-184                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Elkins, Arthur A., Jr., Inspector General, Environmental
Protection Agency..............................................     9
Herr, Phillip R., Director, Physical Infrastructure, Government
Accountability Office..........................................     9
Kienitz, Roy, Under Secretary for Policy, Department of
Transportation.................................................     9
Scovel, Calvin L., III, Inspector General, Department of
Transportation.................................................     9
Trimble, David C., Acting Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, Government Accountability Office..................     9

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Brown, Hon. Corrine, of Florida..................................    43
Hirono, Hon. Mazie K., of Hawaii.................................    47

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Elkins, Arthur A., Jr............................................    49
Herr, Phillip R..................................................    64
Kienitz, Roy.....................................................    86
Scovel, Calvin L., III...........................................   106
Trimble, David C.................................................   128

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions:

Elkins, Arthur A., Jr., Inspector General, Environmental
Protection Agency............................................    58
Herr, Phillip R., Director, Physical Infrastructure, Government
Accountability Office, and Trimble, David C., Acting
Director, Natural Resources and Environment, Government
Accountability Office........................................   150
Kienitz, Roy, Under Secretary for Policy, Department of
Transportation...............................................    94
Scovel, Calvin L., III, Inspector General, Department of
Transportation...............................................   120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66154.019

STIMULUS STATUS:

TWO YEARS AND COUNTING

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 4, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John L. Mica
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Mr. Mica. Good morning. I would like to call this hearing
of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee to
order.
The purpose of today's hearing is to review the status of
stimulus legislation. The title is, ``Stimulus Status: Two
Years and Counting.'' And today we will have an opportunity to
hear from some of the officials who have performed an audit,
have reviewed the work performed under the stimulus program.
And we have had the General Accounting Office, the Department
of Transportation, the inspector general of DOT, IG, the
Environmental Protection--inspector of EPA, and others who have
looked at the implementation of the American Recovery and
Investment Act. And we will hear from them as our witnesses
today.
This hearing is a continuation of a series that began under
the leadership of our former chair, and we have attempted to be
diligent in our oversight responsibilities to review the
progress of that legislation and efforts to improve the economy
and create jobs in a very difficult time in our economy.
The order of business this morning is we will start with--I
will give an opening statement, then I will recognize our
Ranking Member, Mr. Rahall. We will turn to other Members and
allow them the opportunity for comments this morning, and then
we will turn to our witnesses. And I appreciate, again, their
participation and contribution to this important review.
Well, let me say that I probably couldn't be more
frustrated over anything than the situation we find ourselves
in right now with the economy of the United States. There are
still millions of people unemployed. The unemployment level is
at record levels. We are 2 years now into the economic
downturn, and we are a little over 2 years into having in place
the American Recovery Act, known as the Stimulus Bill. And
again, I just could not be more frustrated by the results that
I see.
To put this in perspective, I spoke to a group just an hour
or so ago, and we were talking about stimulus. And I reminded
them that the total stimulus package was $787 billion. And I
think that has been even re-evaluated to up over $800 billion.
The current debt that we find ourselves in in just the last 24
to 30 months is some $5.3 trillion. And still we have a
stagnating economy. We have seen mediocre results from
government attempts to improve the economy. And unfortunately,
the stimulus has not been that effective, particularly in the
small realm in which we were provided funds and authorization.
Again, to put this into perspective, $787 billion in
stimulus money--Mr. Oberstar and I were asked to come back in
December before we drafted--in the January timeframe--stimulus
legislation, and put together a package for infrastructure. At
that time we were told the total stimulus package would be some
$250 billion to $300 billion. That would be for the entire
stimulus package that Congress was to consider. We worked under
the assumption that 50 percent of that $250 billion to $300
billion total package--50 percent--would be infrastructure.
What happened is now history. And you know that only $63
billion ended up in the account that we are responsible for,
infrastructure--not even all of it--in our realm of
responsibility. About $48 billion of the $63 billion went to
the Department of Transportation. And we have monitored the
progress, periodically, of those funds.
What an incredible disaster, to spend $787 billion, have
$63 billion for infrastructure, of which today we will hear
reports that still a good deal of that money is still not out.
Much of it is in the Treasury. Many of the jobs that were
created were very temporary jobs, and very few people had long-
term employment as a result of that effort. I can't think of
anything that is more frustrating.
When you stop and think of the enormity of the dollars that
were spent, $787 billion, I just saw an account to rebuild the
entire northeast corridor that was hit by unprecedented tsunami
and natural disaster in Japan. The entire amount to rebuild
that is $230 billion. Put this in perspective.
So, we spent the money to underwrite unemployment. We spent
the money to underwrite some States. We spent the money on a
whole array of social programs, and we spent very little money
on infrastructure--which actually, for every billion dollars,
we are told, in appropriate infrastructure spending you get
25,000 to 35,000 jobs. $787 billion. And then we get back down
to our $63 billion, and how little of that actually got out in
a hurry.
So, I cannot tell you how frustrated I am, and particularly
in the construction area. We are running 20 percent,
nationally, in unemployment and construction. And almost every
one of these jobs, if the money had been properly expended, and
an appropriate amount for infrastructure, would be putting
people to work in the most hard-hit area.
This will go down in history as one of the greatest
failures of a government program to stimulate the economy that
mankind has ever created. So I cannot tell you how frustrated I
am. I know Mr. Oberstar was frustrated when we got whacked to
$63 billion. It was a very sad day for the American people.
Lesson learned, in closing. Even if you have the money, you
have got to make certain that you have an expedited means of
getting that money out. And it is my hope in the successor to
TEA-LU that we can expedite the process. I stood on the floor
of the House of Representatives and begged them to double the
money for infrastructure, and then condense the amount of time
to get the projects out. I think I had 23 or 24 votes from the
Democrat side of the aisle, but we failed then. We cannot fail
again.
This is a very expensive--almost $1 trillion--lesson that
we should learn from the failure of what has taken place here.
Now, I know there are many temporary jobs. So we had two
failures. We had, first, the Stimulus Bill for infrastructure
and we couldn't get the money out in a timely fashion; and
secondly, not passing a long-term transportation bill. I know
Mr. Rahall, the Ranking Member, and both sides of the aisle are
committed to a 6-year bill. If we had done a 6-year bill, fully
funded at the level Mr. Oberstar and I had committed to, we
would have millions and millions of people working. If we had
stimulus money to properly direct it and then expedite it to
get out for good infrastructure projects, we would have
millions more working. We wouldn't find ourselves in the
situation that we are in today.
So, I cannot be more disappointed. You stop and think about
this. I go back to the district--I know you have, too--and you
cannot help but meet people who have lost their homes, their
jobs, their savings. And I think so much of that could have
been avoided if Congress had done the right thing.
But again, historically, people will look back on the
incredible amount of money that was spent, thinking that much
of this was supposed to be directed towards infrastructure, and
it was only a very minuscule amount. And now we see the results
of that.
And then, finally, I do want to look at some of the
specific transportation money on rail, and how that was
expended, and the failure we had in that area, because I am a
strong advocate of mass and fixed transportation and high-speed
rail, and we had a very dismal start to that program, which is
also a substantial part of that stimulus transportation
dollars, even though they were small dollars. That did not move
forward in a successful manner, and has set us back in that
regard.
So, not here to pick on anybody today. We want to get an
honest assessment. But I couldn't be more frustrated in not
having a better success, both in the amount of money, getting
the money out, and better infrastructure projects to build this
country's crumbling infrastructure.
So, with that opening statement, pleased to yield to the
very capable, honorable, distinguished gentleman who had--what
did you have, the Vice President in your district Monday?
Mr. Rahall. Just the Secretary of Transportation.
Mr. Mica. Oh, Secretary of Transportation.
Mr. Rahall. Yes.
Mr. Mica. That's right.
Mr. Rahall. More important.
Mr. Mica. That's right, more important.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mica. And we had a great discussion with the Secretary
of Transportation--and hosted very generously by the
President--on Monday night, a very productive session with some
of the Senate leadership and----
Mr. Rahall. Bipartisan.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Rahall continues to do an outstanding job in
trying to move us forward in a positive direction on
infrastructure. So, pleased to yield to him.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
those kind words. And, believe you me, it is mutual. And I
salute your leadership of this committee, as well.
Listening to your opening statement, there is a lot of
which I totally agree with you. There are other points that I
disagree that will come out during today's hearing, I am sure.
But I know that this is a very important hearing to discuss the
millions of American jobs that have either been created or
saved--or saved--as a result of the Recovery Act.
This hearing is billed as an opportunity to examine
oversight lapses of the Recovery Act. And I certainly want to
remind my good friends on the other side of the aisle,
especially those 19 new members of this committee, that this is
not the first such oversight hearing, that we did have about
18--no, 19--oversight hearings in the last Congress by this
committee on the Recovery Act alone. So we have been very
studious in our responsibilities to conduct oversight, and you
are continuing that today, Mr. Chairman, and I salute you for
it.
Mr. Mica. I won't do 18, though.
Mr. Rahall. Oh, you won't do 18? Oh, Chairman Oberstar
would hate to hear that.
On the other hand, probably the other things that we have
spent more time on this Congress--not this committee, and I
stress, and not this chairman, I stress--but the other things,
as a body, that we spent more time on in this Congress is
whether or not we are going to end Medicare as we know it,
whether we are going to continue the ill-conceived witch hunt
for President Obama's birth certificate, or whether we are
going to talk about the need for creating jobs while bringing a
budget to the floor that destroys hundreds of thousands of
transportation jobs in America, jobs lost in every single State
of the Union.
So, I am proud of this committee, of its chairman, and of
the oversight work that we have conducted. And I commend the
chairman for his extensive Recovery Act oversight work,
initiated, as I have said, in the previous Congress under our
distinguished Chairman, Mr. Oberstar. And we will have to go
quite a bit to keep pace with him, but I understand you won't
do that.
Whether measured by the millions of American jobs created
or saved, the half-billion dollars in unemployment benefits
that have been avoided, or the tremendous progress that has
been made to repair and rebuild our crumbling infrastructure,
the transportation and infrastructure investments provided by
the Recovery Act have been a success. It has helped stem the
tide of job losses from the worst economic crisis facing our
Nation since the Great Depression. These are investments in
America's future. They are creating economic opportunities for
us today.
The Recovery Act did provide some $64 billion for
transportation and infrastructure needs coming within this
committee's jurisdiction. Federal agencies, States, and their
local partners have obligated $60.7 billion for 19,784
transportation and other infrastructure projects, representing
about 95 percent of the funds available.
Across the Nation, work has begun on nearly all of these
projects, producing badly needed family-wage jobs today. Direct
job creation from these projects has resulted in paychecks for
thousands of Americans, which in turn prevents the need for
those Americans to collect unemployment checks and instead
allows them to pay taxes.
For example, direct job creation from highway projects
alone has resulted in payroll expenditures of $2.8 billion. And
using this data we can calculate that $543 million in
unemployment checks have been avoided as a result of this
direct job creation. And, furthermore, these direct jobs have
caused nearly $571 million to be paid in Federal taxes.
Is the unemployment rate still too high? Absolutely. Do we
have more work to do to create more American jobs? Absolutely.
But would we be worse off today without the Recovery Act?
Absolutely.
I will close by thanking today's witnesses. I look forward
to hearing their testimony and learning more about how we can
build upon the success of the Recovery Act and continue to put
our Americans back to work. We must grow past ideological
differences and work together to keep America's economy on the
road to recovery. The price of not investing in America's
future is simply too high.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. I thank you. Other Members seek recognition? Ms.
Norton?
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for
continuing these hearings. I don't know, you might even agree
that we ought to, in memory of a man who spent so much of his
life here, call these--dedicate these hearings to Jim Oberstar.
But you were his good partner for many years, and it is very
important that we continue to do the kind of oversight you are
doing today.
I do want to say that everyone shares your frustration with
the fact that the stimulus package didn't cure all of the
recession. I am not sure many of us thought it would. The
majority, of course, took power here in the House on the theme
of jobs. So I just want to remind us that whatever the Stimulus
Bill did or did not do, cutting Federal programs that mostly go
to the States does not stimulate jobs. And I do believe that it
has something to do, to say the very least, with why States are
in the midst of collapsing now.
I agree with the chairman that we wanted more of the money
to go to infrastructure. We were competing with our own States.
And I am not sure there is a single Member of this committee or
of the Congress who would have cut off his own State from some
of the funds that came there. And what we see now is the
collapse of the States.
The chairman said that many of these jobs were temporary. I
believe the record should be corrected in that regard, because,
according to the CBO, which is the only objective source we
have, the Recovery Act increased the number of Americans
employed by between 1.3 million and 3.5 million, compared with
what would have occurred, had Congress--and increased the
number of full-time equivalent jobs by 1.8 million to 5
million, compared with what would have occurred had Congress
not passed the Recovery Act. So, whatever you think of the
Recovery Act, there is no case to be made that we would have
been better off without out.
Finally, I would like to say that I think that the
chairman's announcement before we left, that he intends to
bring a surface transportation bill to the floor, is the best
hope for new infrastructure money, and it does provide an
opportunity for both sides to work together as we have always
done so amicably in this committee.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Other Members that seek recognition?
Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. Yes, Mr. Mica. And Ranking Member, thank you.
You know what? I am going to be very brief, I am going to
put my statement in the record. But I just want to be clear
that you can put lipstick on a pig, it is still a pig. And the
fact is in December we spent $700 billion in tax cuts for the
millionaires and billionaires. So, I have a problem--and to me
it was reverse Robin Hood, robbing from the poor and working
people to give tax breaks to the rich.
So, I wanted 100 percent of the tax cuts to go into
infrastructure and transportation. But you know we live in a
climate that you have to get 218 votes in the House and 60
votes in the Senate, and that was the problem in trying to make
sure that we got as much as we can into transportation. And we
know for every billion dollars we spend it generates 44,000
permanent jobs.
And to say that they are temporary jobs, let me tell you
something. People who cannot pay their foreclosure, cannot pay
their mortgage, they would welcome temporary jobs or any other
kind of jobs. And in Florida we could have gotten close to $3
billion for high-speed rail, and that would have generated over
60,000 jobs. All of them would not have been permanent jobs,
but they were good-paying jobs.
And you mentioned earlier about the Federal Railroad
Administration, and how they issued the dollars. Let's be clear
that no State received a dime that they did not request, and
the FRA set up a committee that reviewed all of the
applications. And I was very grateful--and you also--that
Florida received such a large percentage of it. But clearly
there is a great interest in rail. I understand that we
received over 90 applications for a total of $10 billion from
24 States and Amtrak for the money that Florida has turned
back.
So, you know, we have some differences of opinions on how
we should spend taxpayers' dollars to generate the economy. We,
of course, are in a tank, and we need to do all we can. And we
both agree that infrastructure investment is the best way to go
about it. So, I am looking forward to the future dialogue, as
we move forward.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentlelady. As an addendum to my
opening statement, I just--I should have said this, but I feel
too that the thing that has actually motivated any slight
increase in economic activity is some definition of tax policy
which the Congress did do, and which is now taking effect and
has given some stability and ability for people who have the
funds to employ to move forward on some sort of defined----
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Mica. Yes, just quickly.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Mica. Yes.
Ms. Brown. And that is where we disagree.
Mr. Mica. Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am. OK, thank you. Ms.
Richardson, you are recognized.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rahall, and our witnesses who are here to testify with us
today.
As I watched the rollout of the stimulus program, I was
encouraged when I would watch the Sunday morning programs. And
often times, when people would reference how the stimulus
dollars were used, they would very often times refer to the
transportation section. So, although we would have all liked to
have seen it been done better--and maybe never having had to
have done it at all--I would say, though, of everything that
was done, I think this was the most successful part of the
program.
In particular, though, I would like to point out a couple
things. During this recession, the construction section in
particular was hard hit, with nearly losing 2 million jobs.
Unemployment rates in this sector were higher than in any other
sector, even with all the funds we have subsequently invested.
The unemployment rate in this sector still remains at 20
percent. And so, what I would urge is not only as we continue
to fund the projects and get the projects completed, but we
work together on this committee to figure out how to get more
funds there, so we can continue this progress.
The transportation sector has been particularly effective
in getting money out of the door, and getting people back to
work. Federal agencies, State and local partners, have
obligated $60.7 billion for nearly 20,000 projects. That is
amazing. Representing 95 percent of the total transportation
funds. Almost 20 percent of these funds have gone to projects
that have already been completed.
I can submit for the record that in every single city that
I represent, we currently have a project. In Compton, at 205
South Willow Brook, also in Signal Hill, at 2175 Cherry Avenue,
at 1963 East Anaheim in Long Beach, and 701 East Carson Street
in Carson.
So, when we consider the success of this program, certainly
we would like to do better. But I can tell you for the people
in my district who are finally seeing projects come to
fruition, this has been a benefit.
I would like to stress the importance, though, as we move
forward, for the witnesses here, the importance of unbundling
contracts, and to expand the reach of our funds beyond the
standard companies that traditionally receive the funds. I
remember when we took those tough votes. And one of the reasons
why we took it was for the people who were currently not
working, that they were going to have an opportunity. And,
unfortunately, I think we did fall short in that area.
Companies, businesses that were already in the queue, already
working with State and local governments, they were able to
save their jobs. But what new jobs did we create? I think that
debate is still open.
I would also urge that we would continue, as we move
forward, to use project or labor agreements that would
facilitate local hiring and fair wage practices.
Finally, I want to talk a little bit about the information,
the data that we have. And I want to join with Mr. Rahall that
in the subsequent hearings that we had over the last 2 years,
my only issue with this document is that it does not
differentiate--and it is my understanding when the rules were
sent out for the money it did not differentiate--between save
jobs and new jobs. And I think, for that, we are unable to
communicate to the American public how well we really did
fulfill the objective. And that is a very critical point for
me.
But I thank all the witnesses for being here. I thank you
for your work. And we look forward to your testimony. I yield
back.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Pleased to recognize the gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for being
here today, and thank you for having this meeting.
I certainly agree with you that we needed a lot more money
for infrastructure. I would like to have seen a greater amount,
because I certainly see in my district--I come from a district
that has a very old infrastructure--I see what this money has
done in some of this, whether it was paving a road, whether it
was building a bridge.
But when you look at the situation the way it was, we were
losing millions of jobs a month. The financial sector was ready
to crumble. Everything around us was crumbling. So we moved on
a stimulus. And I agree with my colleague, Laura Richardson.
The most successful part of this stimulus has been the
infrastructure money. And, unfortunately, we just didn't put
enough money in there.
So, we have created a ton of jobs at a time where we were
losing millions of jobs a month. And I wish that we are able to
do the same thing in the upcoming ratification of the
transportation bill. Hopefully we can put a lot of money--put
people to work.
So, I thank the chairman for holding this meeting, and I
yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Any other Members seek recognition?
Yes, Ms. Hirono?
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Rahall and our witnesses today.
There is no question that the Stimulus Act has been good
for Hawaii. The members of this committee in particular know
the importance of infrastructure spending. It's job creation,
long-term benefits. And the chairman's leadership and Ranking
Member Rahall's leadership, as we move forward with the surface
transportation bill, will be very critical. And I thank them
for that leadership.
I just want to focus a little bit on Hawaii, and what the
Stimulus Act did for Hawaii. The Council of Economic Advisors
said that 13,000 jobs were retained or created in Hawaii, and
over $125 million went to highway infrastructure funding, and
some $40 million has been obligated, $70 million went directly
to paychecks for Hawaii workers and their families.
And in Hawaii they created a very transparent way of
tracking this money, the recovery money. They created a
recovery website. There is an office of economic reinvestment
and recovery. And they established a legislative oversight
committee. And, of course, the work o this committee, the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, is a model of
congressional oversight over the Recovery Act funding.
I also want to mention that the State of Hawaii received
$24.5 million in TIGER transportation investment, generating
economic recovery money. And this went to the rehabilitation
and construction of Pier 29 in Honolulu Harbor, which is the
15th busiest port in the country. So when Secretary LaHood was
visiting Hawaii a little while ago, he was particularly
interested in seeing Recovery Act projects, and he--we took him
to see the pier, and what was happening there.
So, once again, it is of critical importance that we
continue to support infrastructure investment. All of us on
this committee know that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And thank all the Members who have
provided opening statements. And there being no further opening
statements, let us turn now to our witnesses. And we have a
number of witnesses. I will introduce them briefly: Calvin
Scovel, inspector general of the Department of Transportation;
Arthur Elkins, inspector general of EPA; Phillip Herr and David
Trimble, who is accompanied by Susan Flemming of the General
Accounting Office; and Roy Kienitz, who is with the Department
of Transportation as under secretary for policy.
So, we welcome our witnesses. And, as is normal, we--if you
have a lengthy statement, it can be submitted to the record.
And we hope you can summarize in approximately 5 minutes.
We will go through all the witnesses, and then we will turn
to questions. So let me first welcome the inspector general
back, Calvin Scovel, with the Department of Transportation.
Welcome, sir, and you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF CALVIN L. SCOVEL III, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION; ARTHUR A. ELKINS, JR., INSPECTOR
GENERAL, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; PHILLIP R. HERR,
DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE; DAVID C. TRIMBLE, ACTING DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES
AND ENVIRONMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; ROY KIENITZ,
UNDER SECRETARY FOR POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Scovel. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Rahall, members
of the committee, thank you for inviting me here today to
discuss DOT's ARRA spending.
As you know, ARRA designated $48 billion for new and
existing DOT programs to create and save jobs, invest in long-
term growth, and improve the Nation's Transportation system.
DOT has been working hard to administer the large infusion of
funds and comply with ARRA requirements. However, more
difficult work lies ahead, as a significant portion of ARRA
funds remains to be spent.
Our completed and ongoing ARRA audits point to challenges
DOT must address as it moves forward, ensuring transparency on
job reporting, strengthening project and financial oversight,
maintaining measures to combat fraud, waste, and abuse, and
finally, effectively implementing its new TIGER and high-speed
rail programs. Failure to address these challenges could have
significant cost and schedule implications in the future.
Our ongoing audit of FAA's jobs reporting found problems in
the accuracy of the data, such as one airport that received
funds through FAA's $1.1 billion airport improvement program,
reporting over 100,000 more job hours than actually occurred.
This work also identified weaknesses that relate to DOT's
process for estimating and reporting jobs information to
Congress under section 1201. DOT did not report an estimate of
indirect jobs or how it calculated the total number of jobs
funded. Providing this information would enhance transparency,
and more fully satisfy congressional requirements.
Strengthening DOT's project and financial oversight is also
important. The Federal Highway Administration, which accounts
for more than half of DOT's recovery budget, is taking action
to address weaknesses we identified in its national review
teams, actions that should help FHWA remove known
vulnerabilities, identify emerging risks, and assess States'
corrective measures.
FHWA is also updating its regulations to help ensure States
conduct value engineering studies to objectively review design
alternatives on highway and bridge projects.
FHWA has other opportunities to improve project
performance. It has acknowledged the risks associated with
local public agencies, and our ongoing work indicates that some
LPA projects continue to fall short in complying with Federal
requirements for quality assurance and processing of contract
changes.
Promoting fuller competition could also help achieve cost
savings in FHWA's ARRA-funded contracts, as well as its other
Federal aid contracts.
Ensuring rigorous financial oversight of grantees has also
been a challenge for the Department. In a review of AIP
payments commissioned by FAA, consultants determined that 14 of
24 airports did not have adequate support to justify their ARRA
payment requests, consistent with findings we reported on FAA's
oversight of non-ARRA-funded AIP grants.
Across the Department, full compliance with OMB's single
audit requirements for ensuring grantees implement corrective
action plans would help prevent improper payments and provide
timely action on questioned costs. Over the past year, we have
issued 66 single-audit action memos on deficiencies in
grantees' oversight of ARRA funds. Our ongoing work identified
16 questioned cost findings, totaling $3.7 million, with final
decisions or repayments pending for an average of 20 months.
The surge in ARRA funding and construction activity also
demands continued aggressive pursuit of counterfraud efforts.
As of March 2011 we have 51 open ARRA investigations, 45 of
which the Department of Justice is reviewing for potential
prosecution. One of the strongest deterrents against contract
fraud is DOT's ability to make timely suspension and debarment
decisions. However, last year we reported that many of the
Department's S&D decisions had been pending for a year or
longer. DOT has issued a revised S&D policy, but sustained
focus is needed to ensure S&D decisions are timely, and prevent
unethical parties from bidding for and receiving contracts.
Tackling all the challenges I have outlined will be
critical for DOT to effectively implement its TIGER and high-
speed rail programs. Standing up these programs requires direct
oversight of large infrastructure projects, a role OST and FRA
have not previously performed. Based on our work to date, OST
is on track to meet its ARRA-required deadline to fully
obligate funds for all TIGER contracts. However, effective
oversight and management of the TIGER program will be highly
dependent on OST's coordination with the operating
administration administering those TIGER grants.
Our high-speed rail work indicates that FRA has not issued
sufficient guidance for forecasting benefits, and establishing
access agreements between States and the freight railroads.
In addition, FRA has yet to finalize policies and
procedures that would ensure a core set of grant management
responsibilities are carried out. With the majority of program
implementation and construction ahead, FRA has an opportunity
and an obligation to build in oversight controls before a
significant amount of ARRA funding is spent. We will continue
to assist the Department in its efforts to ensure all ARRA
funds are spent wisely, and we remain committed to promptly
notifying Congress and DOT of actions needed to achieve ARRA
goals.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would
be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the
committee may have.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, and we will hold those questions until
we have heard from the other panelists. And next I recognize
Arthur Elkins, inspector general of EPA.
Welcome. You are recognized, sir.
Mr. Elkins. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Mica, Ranking
Member Rahall, and members of the committee. I am Arthur
Elkins, Jr., EPA Inspector General. I am pleased to appear
before you today for the first time since becoming IG in June
2010 to discuss our Recovery Act activities.
The Act was intended to create jobs, stimulate economic
recovery as quickly as possible, and invest in infrastructure.
The Act's purpose, as it applies to EPA, is to promote economic
recovery by creating jobs, while also promoting a healthier
environment. Toward that end, EPA received over $7 billion for
6 EPA programs, $6 billion of which went to the Clean Water and
Drinking Water State Revolving Funds.
EPA has some noteworthy accomplishments. For example, EPA
has obligated over 99 percent of its Recovery Act funds. All of
its State Revolving Funds awarded to States were under contract
or construction by the statutory deadline. We expressed
concerns about EPA being able to meet this deadline. And, to
their credit, they accomplished this task.
Also, the OIG has detected limited fraud of EPA funds so
far. Recipient reporting requirements and greater transparency
seem to have made a positive impact. However, experience shows
that complex fraud schemes take time to surface, so sustained
vigilance is necessary.
While EPA quickly obligated its Recovery Act money, we have
seen some implementation issues. I would like to highlight
three issues this morning.
First, EPA is unable to assess the overall impact of its
Recovery Act funds on disadvantaged or environmental justice
communities. The goals of the Recovery Act, which, as you know,
is to create and retain jobs, promote economic recovery, and
assist those most impacted by the recession, are outside of
EPA's mission to protect human health and the environment. The
Act's intended results are not traditionally tracked by EPA.
As a result, our work shows that EPA has had difficulty in
identifying and targeting economically disadvantaged
communities. Their effort was hindered by the absence of
definitions, data, and measures. Multiple constraints limited
EPA's ability to target funds to preserve and create jobs, as
well as reach those most impacted by the recession.
Of note was the ``shovel-ready'' requirement and the short
timeframes to allocate funds. EPA programs require all
applicants to meet program criteria. For water and wastewater
projects, applicants had to demonstrate some preparedness,
including completion of design plans and permitting processes.
However, communities most in need often lacked the financial
resources to develop the necessary design plans or to prepare
applications. Those communities who did not have the necessary
materials prepared in advance were unable to compete for funds.
In addition, among the Recovery Act-funded programs at EPA,
States made the funding decisions for 86 percent of the funds.
Whether and how socioeconomic conditions influence project
selection was at their discretion. The result was that EPA's
ability to target economically disadvantaged areas that have
environmental needs was adversely impacted.
Second, EPA did not always develop clear, comprehensive,
and timely guidance for recipients. One example was how to
determine the eligibility of green reserve projects.
Specifically, EPA did not provide guidance on how to solicit
and select green projects until after many States had finished
doing so. Moreover, EPA's guidance and subsequent updates have
not addressed important aspects of project selection. As a
result, EPA could not provide a reasonable assurance that its
green reserve projects will meet Congress' objectives.
Finally, EPA should ensure that it has sufficient contracts
and grants staff to perform both Recovery Act and non-Recovery
Act activities. While EPA made the Recovery Act a top priority
by shifting its existing contract and grant administration
staff to those activities, the process was not always based on
workforce analyses of the actual resources needed. As a result,
this left less time for staff to focus on non-Recovery Act
administration, monitoring, and oversight. This leaves EPA
contracts and grants susceptible to undetected errors.
In closing, while we have noted implementation issues, we
have not seen significant problems with Recovery Act funds at
EPA so far. However, I must stress that the story is still
unfolding. As I mentioned earlier, complex fraud schemes often
take time to surface so EPA must not take its eye off the ball.
Also, we have concerns that there may be insufficient EPA
oversight to ensure that projects are completed on time, and
environmental objectives achieved. EPA's oversight funds must
be obligated by the end of fiscal year 2011, yet many Recovery
Act projects will not be completed by that date.
The OIG will continue to monitor and assess EPA's Recovery
Act activities in these and other areas. I want to thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would be
pleased to answer any questions the committee may have. Thank
you.
Mr. Mica. Again, we will defer for questions.
And I will recognize first Phillip Herr, and then we will
go to David Trimble.
Mr. Herr. Thank you. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Rahall,
and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss GAO's work on Recovery Act transportation programs.
Drawing on prior and ongoing work, I will discuss the status,
use, outcomes, and lessons learned across several programs,
including the TIGER and high-speed rail efforts.
In terms of funding status, of the $48 billion available
for transportation programs, about 95 percent has been
obligated for over 15,000 projects. Expenditures total about
$26 billion, about 59 percent of available funds.
Highway funds have been primarily used for pavement
improvement, and transit funds have been used to upgrade
facilities and purchase new vehicles. Recovery Act
transportation projects are reported to have supported about
50,000 full-time equivalent jobs from October through December
of 2010. Highway projects accounted for approximately two-
thirds of these jobs, with transit and other projects making up
the rest.
We recommended that DOT determine the data needed to assess
Recovery Act transportation impacts, but it has not committed
to doing so. We continue to believe that effort is important.
Several lessons learned from Recovery Act programs may be
relevant to reauthorization decisions. States were required to
certify they would maintain planned transportation spending
from February 2009 through September 2010, referred to as
``maintenance of effort'' in the law. Available data indicate
that 21 States did not meet planned spending levels during this
period. This provision was also administratively challenging,
with seven iterations of DOT guidance being issued to States.
Federal and State officials stated that more flexibility is
needed to implement this provision, in light of unexpected
changes in economic conditions. Going forward, we believe DOT
is well-positioned to understand how this provision could be
improved and implemented.
Another unique feature of the Recovery Act was targeting
economically distressed areas. This also proved challenging due
to variation in how some States prioritize projects. DOT also
had ongoing challenges maintaining data on this aspect of the
Recovery Act, and we are continuing to monitor that.
The high-speed rail and TIGER programs represented
important steps toward investing in projects of regional and
national significance through merit-based competitive
processes, and using cost benefit analysis to inform decisions.
While generally following recommended grantmaking practices,
both could have better documented award decisions. In our view,
the absence of documentation can give rise to challenges to the
decisions, making DOT vulnerable to criticism that projects
were selected for reasons other than merit.
Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Rahall, and members of the
committee, this concludes my statement, and I am pleased to
answer questions. And my colleague, Susan Flemming, is here to
answer questions on GAO's high-speed rail work as well, should
those arise.
Mr. Mica. We will hear from Mr. Trimble next.
Mr. Trimble. I am pleased to be here today to discuss our
work examining States' use of Recovery Act funds for clean
water projects. My statement is based on GAO's ongoing work
examining the Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving
Fund programs.
As part of this review, we examined the national data, as
well as specific implementation issues in nine States.
Nationally, all of the Recovery Act SRF funding has been
awarded and obligated, and almost 80 percent has been drawn
down by the States. This money was used to address water
quality problems, and help fund nearly 1,900 clean water
projects, with roughly one-quarter of these classified as
green.
Clean water projects included secondary and advance
treatment facilities, storm and sanitary sewers, and projects
intended to address nonpoint source pollution. About three-
quarters of clean water Recovery Act funds were provided as
grants or other subsidies. As projects are completed and funds
spent, the number of full-time equivalent jobs has begun to
decline from their peak last summer of over 9,000 to just over
4,000 for the quarter closing in March.
For the nine States in our current review, the States told
us that about 20 percent of their clean water SRF funds went to
projects that served disadvantaged communities, and over 80
percent of this money was provided in the forms of grants or
other subsidies.
State officials did face some challenges in meeting
Recovery Act requirements. Some officials noted that the
requirement to have projects under contract within 1 year, as
well as the requirement for green projects, changed which
projects they funded. While the Buy American and Davis-Bacon
provisions generally did not affect project selection, some
potential sub-recipients declined funding, as they did not want
to meet the requirements, or were concerned the requirements
would increase the project's cost.
Our current work is showing that EPA, EPA IG, and State
program and oversight and audit staffs continue to conduct
oversight, and the EPA has taken action on our recommendation
from last year to improve oversight over Recovery Act funds.
States' experiences implementing the Recovery Act
requirements highlight potential future challenges for the SRF
program, where the green and the additional subsidization
requirement have been continued. Officials in four of the nine
States we examined noted that the 20 percent green target was
difficult to achieve, with one suggesting such goals should be
encouraged, but without a fixed target.
Officials in other States noted that requirements to
provide grants or other subsidies preclude the re-use of this
money in the revolving loan fund, which means that less money
will be available to fund future water infrastructure projects.
The policy tradeoff is that additional subsidization funds
enable but do not require States to give money to disadvantaged
communities, if they choose to do so.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And now we will turn to Under Secretary Kienitz, and I
recognize him.
Thank you.
Mr. Kienitz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rahall, and
members of the committee. Obviously, the staff at DOT from top
to bottom and in every State have spent hundreds of thousands
of hours working on implementation of Recovery Act projects.
And so we are glad to have an opportunity to come talk to you
about what we have been doing. It has been a very big project
for us, and we hope the results have been good.
More than 15,000 transportation projects in all 50 States
have received Recovery Act funding from our agency. And 9,000
of these projects have already been completed. And that ends up
being thousands of new bridges and buses, new runways and
railways serving the traveling public in communities all over
the country.
As of the end of April, DOT has obligated almost 100
percent of funding in most funding categories. Among the
projects funded: for highways we were given $27.6 billion,
that's 13,300 individual projects, including 41,800 miles of
highway receiving improvements and 2,700 individual bridges;
for transit we got $8.8 billion, that's 11,400 buses and vans
that were purchased, and 637 rail vehicles, and more than
10,000 individual other projects for transit; on high-speed
rail we have dedicated funding to 738 miles of new routes.
The TIGER discretionary program mentioned here funded 51
regionally or nationally significant projects for roads, rail,
ports, transit, multimodal and other things. Amtrak, which has
not been mentioned here yet, did get $1.3 billion. They have
worked on 190 miles of track, 10 individual bridges, 79 rail
stations, as well as passenger cars and locomotives.
On the airport side, we did 157 individual runway projects,
25 air traffic control facilities, and many other smaller
projects. And there was even a small shipyards program, where
we purchased cranes, equipment, and machinery for 53 shipyards.
As of the end of January, these projects have provided more
than 280,000 job years of work in the overall economy, creating
both direct transportation jobs, as well as jobs in
manufacturing and supplier industries. For example, hundreds of
workers are expanding Highway 24 in California from six lanes
to eight, to alleviate congestion for the 160,000 commuters
from Contra Costa who come into the Oakland area.
We are expanding Interstate 94 in Wisconsin from six to
eight lanes, from Milwaukee down to the Illinois border. In
Tampa we are linking Interstate 4 with the Lee Roy Selmon
Crosstown Expressway to provide trucks with direct access to
the Port of Tampa without going through downtown, just the kind
of last-mile investment in intermodal transportation that both
transportation experts and the members of this committee have
repeatedly told us need to be a priority.
We have added enough new buses to the Nation's transit
fleet that, if we line them all up, the line would be 40 miles
long. We are restoring the 136-year-old Eads Bridge across the
Mississippi River in St. Louis, 80-year-old subway stations in
Philadelphia, and even the Brooklyn Bridge. Recovery Act
funding has made it possible to repair, restore, and expand our
transportation capacity all across the Nation, and we are
better off, as a result.
While most of the DOT recovery money was distributed to
State and local authorities using existing formulas and
programs in which decisionmaking is devolved to the State and
local level, Congress took some bold steps in the Recovery Act
to go outside of that pattern.
First, Congress enacted a competitive surface
transportation grant program that we have called the TIGER
program to fund innovative projects from across all of DOT's
modes. And Congress chose to add a considerable amount of
funding to the previously authorized high-speed rail and
intercity passenger rail programs.
We are very proud of the partnerships we have created with
State and local communities as we have implemented those two
popular programs, and we are pleased that we were able to use
these programs to introduce the kind of competitive and merit-
based approach to project selection that the President and the
administration have long advocated and that the GAO has
advocated for a long time, as well.
GAO recently published two reports on our Recovery Act
work: one on TIGER and one on high-speed rail. And we are
pleased that they generally found we did a good job in carrying
out the congressional mandate and in running those programs
according to good grantmaking practices. And, in fact, we did
some checking. Since 1970, GAO has issued almost 169,000
individual reports and opinions. And does anyone here know how
many of them use the word ``good'' in the title? Fourteen out
of one hundred sixty-nine thousand, which is less than one in
ten thousand. So we are proud that they were able to say that
we used good grantmaking practices in one of the titles. Though
I suspect, now that I have said this, it will be the last time
that they ever do that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kienitz. But in addition, we have respected
particularly the GAO's work in which they have been saying for
a long time that the outcomes achieved from Federal funding for
transportation could be improved by having the kind of
competitive programs that are embodied in TIGER and high-speed
rail, and that is something that we are very much believers in,
and we have worked very hard to stand those programs up from
nothing.
So, thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
am happy to answer questions.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. I think we have heard from all the
witnesses now, and we will turn to questions. And I have a
couple of questions.
First of all, one of my concerns--well, the stimulus was
intended to provide jobs in economically depressed areas. And I
think that was one of the directives included in the
legislation. And, unfortunately, I have got two charts of some
of the outlays for funds, particularly, I guess, in the TIGER
grants, which was the discretionary funds that DOT gave out.
And we had total, I think, of $2.3 billion given to States.
For example, $171 million went to North Dakota, with an
unemployment rate of 3.6; $225 million went to Nebraska, with
4.2 percent unemployment; $211 million went to South Dakota,
with a 4.9 percent unemployment. And then States like Florida,
we had very high unemployment, and we got zero, I think, on the
first round of TIGER grants.
Did you look at any of this, Mr. Scovel, about the intent
of Congress, and then applying the money to States that had the
greatest unemployment need?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that we did
not. In coordinating our work with that of GAO, we split the
workload so that GAO would function, essentially, on the first
part of implementing the TIGER program, up through the grant
selection decisions.
Mr. Mica. And----
Mr. Scovel. We are looking, in my office, at the management
and oversight implications.
Mr. Mica. Mr. Herr or Mr. Trimble, did you look at the
intent of Congress, and also the expenditure of money in regard
to providing assistance to hard-hit economically depressed
areas?
Mr. Herr. Chairman Mica, in the transportation work we did
look at the focus on projects in economically distressed areas.
As part of the larger body of work we did on transportation,
one of the concerns that we saw was that the tracking system
DOT established had some inaccuracies in it.
Mr. Mica. Had some what?
Mr. Herr. Had some inaccuracies, in terms of how the
projects and EDAs were being identified by the States. But we
were doing that on the broader effort.
Mr. Mica. But nobody really has an analysis of the program
meeting Congress' intent?
Mr. Herr. Well, in terms of the TIGER program specifically,
those grants had been made a little later in the process.
Mr. Mica. But you did not----
Mr. Herr. We did not look specifically at that piece.
Mr. Mica. OK. One of the things you did say was a
significant amount of the DOT money went to paving. I was told
it was about 50 percent or more. Is that correct?
Mr. Herr. It's a little higher than that. Pavement-related
spending is about 70 percent, sir.
Mr. Mica. Oh, it's 70 percent. So--and most of those jobs
would not be permanent jobs, would they?
Mr. Herr. Well, that would be usually a shorter term
process, or projects that could be gotten underway quickly.
That would be correct.
Mr. Mica. Does anyone know--we have different categories of
funds, some expended out of the Treasury. Of the $63 billion--
well, maybe you could take DOT, $48 billion DOT. What
percentage of that has actually been spent out of the Treasury?
Mr. Herr. The data that we have is provided today in my
statement, where you can see the total----
Mr. Mica. Give it to me again.
Mr. Herr. Fifty-nine percent.
Mr. Mica. Fifty-nine percent. So, 40 percent is still in
the Treasury. You said allocation is a higher number. What's
the allocation to date?
Mr. Herr. At this point the total obligated is $45 billion,
or just about 96 percent.
Mr. Mica. Ninety-six percent. Now, one of the things that I
have noticed is there has been--since the program takes so
long, and there are delays in approvals and States run out of
money, there has been a fair amount of reallocation. Do you
have a figure on reallocation?
Mr. Herr. We had data as of last year.
Mr. Mica. I am sorry?
Mr. Herr. We had information that was current as of last
year----
Mr. Mica. I cannot hear two people speaking here, I am
sorry.
Mr. Herr. I can get updated information. We have a report
on the Recovery Act that we are going to be issuing next month,
that could discuss how funds have been reallocated.
Are you specifically asking about money that was moved from
highways to transit?
Mr. Mica. No, just reallocation. Projects went south. Well,
and any money that was moved from accounts. But I am told a
very significant amount of money had to be reallocated. And you
don't have that figure?
Mr. Herr. We had information earlier in our work. There
were a lot of bid savings in contracts. And so, in some cases
there were actually more contracts awarded because of bid
savings.
Mr. Mica. Right, projects came in at lower cost.
Mr. Herr. At lower cost.
Mr. Mica. But that is not what I am talking about. I am
talking about projects going south, or not moving forward, and
then reallocation. You don't have a----
Mr. Herr. My understanding from prior work was it was a
relatively low percentage.
Mr. Mica. That was what?
Mr. Herr. A relatively low percentage.
Mr. Mica. But you do not have an amount----
Mr. Herr. Not today, sir.
Mr. Mica. OK. High-speed rail. Unfortunately--well, I
believe I am the most prominent advocate of high-speed rail in
the Congress. I wrote some of the PRIIA Act provisions for
high-speed rail, some of which were ignored in the stimulus
program.
But I couldn't think of a worse start of any program--you
mentioned high-speed rail--we had sort of a bait and switch
operation that people thought they were getting high-speed
rail. The governor of, what is it, Ohio--that project was 39
miles an hour, huge expenditure of funds. You could have taken
a bus and gotten there faster, even after spending the money
that Governor Kasich sent back. The system, that 39 miles an
hour is not high speed. Or even if it had gotten up to 50 miles
an hour is not high speed. That is correct. Isn't it, Mr. Herr?
Mr. Herr. That would be my understanding.
Mr. Mica. Yes. And then the route from Chicago to
Wisconsin, that was a 78 or 80 miles an hour. That was not
high-speed rail, either, was it, that came back?
Mr. Herr. That would be my understanding.
Mr. Mica. Yes. And the Florida project was 84 miles in
length, and it took 1 hour to go the 84 miles. How fast would
that be going, average miles per hour, Mr. Herr?
Mr. Herr. Doing the math in my head, somewhere under 60.
Mr. Mica. That would be 84 miles an hour, sir.
Mr. Herr. Oh, I----
Mr. Mica. Got to work with--we have definitely got to work
with you, sir.
Mr. Herr. Well, I misunderstood your question.
Mr. Mica. In fact, we may have to recalculate all the
information he gave us, on that basis.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mica. But that was not a high-speed rail project,
either. And being a strong advocate, again, it was $8 billion
of stimulus money, plus another $2.5 billion through a regular
appropriation we worked on with Mr. Oberstar.
And the only potential now we have of high speed--and,
unfortunately, the California project is between Fresno and
Bakersfield, there is mostly farmland in between, and very
little population to support a high-speed rail system. We will
not see high-speed rail in any of our corridors. Is that
correct, Mr. Herr? Do you know? Or Mr. Kienitz, do you want
to----
Mr. Kienitz. I would be happy to respond to that line of
argument. I would say that the congressional definition of
high-speed rail----
Mr. Mica. Is 110 miles an hour.
Mr. Kienitz. Is achieving peak speed----
Mr. Mica. That was watered down for Amtrak, because the
international one is 120. But most high-speed rail systems are
operating at 150, and some are operating at 180 miles an hour.
Mr. Kienitz. And I have ridden them, and they are
impressive. The Wisconsin----
Mr. Mica. But we won't be riding one in the United States.
Mr. Kienitz. I have--I am confident----
Mr. Mica. Between any metropolitan areas.
Mr. Kienitz. I am confident----
Mr. Mica. With any significant population.
Mr. Kienitz. I am confident. I have more confidence than
you, perhaps.
The Wisconsin segment you mentioned does peak at 110 miles
an hour. And so, as a legal matter, it is called high-speed
rail. I think we all wish it were faster.
Mr. Mica. Well, Florida would have gotten up to 150 miles
an hour.
Mr. Kienitz. Right.
Mr. Mica. In a peak. But so does Acela, it gets to 150
miles an hour on the Northeast Corridor. But its average speed
is around 80 miles an hour in the southern half, and 65 miles
an hour from New York to Boston.
And I am not trying to bust your chops. I spent time with
the Secretary, Mr. Rahall and myself, I spent a lot of time
this past weekend with the Vice President, and will continue. I
want to see a success. I compliment the administration for
finally--what, a month ago--designating--didn't you designate
the Northeast Corridor finally as a high-speed corridor
eligible for some Federal assistance?
Mr. Kienitz. And we are hoping that bears fruit soon.
Mr. Mica. Well, when we have that announcement--when is the
fruit announcement coming?
Mr. Kienitz. Soon.
Mr. Mica. Anything you can tell the committee?
Mr. Kienitz. Sadly, I would get in big trouble if I said--
--
Mr. Mica. But is it a week, 2 weeks, a month, a year? I
mean my term ends next November, and----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kienitz. It is not a year. I will give you that. No, we
have placed a high priority on getting this money out quickly.
So the process by which we solicited applications and are
making decisions for this will be faster than any other process
that we have done.
Mr. Mica. So within the next 30 days you would anticipate
that you would have some announcements?
Mr. Kienitz. You said it, not me.
Mr. Mica. Let me yield. Maybe you could get more out of
him, Mr. Rahall.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rahall. Let me ask Mr. Kienitz of DOT and Mr. Herr of
the GAO, putting in context that this is the first time DOT
ever had a plan to award and oversee two discretionary grant
programs of this size, the TIGER and the high-speed rail, are
you pleased with the results of GAO's audits?
Mr. Herr. Mr. Rahall, our work showed that DOT did a good
job of setting up criteria. And on the technical review side
they established panels that did their due diligence.
One of the concerns that we had about how TIGER came out
was it was difficult for us to understand the basis for the
final decisions, and the documentation for those. Our
recommendation to DOT is to improve the documentation of major
decisions throughout the process. And I was very pleased to see
in Mr. Kienitz's statement today that DOT has agreed to move
forward with that recommendation.
Mr. Kienitz. Yes, the nature of the GAO process is very
long and involved. We received in draft form a recommendation
that we could have done a better job documenting the review
team level work on TIGER. So in the TIGER II process, which we
completed 6 months ago, we implemented that recommendation and
plan to improve it further for the TIGER III that is now
upcoming. So, we took that as a responsible critique, and have
attempted to do it.
Mr. Rahall. Continuing with you, Mr. Kienitz, approximately
15,000 Recovery Act highway, transit and aviation projects, as
you have referenced, have broken ground all across the country.
Can you give us a little more on the economic impacts of these
projects? And when these projects are completed, what will the
taxpayers get in return for their money?
Mr. Kienitz. Yes, it is a quite long and quite impressive
list of tens of thousands of miles of road that have been
improved. Almost 12,000 new transit buses, 157 runways, ports,
airports, and 2,700 bridges have been improved. It is an
impressive list.
I think the issue that we are running into now is the good
news in that 9,000 of the projects are done, and many of the
rest of them are close to being done. Eventually the last
dollars will be paid out, as the last invoice is submitted,
once the project is done. The difficulty we have there is it is
true for construction projects generally that every
construction job is, to some degree, a temporary job. You
identify a project, you design it, you build it, and then it is
built.
Hopefully, these projects are of a kind that are generating
generalized improved economic performance that helps support
the economy in the future. But the direct construction
employment, as we complete projects, is inevitably going to
wind down.
And, in fact, the numbers we have been looking at for
reporting the total job numbers employed during that quarter
for transportation recovery projects are less than in the
quarter before. And we fear that that is part of a downward
trend, where it peaked during the first and second summers of--
in the construction season, and now that we are 2 years gone it
is going to inevitably go down.
So, I think this is why your interest and the chairman's
interest in getting a long-term reauthorization has been right
on point, and we agree with that.
Mr. Rahall. Would you not agree that Vice President Biden's
leadership--that these projects and the money spent under are
perhaps the most scrutinized, sanitized, and transparent
spending of government--of taxpayers' money in your history?
Mr. Kienitz. I would certainly say it is the most
scrutinized thing that DOT has ever done. A lot of the
reporting that we do, and the transparency that we do, is
pretty routine. We normally do it. It is just that, to be quite
honest, no one ever looks at it. What is happening this time
is, because it was such a high-profile activity, all of the
things that folks do as a matter of course are getting intense
scrutiny. But we also had additional levels of reporting.
Generally, every agency receiving Recovery Act funds had a
whole set of reporting that you had to do. DOT, because of the
work of this committee, we have our own separate, additional
layer of reporting, where we report to you on what we are
doing.
So, the amount of work that has gone into documenting this
stuff is massive. What we have basically found from that,
though, whether it is economically distressed areas or total
jobs created, the fundamental requirements of the Recovery Act
were not, ``DOT, go out and count the jobs; DOT, go out and
determine the Recovery Act.'' It was, ``DOT, make sure your
grantee goes out and counts the jobs and tells you; make sure
your grantee tells you whether it is in a distressed area or
not.''
And so, we are fundamentally dependent--when you are doing
15,000 projects, we are not going to send DOT agents out to
stand at the job site of all these projects. We are dependent
on the reporting that we get back. And what we find is a lot of
the reporting is really good, particularly from the more
sophisticated--California Department of Transportation has got
100,000 employees, it is a huge, professional organization. But
we also have some tiny, little shipyard somewhere that got a
new crane, it has got six employees, they have never been
involved in this any more, they do not know how to do it.
So, I think, as a whole, the numbers we got were valid in
their totals, but there are some people who are not very
experienced in this work that were involved for the first time.
Mr. Rahall. Would any other member of the panel wish to
comment on that point?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Rahall. Our work shows that the
Department can increase its transparency, and ultimately the
utility of the data that it provides to Congress and to the
taxpayer by paying more attention to the job data.
Mr. Kienitz referred to the Department's requirement under
section 1201 to report direct jobs, indirect jobs, and total
jobs. Our work has shown that, with greater attention, the
Department could, especially with respect to indirect jobs and
total jobs, provide data of greater utility to the committee
and to the taxpayer.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you.
Mr. Kienitz. And I might just respond on that point.
Theoretically, you can count direct jobs. It is up to our
grantees to do that. But you cannot count indirect jobs. An
indirect job is, if the workers are going and buying
sandwiches, and there is a guy making sandwiches at the shop
around the corner, then he has a job. There is no way to count
those.
So, the only question of indirect jobs is which Ph.D. do
you listen to who says he knows the answer. And we have got a
lot of Ph.D.'s and they all--you know, what do they say? When
you get five economists and you ask them a question you get six
opinions.
Mr. Rahall. Right.
Mr. Kienitz. And we had a lot of those meetings. So I am
sympathetic with the point the gentleman made, but I am not
sure it is a perfectible science.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this hearing.
The main concern that people on our side had about this
stimulus package, first of all, was the tremendous cost. Most
of us thought we just could not afford it. Today there is
tremendous concern over this--reaching this $14.3 trillion debt
limit. I suppose at the time we passed this Stimulus Bill, the
debt was probably around $12 trillion. And I have always been
convinced the reason that more people do not get upset about
that is that those are figures that nobody can humanly
comprehend, not me or anybody else.
But there also was some concern because most of us on this
side of the aisle felt that the bill was sold to the country on
the--as being almost completely or totally an infrastructure
package, when only 7 percent, roughly, went to infrastructure.
But the biggest question I have is one that probably none
of you can answer. But maybe somebody can enlighten me some. I
spend many hours each day reading everything I can about these
bills, and the legislation before us. And when the stimulus
package was acted on it was referred to in article after
article as a $787 billion bill. Well, within probably less than
a year--but I have seen many, many articles since that time
that have referred to the bill as an $862 billion bill. Now,
that is a lot of difference, that is $75 billion difference.
The Congressional Budget Office apparently issued a revised
estimate of $812 billion in January, but said it is likely to
go up from that figure.
Can somebody give me an explanation as to how a $787
billion bill, which is what we were told at the time we voted
on it, turned into an $862 billion bill, or some figure in
between there?
Mr. Kienitz. I am obviously not an expert in this area.
Mr. Duncan. Yes.
Mr. Kienitz. But I think I know the answer, which is it is
on the tax provisions, not any of the spending or
infrastructure money. We get a very exact amount of money, and
we spend that exact amount.
On the tax side, if you are giving tax cuts, you have to
make an estimate of how much taxes people will pay in the
coming years, and then how much less they will pay if you give
them a rate cut. But the actual amount that people end up
paying and the amount they would have paid depends on what
employment is in the economy, economic growth, and income tax,
and they never get the number right.
I think the answer is they underestimated the amount of
income that would have been earned, that was going to be
earned. And so, the tax cuts actually ended up being of greater
value, because people got more tax cuts than they would have,
which means the cost of the bill is higher. I think that is the
answer.
Mr. Duncan. So----
Mr. Herr. Mr. Duncan, there were also some credits for
energy efficiency, and things of that nature. So if somebody
opted to, say, upgrade a particular kind of system for their
home, they could get a tax credit for that, as well. That would
be along the lines of what Mr. Kienitz was just describing.
Mr. Duncan. I don't think that was made clear to us. I
thought that, at the time, it was sold to us as being at least
a maximum of $787 billion, because I have read many, many
articles about it. But at least that is somewhat of an
explanation, I suppose.
What--there are several other things that questions have
been raised about. For instance, it says the--in one of the
memos it says the FAA emphasized in public testimony its goal
to select the highest priority projects defined by the FAA as
having a score of 62, yet the FAA awarded over 80 grants to
lower scoring projects.
Does anyone know why the FAA awarded those grants to
projects that did not meet their own qualifications?
Mr. Scovel. Mr. Duncan, we have some information on that
particular point. FAA was funneling its ARRA money through its
airport improvement program, and set initially a score of 62 in
the national priority rating as the cut-off point for projects
that would be considered for ARRA funding.
In addition to the criteria that were established by the
Act and by the President for ARRA funding, FAA also established
geographic distribution requirements and also put limits on the
sizes of individual awards. By the time all of those factors
were considered and folded in together, some lower priority
projects ended up being funded with ARRA dollars.
In February, we issued a report that indicates, for
instance, five very small village air fields in Alaska received
a total of $59 million, equivalent to what the entire State of
Texas received, and more than Florida, Illinois, or New York.
We concluded that FAA ultimately did not pay sufficient
attention to the required guidance, the criterion to optimize
economic activity with regard to the Federal expenditure of
these ARRA dollars. In fact, they considered that that would be
accomplished through their normal AIP program. But when they
layered on these additional geographic requirements and size
limits, it ended up creating anomalies like those of the small
Alaska air fields that I just described.
My office does not wish to take issue with the fact that
improvements were needed to those individual air fields, or
that they did not belong on the priority listing for the
airport improvement program in general. However, it does raise
the reasonable question, we think, that with regard to ARRA
dollars specifically, the creation of these anomalies showed
that there were unintended consequences by FAA's decision to
layer on additional requirements to those of ARRA.
Mr. Kienitz. And if I might comment on that?
Mr. Duncan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kienitz. The only thing that I would say is that, as I
have spent the last several years working at the Department, we
have a myriad of programs which have geographic diversity
requirements layered on to them. And most of those are
congressionally mandated. And that has everything to do with
people who represent small communities that think the Federal
Government is never going to see them, or care about their
projects, and so Congress writes it as a rural minimum, or it
is a requirement for geographic diversity, and so we have lots
and lots of programs.
And we end up, often, with this type of criticism that says
if you had provided a rigorous cost benefit analysis, you would
not have funded the project in rural Idaho or Oklahoma or
somewhere. And I think our view of reasonable geographic
diversity is actually a policy goal that the country has
adopted for a long time. And as long as Congress tells us to
keep doing that, I think it is our job to do it.
Mr. Scovel. Mr. Duncan, if I may?
Mr. Duncan. Yes.
Mr. Scovel. One of the points we also made in regard to
your question has to do with this. FAA funded 360 projects with
ARRA dollars under the airport improvement program. It
published data on those projects, and the rationales for their
selection in the cases of 280; 80 projects were left to the
speculation of those who were viewing the results of FAA's AIP/
ARRA-funded selection process.
When transparency is stated as one of the goals of this
program, and when, as the under secretary correctly points out,
the geographic distribution is a key goal of congressional
programs like this, certainly the agency--in this case, FAA--
ought to undertake greater transparency with regard to
explaining its decisions.
We were notified last week, as we prepared for the hearing,
that, in fact, FAA, by the end of this month, will publish data
now on those 80 low-priority airports that it selected for ARRA
funding.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mica. Other Members seek recognition? Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Part of what
occurred in this quite extraordinary process could form the
basis for best practices, and part of it probably could not.
The transparency, unprecedented in such projects, the way in
which we kept track of such projects online and in the
Congress.
But in a real sense I have a question about the competing
criteria. When you are in the middle of a recession, and you
have got to get the money out on the streets--or at least that
is what you want to do quickly to make jobs--if you compare the
agency that came under my jurisdiction when I chaired the
Economic Development Subcommittee, the GSA, you were dealing
with one of the few Federal agencies that could, in fact, make
the contract themselves--compete, put out the contracts
themselves. So there was no pass-through. And thus, GSA was
able to get its money out quicker than the States.
And, of course, they found, as the States did, that bids
were coming in lower, because we were in a recession. And they
were able to do 17 additional projects beyond those that were
authorized. So we haven't had any trouble with them. But it was
interesting to see the difference.
Now, flip to the States, where they too have to compete.
And we have got to get to a pass-through to get to them, and
through our processes to get to them. Then we say, ``Be shovel-
ready, no fraud and abuse, and high quality'' at the same time.
So, I want to know two things: one, whether you found any
more fraud, waste, and abuse in the Recovery Act projects than
would typically be found in such projects; and I would like
your views on, given the competing criteria, whether you
thought the States, for the most part, were able to handle this
mixed message of what was required of them.
So, first, was there any more fraud, waste, and abuse than
you normally find in such projects?
Mr. Scovel. Ms. Norton, I can speak from the basis of our
investigative work in the Department of Transportation's office
of inspector general.
In fact, we have been very pleasantly surprised that we
have not found more fraud than we have. And we have also been
pleasantly surprised that we haven't found any remarkable
variations on the types of fraud that we have found in the
past. Bottom line, fraud is fraud. It depends on what pot of
money the fraudster is trying to reap his benefits from.
We have--I think I mentioned earlier we currently have open
51 investigative cases. Frankly, that number is a little bit
high, and it is because we have lowered our investigative
threshold in order for us to pay more attention to ARRA cases
that may come to our attention, as well as meet the requests of
the Department of Justice, who have indicated that they want to
pay more attention in their prosecutive efforts, too, to ARRA
cases.
But I think, speaking from my vantage point as a member of
the recovery, accountability, and transparency board, many of
us in the inspector general community have been pleasantly
surprised that the level of fraud has not been higher. Much of
that is due to the remarkable oversight, the attention that is
being paid by the Congress, by our respective agency heads, by
offices such as mine. We do worry that the fraudsters may be
looking to other pots of money, so that is why they are not
dipping into stimulus funds right now, but we are keeping a
very, very close eye on it.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Elkins?
Mr. Elkins. Yes. Ms. Norton, I would concur with Mr.
Scovel. Our findings at the EPA, with our work, is that we have
also seen very little fraud activity, as well.
However, I want to caution you. We have only been in this
for 2 years now, and--the amount of money that has been
invested at EPA, for instance--we are looking at $7 billion. I
mean that is the amount of money that pretty much mirrors what
the EPA's budget was back in 2006, 2007 or so. So we are
talking a very large amount of money.
Ms. Norton. Yes, I am aware of that. I am just trying to
track where we are now, because we are going to be having these
hearings, and it is important to note because, frankly, the
press did the right thing in going around the country and
looking to see whether, with all this haste, you would see
fraud. And there were not a lot of big stories. So I wondered
what those of you who look more closely have found.
The chairman talks about temporary jobs. Now, I just want
to say on behalf of the million construction workers who were
out of work since construction work is always temporary until
you can get the next job, these are precisely the kind of jobs
that infrastructure seeks to fill. These are jobs that have the
best effect on reverberating throughout the economy, because
they stimulate other parts of the economy, as well.
Now, the criticism that there had been a lot of paving and
the rest, here we get into my original question about competing
criteria. We had hearings in this committee: ``Have you gotten
the money out''; ``How much of it is obligated''; ``How much of
it is on the street?'' If you are in the States with that kind
of pressure on you, is the Congress not in effect saying, ``Do
not target this money, get this money on the streets the old-
fashioned way, we are making jobs, we are stimulating the
economy, and yes, we are fixing your infrastructure, but you
have got to do all of these things at the same time''?
So, was the paving of the streets or similar work that the
States might not have done almost inevitable to do, in light of
the mandate of the Congress?
Mr. Kienitz. I might respond to that, if you don't mind,
ma'am. I will respond from our work at USDOT, which is we have
seen a lot of small and medium-sized projects, and it is
paving, it is guard rail, it is buying transit buses, which you
can just easily order, it is simply runway projects. What we
have not seen a lot of is the big, complicated bridge project,
the big, complicated transit project, the big, complicated road
reconstruction. They just take too long. They have to sit in
the pipeline. Even the construction, once you are go, the
construction could take 3 or 4 years.
I was in State government in Pennsylvania up until March.
We started preparing 2 months before the bill passed, because
we saw that it was going to pass, started putting our list
together so we would be ready the moment the money showed up.
And once we started looking, what can we actually get done, it
was all about small and medium-sized stuff. It really needed to
be done.
But what that means--well, for example, in transit right
now the average age of the bus fleet in the United States is
getting better. Buses are in much better condition than they
were. The average condition of old track infrastructure and
transit systems, where the projects are much, much harder to do
and more expensive, is still not nearly as good. And not a lot
of recovery money went into that, because the projects take too
long.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman. Time has expired. Mr.
Shuster?
Mr. Shuster. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of you for
being here today. My question is to Mr. Kienitz. And I
understand that USDOT has issued guidance to States regarding
obligations to the--to comply with the certification reporting
requirements contained in the maintenance of effort, or the
MOE, in section 201 of the Recovery Act.
It is my understanding, under current guidance, that even
if a State met its cumulative State-certified level effort
expenditures, that they would still be subject to being
penalized by a prohibition on participating in this August
highway redistribution if they failed to meet the requirements
on a program-by-program basis. Is that correct?
Mr. Kienitz. That is how the current guidance reads,
correct.
Mr. Shuster. I further understand that, under that
guidance, 14 States would be subject to a penalty.
Mr. Kienitz. What I would say is we got an initial set of
data in the fall, indicating a somewhat larger number of States
would be subject to penalty. We have just recently gotten in
the new final data, and we are still in the process of
compiling that. That is a number that I have heard, as well,
but I would not take it as the final answer. I think we are
still in the process of making those assessments and decisions.
Mr. Shuster. Well, are there any actions currently under
review on this guidance? I understand that you have had some
conversations and you may be looking differently--looking at
the cumulative totals, because when you do that you reduce it
from the 14 States down to just several States under current--
currently, if you look at program by program, Arkansas,
Florida, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, New Hampshire,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island have all met the cumulative
expenditures.
So, are you in discussions right now trying to review that
and look at cumulative, instead of program by program?
Mr. Kienitz. Yes. I think as you point out, there are a
number of States that, no matter how any of this works, clearly
did not meet the maintenance of effort requirement.
Mr. Shuster. Correct.
Mr. Kienitz. But there is somewhere--depending on how it is
interpreted--the issue we are facing is that the language of
the statute can be easily read to have two different meanings.
And so, that is something we are looking at. Our goal is
not to withhold funds from States, but we do have a
congressional mandate to do that. And that was something that
this committee wanted to make sure that when the recovery money
went out to States, States did not just pull back their own
dollars.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Kienitz. And in some cases, I think States are
suffering from the fact that they have a dedicated tax that
pays for transportation.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Kienitz. Economy goes down, tax revenues goes down,
their spending goes down. There was no affirmative step they
took to reduce spending.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Kienitz. It just was reduced. In other cases, there are
States that----
Mr. Shuster. Currently didn't--sure.
Mr. Kienitz [continuing]. Made affirmative decisions to
take money out of transportation, spend it on things----
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Kienitz [continuing]. And I think that was the
intention of Congress, to----
Mr. Shuster. So my understanding, from what you said, is
you are going to look at the rule and----
Mr. Kienitz. We----
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Maybe look at cumulative? Because
that is--again, I--when I read the legislative language, it
looks like there is some flexibility in there, and I think that
is the key to this, is flexibility. One size fits all--I mean
Pennsylvania, for instance, missed its--in aviation missed its
number, but overall it exceeded.
Mr. Kienitz. Right.
Mr. Shuster. So, again, they made the effort. And I think
that that one size fits all, I mean, that is the problem with
the Federal Government. Too many times we do one size fits all,
instead of leaving these States some flexibility to decide, OK,
it is better for Pennsylvania to spend more money on road
projects than maybe aviation.
So, is that something--again, I want to make sure I am
clear--you are going to consider that? You are going to look at
that and maybe make some changes to the rule?
Mr. Kienitz. There is certainly discussion going on with
this question, and I will take your concern back. I know there
are a couple of other States, for example, where just the
aviation number was----
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Mr. Kienitz [continuing]. The number that is not working.
So we are--I will take that back, and--as we have these
discussions.
Mr. Shuster. Oh, I appreciate that greatly.
Next question to Mr. Herr. Why do you believe that DOT did
not comply with the President's directive to be completely
transparent when they provided the grants for high-speed rail
and TIGER grants?
Mr. Herr. In terms of why they did not do that, I am not
sure I could get behind and understand the reason why. Some of
it, I think, would be protecting the deliberative process that
went on in the Department, in terms of the folks that were
doing the technical reviews.
We had some questions, which we outlined in our report.
Mr. Shuster. Right. But your report was--I think was pretty
clear that you were--you had great concerns of why they were
not more transparent. And, according to the report, ``Decision
rationales provided little insight into selections.'' You found
several instances in which, without documentation, it was
difficult to determine the reason why some projects were
selected and others were not.
Mr. Herr. That is correct.
Mr. Shuster. That is something that we have been talking
about here in Congress----
Mr. Herr. Right.
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Asking for that transparency.
Mr. Herr. Right. We certainly agree that transparency is
important, sir.
Mr. Shuster. So, Mr. Kienitz, why haven't we received
that--those documents? And the transparency--here in Congress,
most of our--almost all of what we do is online. The President
is--ran for--came into office and said he was going to be
transparent, and yet the Department of Transportation has
stumbled badly on these things. These are billions of dollars.
So, can you give me an answer why we have not received
those documents and the criteria and the reasoning why you
delivered money to various projects?
Mr. Kienitz. Well, I will answer that question in several
parts. The first thing that I will say is that, also in the
GAO's testimony, they found that out of these six grantmaking
practices that they track--generally for Federal agencies--we
scored doing a good job on five of them, and on half of the
sixth. So five-and-a-half out of six is pretty good to begin
with.
Second thing I will say is their particular criticism was
mostly that the documentation of what went on in those final
discussions was not what it could have been. And as I said
earlier, we have accepted that as a reasonable criticism, and
the documentation that we have been providing on subsequent
rounds of both TIGER and high-speed rail is much more robust.
As to the third matter of providing documentation, we have
turned over basically every single document that exists that we
have on the high-speed rail program to GAO. GAO is the
investigative arm of Congress. It was set up for exactly that
purpose. They are professionals, and that is their job, and we
are following the longstanding practice of giving our material
to them, let the professionals look at it, and decide what they
think.
Mr. Shuster. But according to GAO it is incomplete. Is that
correct, Mr. Herr?
Mr. Herr. The information that we have received for TIGER
was incomplete, yes, in terms of one of the last meetings that
they had, where some final decisions were made.
Mr. Shuster. I am sorry, it was incomplete?
Mr. Herr. Yes, for the final decisions that were made on
the TIGER grants.
Mr. Shuster. And that is, again----
Mr. Kienitz. I believe we provided the information. I think
that they found that the documentation of what actually
happened in those final meetings was not what it should have
been.
Mr. Shuster. Right. Well, that is the point.
Mr. Kienitz. We provided them everything that we have.
Mr. Shuster. That is the point. We want to know why you
made the decisions, why the money went where it went. And was
it fairness? And again, they are skeptical if the process,
overall, was fair or not. And that is what we want to get to
the bottom of----
Mr. Kienitz. That is a misstatement. They are not skeptical
that the process was fair. They said that the documentation
could have been better. You may be skeptical that the process
was not fair, but that is not what they said.
Mr. Shuster. Well, according to some of their conclusions,
``by not establishing this record, invites skepticism by the
overall fairness of decision.''
So, again, that is what we are trying to get at, why the
money was done. You know, maybe we need to get the folks that
made those final decisions and get them before the committee to
determine why they did it. I know you are--I think the GAO said
they are trying to protect the process, but that is the
problem. We do not know why it went, and there is--in our mind
there is some great doubt as to why it went certain places.
So, again, I would encourage you to continue to bring that
information forward to GAO, but to Congress, so that we know
that things are done in a fair and transparent way.
So thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. Yes. I just want to let you know that I feel it
was very fair. Florida got the money, and that is what I wanted
to happen.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kienitz. We wish they would have kept it.
Ms. Brown. I wish we could have kept it, too. But quickly,
let me just ask you a couple of quick questions.
The chairman often talks about--my friend, Mr. Mica--high-
speed rail. And he forgets an intercity passenger rail. And he
thinks all--and his definition of high speed is different from
the international definition, because we do not have the
infrastructure in place.
Can you clarify that for me, sir?
Mr. Kienitz. As a general matter, I have to say I agree
with the chairman's fundamental underlying point, which is
high-speed rail is the goal.
Ms. Brown. It is the goal.
Mr. Kienitz. What we found in trying to spend $8 billion of
Recovery Act funding to create jobs as quickly as possible is
that the state of readiness of grantees to accept funds to have
fully designed and ready projects to go from what is, frankly,
a pathetic rail system that we have in a lot of America to
high-speed rail in one step, it just was not there.
Ms. Brown. And $8 billion won't----
Mr. Kienitz. In a couple of places----
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Take us there, either.
Mr. Kienitz. Yes. California and Florida, where it had
stuff that was pretty much ready, and everyone else was back
behind that.
And so, we looked to the European experience. And in very
few places did they go from nothing to high-speed rail in one
step.
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kienitz. They went from slow rail to medium rail,
medium rail to faster rail, faster rail to high-speed rail. And
I think, over the long term, our country is mostly going to
have to follow that path. So we are taking a lot of service
that is 70 miles an hour and upgrading it to 110. Some places
where there is 110 it is going to be upgraded to 130. The
Northeast Corridor, they can go faster. California is the one
place where they are literally starting at nothing and building
it capable of 220. That is high-speed rail.
Now, unfortunately, that is going to take 10 years. So a
lot of the criticism we get about California is, ``Well, where
is the results?'' Well, in California we are doing what people
have said that we should have done in other places, and then
the criticism we get is, ``Well, we cannot--there is nothing to
see.'' So it is a damned if you do, damned if you don't
situation a little bit.
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir. Mr. Herr, you indicated that some of
the funds was turned back because of Davis-Bacon or Buy
American provision. What kind of projects are you talking
about, and how many was turned back?
Mr. Trimble. I believe that was----
Ms. Brown. I mean who said that? Yes, sir.
Mr. Trimble. That's me. Yes, that was in reference to the
clean water infrastructure projects. And that was--for the nine
States that we went out and visited, generally the States were
able to move forward with those requirements. Where that came
up is in each of those States they mentioned that certain
projects declined the funding, or were not in----
Ms. Brown. OK. How many? How many?
Mr. Trimble. It was anecdotal. They did not track, so we do
not have numbers on it.
Generally, this was happening with projects that were
already under contract. So the applicants did not want to go
back and revise all their contract documentation.
Ms. Brown. OK. On the clean water, who was that? Was that
you, with the water, also? Because basically, the funds went
into the Revolving Fund, and the States already had the
projects.
Mr. Trimble. Right.
Ms. Brown. So the question was--as we move forward, we are
trying to learn something from this--is it a conflict, when we
want to try to get the projects to the most needy area and it
may be that the States do not--did not take this into
consideration with their Revolving Fund?
Mr. Trimble. Well, I think--and I think Mr. Elkins will
have some work on this, as well, with the targeting to
disadvantaged communities, the challenge in that, in terms of
the Revolving Fund for the water projects, is there was no
requirement to target those monies to disadvantaged
communities.
I think the EPA IG has work indicating that EPA does not
have the data to track what money went to which community. We
had data, because we had done field work in nine States, and we
found that about--I believe it was around 25 percent had gone
to disadvantaged communities.
Ms. Brown. Well, I am confused because I thought, in the
overall project, it was to say that so much should go to
disadvantaged communities.
Mr. Trimble. I believe that is for transportation. Not on
the water side. There is a requirement for--a 20 percent green
requirement, and then there was a requirement for 50 percent of
the money to be given out as additional subsidization, which is
grants and things. But that additional subsidization was not
linked to disadvantaged communities.
Ms. Brown. OK. I am confused about that.
Can you tell me the percentage of the stimulus dollars that
went to tax cuts, and not to, per se, projects or generating
jobs, just directly to tax cuts?
Mr. Trimble. I do not have that number.
Ms. Brown. Does anyone have that information? I think it is
one-third, but----
[No response.]
Ms. Brown. All right, thank you.
Mr. Mica. Other Members seek recognition? Our side? Mr.--
OK, Mr. Lankford, you are recognized.
Mr. Lankford? Oh, we need to provide the new Members with
communications.
Mr. Lankford. That is right. Freshman Members do not get
electricity at their station. Keep them in their place.
I appreciate you all coming in and getting a chance to talk
about this. I want to further that conversation about some
communities or States initially having a conversation about
getting stimulus dollars and then withdrawing on that. Finish
out that conversation that you had begun. Why do you think that
is? It sounded like it was paperwork requirements, or other
things that were going into it, that they would initiate that
and then step away and say no.
Mr. Trimble. Yes. Some of the projects, in the majority of
the examples that we had it was the communities that had those
projects did not want to go back and amend existing contract
documents for an ongoing project, to include the Buy America
requirements, the Davis-Bacon requirements, as well as the
reporting requirements. So they----
Mr. Lankford. It was the assumption that it would drive up
the cost of the project?
Mr. Trimble. In some cases.
Mr. Lankford. If they got the Federal dollars, it would
actually be more expensive than if they just did it locally and
made local decisions, or----
Mr. Trimble. Or they would go and get base SRF funds to
fund that part of the project, or use the bond money for that
portion.
So, for example, I believe in Connecticut there was a
project, it is about an $11 million project. The stimulus money
was going to be about $1.2 million of that. And rather than
take on those additional requirements, they went elsewhere for
that portion of the funding.
Mr. Lankford. OK. Let me ask a couple questions. Just--the
State decisionmaking process on the whole--and anyone can
respond to this--as the States were choosing which projects to
be able to take on, mostly positive, you would say, as far as
their decisions on what projects to take, as you look back on
it now in retrospect, and say, ``They made good decisions on
those projects''?
I know the stipulations have had to be quick. We talked
about the small to medium-sized projects. But on the whole, we
look at their decisionmaking and say, ``These seem to be
positive''?
Mr. Kienitz. I would say, from my point of view, sir, on
the transportation side we actually had a pretty wide variety
of strategies that States followed. Some States went to their
State priority list, went to the first project that was not
getting money, and went down until the money ran out. Other
States adopted a very specific strategy to say, ``I am going to
pick the quickest projects I can possibly get.''
Other States--I know in Pennsylvania we said bridges are a
big problem, we are going to put this into bridges. I know
Kansas, for example, decided to do three or four big highway
projects, and not spread it around to a bunch of little things.
So, every single one of them followed the correct
procedures. Which of those is better? I am not sure I really
know.
Mr. Lankford. Not necessarily good or bad----
Mr. Kienitz. Yes.
Mr. Lankford [continuing]. But you are saying that they
seem to be consistently good in making the decisions on that,
the different strategies----
Mr. Kienitz. Exactly. But it was all very by-the-book.
Mr. Lankford. OK.
Mr. Herr. We looked at the expenditure rates for the
highway funding and five States are now over 95 percent in
terms of their expenditures: Oklahoma, Wyoming, South Dakota,
Iowa, and Maine. And there are two States that have spent about
one-third: Virginia and Hawaii.
Three others States are around 50 percent. Virginia pursued
some bigger ticket projects. But they had different strategies
to do that, and there were some tight obligation deadlines, as
well.
Mr. Lankford. Great. Mr. Elkins, I think you were going to
try to jump in, as well.
Mr. Elkins. Yes. Actually, I was just going to comment that
within EPA OIG we just have not looked at that particular area
as yet.
Mr. Lankford. OK. Well, there has been ongoing conversation
about how much flexibility States should have in making
decisions about their own transportation dollars and how that
is handled, and this is a unique experiment for us, to see a
very rapid decisionmaking process to see how States handle
flexibility in making decisions on what are the best projects
they see in their State, rather than from a Federal side
stepping in and us evaluating for them what we see is the best
State. So it is just an interesting analogy.
I do want to be able to follow up, as well, on an initial
comment that was made about suspension and debarment. Three
hundred days from making a decision on suspension, 400 days on
making a decision on debarment. Now, my understanding is that
has been in the process of changing, which is great. And I want
to be able to follow up on that. But talk me through the
process on that, and where things are, from your side.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, sir. It was my office that did the
report----
Mr. Lankford. Yes.
Mr. Scovel [continuing]. About a year-and-a-half ago at
this point, and we testified last year before House Oversight
and Government Reform on it.
We examined the Department's suspension and debarment
process. As you mentioned, 300 days, on average, to reach a
decision on suspension; 400 days, on average, to reach a
debarment decision. We found that there was insufficient
oversight and prioritization and resources allocated within the
Department to those efforts.
We also found, frankly, that a couple of the operating
administrations were imposing their own unnecessary and
redundant review processes on top of what was stipulated by the
Department itself. And that created a lot of the delay. The
risk, of course, when there is that kind of delay, is that not
only the Department of Transportation, but other Federal
agencies may award Federal contracts to contractors or others
whose reliability or responsibility is subject to question or,
in fact, has been decided through adjudication in the case of a
conviction.
Mr. Lankford. Two quick statements. What do you think is a
reasonable period of time for making that decision?
Mr. Scovel. The Department has set 45 days.
Mr. Lankford. All right. That is significantly shorter than
400 days.
Mr. Scovel. Absolutely. And the Department has recognized
the validity of that number, and we would acknowledge that as a
very worthwhile goal.
Mr. Lankford. OK. And then, once someone is awarded the
contract, even if they--you know, let's say they have been
awarded a contract during that time period of the
decisionmaking process, then later they are debarred. Does that
contract then finish out, or is that contract then null and
void?
Mr. Scovel. It is my understanding that they have the
contract at that point.
Mr. Lankford. Love to be able to follow up with you on that
one----
Mr. Kienitz. The only thing I will----
Mr. Lankford [continuing]. Taking corrective actions, that
is great. Just talk us through where things are now.
Mr. Kienitz. Yes, sir. Thank you. The only thing I would
say is that I think we have recognized this, once again, as
value added that we have gotten out of the inspector general. I
mean they are an independent entity and when they do not like
what we are doing, they certainly tell us. This has been a
valuable area, and we actually sent our counsel's office up to
testify in front of the committee about this. This is something
that is getting the Secretary's personal attention. We have
established this goal for a 45-day turnaround.
But I think, as you find in a lot of DOT programs, you
know, we talk about 1 DOT but we really actually have 10
independent operating administrations. And so we have a great
variability in how they have been handling things. So that is
part of what we are trying to do, is impose a little bit more
structure on everybody, so there is consistency.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Holden?
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Kienitz, it
is good to see you again.
In 2005 in SAFETEA-LU, Congress enacted a $1.7 billion
program somewhat similar to the stimulus program, the TIGER
grant program, called the Projects of National and Regional
Significance program. Unlike the TIGER grant program, however,
all the projects that were awarded funding in the PNRS program
were selected by Congress through earmarks. Could you compare
these two programs, and tell us how the two programs have done
so far in getting their funds obligated? And could you also
compare the transparency of the two programs, and tell us how
much information was provided by Congress on why specific
projects were selected?
Mr. Kienitz. As to the obligation rate, I think I can talk
about that. A number of those programs from SAFETEA-LU, the
regional and national significance, zero funds have been
outlaid because the direction to fund a specific project was
put in for a project that ended up not being viable or not
being ready, for whatever reason.
So, I think after 6 years, the obligation rate is in the 50
to 60 percent range for that program. In 2 years, the TIGER
grant program, we have obligated, I think, 99 percent of that
money.
That is because one of the levels of staff review that we
do is a fairly intense scrub of the readiness of the project,
such that we got submissions for a bunch of projects that were
interesting and valuable and not ready, and basically mostly we
did not select them, not because they were not valuable, but
because they were not ready.
On the question of transparency, I know that our process is
intensely transparent, and a huge amount of effort has gone
into that, and we have accepted the critiques that we have
gotten on that point, and are trying to improve. I think you
all know more about the process of selecting earmarks than I
do, so I will just leave it at that.
Mr. Holden. Well, we happen to like them. At least I do.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Holden. I believe in your opening statement--I hate to
have you repeat it; this hearing has been going on for a
while--but you talked about the GAO report, particularly on
intercity passenger rail, when the report referred to ``good
grantmaking practices.'' I believe you mentioned how often GAO
uses that term, ``good.'' What percentage----
Mr. Kienitz. Yes, it is 14 times out of 169,000 individual
opinions. So it is a rarity.
Mr. Holden. Very, very rare.
Mr. Kienitz. Let's just say that.
Mr. Holden. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kienitz. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Mica. Other Members seek recognition? Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To begin, on the
high-speed rail, I want to echo the chairman's comments. But I
would suggest very strongly that one of the reasons we do not
have real high-speed rail in this country is because you get
too many projects going on. Pick one, make it work, and others
will desire it. Simple. Stop trying to create 50 different
projects, half of which will never work, and you will make a
lot more progress, just like we did with subways. Years ago,
nobody----
Mr. Mica. Would the gentleman yield? Could I associate
myself with the remarks of the gentleman? Just for the record,
so we insert right there that I associate----
Mr. Capuano. Well, that is--I am just following up on----
Mr. Mica. Thank you, yield back.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. Your comments, Mr. Chairman.
I guess, first of all, does anybody here know who the
genius was that, after a year-and-a-half of me and my friends
getting the living heck beat out of us because of a stimulus,
some genius decided to stop calling it stimulus and call it
ARRA? Are any of you the geniuses? Because if you are, we are
going to have a problem.
Mr. Kienitz. I am a genius, but I am not that genius.
Mr. Capuano. Good. Thank you for that one. And, Mr. Elkins,
I just want to congratulate you. You actually used the word
``stimulus'' in your title. Thank you for that, because I kind
of figure if I am going to take the grief for something, when
it starts working people should know where it comes from. And I
will tell you nobody knows.
And I would ask any of you. When we were debating stimulus,
did any of you call it ARRA?
[No response.]
Mr. Capuano. You got that directive after the fact. If you
find the genius who changed the terminology, please let me
know.
I would like to ask the members up here. Any of you have
permanent jobs?
Mr. Kienitz. So far.
Mr. Capuano. Is it permanent?
Mr. Kienitz. Oh, no. It is at the pleasure of the
President, actually.
Mr. Capuano. Anybody here have a permanent job? Anybody in
the audience have a permanent job?
[No response.]
Mr. Capuano. I have the closest to permanent. I am here
until next January or--if the voters do not decide to change me
after that. So there is no such thing as a permanent job, that
I am aware of. If there is, I do not know anybody who has one.
The concept of creating a job is always temporary, always
temporary.
And Secretary Kienitz--you are the only one, I think, to
use numbers--280,000 job years of work. What the hell is a job
year?
Mr. Kienitz. What we are trying to do is, rather than count
individual people--some have worked 1 hour and some have worked
every hour of every year----
Mr. Capuano. But you do realize that nobody has a clue what
you are talking about.
Mr. Kienitz. Right. And I can explain----
Mr. Capuano. When I go home and I say ``job years,'' they
look at me like I have three heads. How many jobs did we create
in the Department of Transportation through the stimulus?
Mr. Kienitz. In the third quarter of last year there were
65,000 people at work on stimulus projects. But the number of
areas depended on which month----
Mr. Capuano. Yes, I understand the number of areas. I am
looking to be--a legitimate answer--when I get asked at home,
``How many jobs did we create with the stimulus?'' you are
going to tell me 65,000 is a fair number?
Mr. Kienitz. That was the number in the fall, correct. In
the summer, the number tends to be higher. In the winter, it
tends to be lower.
Mr. Capuano. So if I say 75,000 jobs, that is a reasonable
number----
Mr. Kienitz. Sure.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. That would be hard to debate?
Mr. Kienitz. I think so. I don't know. These guys might----
Mr. Capuano. Does everybody agree with that general number?
Mr. Herr. We also have some data in our testimony, too,
that shows the quarterly variation. It is in that ballpark,
50,000 to 75,000----
Mr. Capuano. In that ballpark. And that is just DOT. Does
that include EPA and others, or just DOT?
Mr. Elkins. We have not done work in that area, so I really
couldn't----
Mr. Capuano. So it is an absolutely minimum of 75,000 jobs,
and that is only on 7 percent of the stimulus.
Mr. Kienitz. Right, and that is only the direct actual
people employed, rather than the follow-on----
Mr. Capuano. I understand.
Mr. Kienitz. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. So--but again, I am trying to come up with
something that we can absolutely agree on. Not looking for
debate.
So--and everybody here--as I heard the testimony, everybody
here pretty much said that there is very little or virtually no
waste, fraud, and abuse in the monies out there. Did I hear
this correctly?
[No response.]
Mr. Capuano. There is very little waste, fraud, and abuse
in the whole program, is that a fair----
Mr. Scovel. So far. Sir, I would not characterize it as
very little. I would say surprisingly--I surprising low level.
Mr. Capuano. Surprising?
Mr. Scovel. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. Surprising is not necessarily, my term, and
objective term.
Mr. Scovel. It is not.
Mr. Capuano. It is either a lot or not a lot.
Mr. Scovel. Right.
Mr. Capuano. And it is not a lot.
Mr. Scovel. It is not a lot.
Mr. Capuano. You may be surprised by that, but somehow I am
not.
Mr. Scovel. I am.
Mr. Capuano. So that we have a program that is only 7
percent of the total expenditures that created a minimum of
75,000 jobs with very little waste, fraud, and abuse. Does
anybody here not call a program with that record an incredible
success? Maybe even a surprising success? I would call that a
massive success, one that I am proud to have been associated
with, one that I am proud to have voted for, one that I am
proud to have voted for. So, with all the grief that we took
for a year-and-a-half on the stimulus, turned out pretty good.
With some bumps, but pretty good.
I just want to make sure I heard all this testimony the
same, because we talk a lot in terms that the average
American--and that includes me--have a hard time following. I
do not think I have a hard time following that. We created a
lot of jobs. We ended up with infrastructure improvements that
will help the economy in a long-term situation. We made life in
this country better, and we did it with very little waste,
fraud, and abuse.
Thank you, gentlemen. I am very proud to have voted for
this bill. I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman. Other Members seek
recognition? Mr. Southerland?
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the--I
am curious on the jobs issue. How many--and I just--I am asking
for clarification. I know you just were asked the number of
jobs in the Department. I think you said 65,000.
Mr. Kienitz. That was in the fall.
Mr. Southerland. In the fall. Were those added jobs to DOT
to oversee the stimulus projects, or were those existing jobs
that were already there that were given oversight over the
stimulus funds?
Mr. Kienitz. No, these are actually people working at
construction sites on transportation projects, building them.
Mr. Southerland. OK. So those were both private and
Federal----
Mr. Kienitz. Almost--99 percent private sector. This is all
bid out to the private sector.
Mr. Southerland. OK. As far as the--how many--so,
obviously, we do not know those jobs, since they are private
sector--we have no idea whether those jobs are obviously going
to exist after the stimulus dollars----
Mr. Kienitz. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Mr. Southerland. OK. I am just curious. How do you--what
have we learned here--and I wasn't here, I know I just arrived
about 20, 30 minutes ago--what is the greatest--where did the
American people get the biggest bang for their buck?
And I know that is a very difficult question, because you
addressed how each State made their own decisions on--and I
like that very much, I think you are the best ones positioned
to do that.
Just real quick, though, I mean when you look back over
your career, you know, when you are retired and you say, ``Hey,
let's talk about the stimulus dollars,'' what did we do great?
Mr. Kienitz. I will answer it and then the gentleman can
answer. I think for transportation, the most obvious lasting
legacy of the stimulus will be improved road and pavement
condition.
Mr. Southerland. OK.
Mr. Kienitz. And that is something that we track according
to an international standard about tracking pavement
conditions. You are supposed to replace pavement surface every
7 years and underlayment every 15 years, according to a
schedule that is well known by engineers.
And, for much of the last 40 or 50 years we just do not do
that on the schedule that we should, and that is why roads are
in bad shape. And we just got a huge amount of backlog out of
the system. And that is all stuff that in 7 years from now and
15 years from now is all going to have to be done again,
because that is the way it works. But at least for this
upcoming period, that stuff is going to be in way better shape.
And on the transit side, 12,000 new buses to replace 15-
and 20-year-old buses that break down all the time and have to
be fixed, that is going to be a big legacy.
Mr. Herr. I think it is a very fair question, and it is
something that we have recommended the DOT take steps to do, to
provide an assessment that looks across the $48 billion. I
think that timeframe is going to come up in about a year or so.
As Mr. Kienitz mentioned, certainly with regard to pavement,
buses, things of that nature. We have laid out what some of
those are at this point.
At some point you can also look at bridge rehabilitation as
well, and there are databases that would allow someone to look
back and determine whether a structurally deficient bridge was
improved or if a bridge that needed to be repaired that was in
a queue has been repaired. So there is an opportunity to do
that, and we certainly encourage the Department to take that
step, too.
Mr. Southerland. I know, because time is precious, let me
ask my follow-up question for those who did not get a chance at
that one.
When you are retired and you are back and you are looking
back over the stimulus dollars and the last 2 years, where will
you be honest and say, ``Man, the American people got the shaft
on this one''?
[No response.]
Mr. Southerland. I mean--and that is not a leading
question, I am just being fair. I have asked you where our
successes were, and I think it is fair--I am a small business
owner, OK? To say that, hey, you know, the--I mean what did we
learn?
Mr. Trimble. I mean, from our perspective, the work we did
early on, in terms of providing oversight on the process, I
think it did a lot to prevent any sort of disaster stories from
happening. We and the IGs have been out there making sort of
day-to-day or bimonthly reports on this issue to try to improve
the oversight. So I do not think we have seen those kind of
sort of big derailments of the process.
Mr. Herr. As you think about things like this in the
future, there is a tension between doing things quickly,
getting half the money obligated in 120 days and the other half
within a year----
Mr. Southerland. Right.
Mr. Herr. And then coming back later and asking, ``How many
big ticket projects got underway?'' There are trade-offs in
that respect.
Mr. Scovel. Sir, if I may cite one point.
Mr. Southerland. Sure.
Mr. Scovel. And this is a question mark that we have, and
it remains over the next number of years to be resolved. But it
has to do with high-speed rail.
Our statement points out that FRA has not yet issued
detailed guidance for forecasting processes that would help
determine sustainability and sustained award decisions. Neither
has FRA yet issued guidance on core management responsibilities
to provide the oversight that only the agency can do.
At the end of the process, if that is not a success, then
high-speed rail may well be marked a deficiency in the eyes of
the American public----
Mr. Southerland. Well, and I think this. You know, I tell
people that everything I learned to be a Member of Congress I
learned in our home by the age of 10. It is really not
complicated, OK? My father would make sure that we, as
children--that he gave us a little bit before he gave us a
whole lot. He wanted us to mess up with just a little bit
before we messed up with a whole lot. That is good parenting.
Now that we perpetuate our family's 60-year business, it is
good that that principle is followed.
The only thing that I can look--when we talk about high-
speed rail, what is the definition of a little bit before we
bite off a lot? I would say Amtrak. How have we managed? For
every dollar of revenue that we sell and that we generate, we
generate $2 in expenses. My father would have a little meeting
of the minds if, at the age of 10, I wasted $2 for every dollar
he gave me. And he would stop and say, ``You know what, son?
This was $5 here. I am not about to give you $50.'' Let's
understand the process.
You know, we talked to America that this is complicated up
here. I have to tell you it is not. I go back to the lessons of
my youth. And thankfully, at the end of the week, I get to
thank my parents for the lessons that they gave me as a child
in their home. I hope that you--because you are decisionmakers,
and your decisions affect hundreds upon hundreds of thousands--
millions of people, we must prove able with a little bit before
we force the American people to give us a lot.
I would say, over the stimulus, how many times did we feed
a man a fish, where what we really should have done is taught
that man how to fish, because we have then taken care of him
for the rest of his life?
I know this was a difficult challenge. But unless we say,
``Where did we screw up, what do we know, what have we learned,
and what are our options going forward,'' I would say you have
got to spend your time focusing on where did the American
people not get their biggest bang for their buck. If we claimed
we were going to freeze unemployment at 8 percent and we jumped
to 20--I mean jumped to 10, excuse me--we got to 10, what
should we have done to prevent that?
I am not accusing anyone. I am saying that you gentlemen
are in the position--the American people demand and deserve us
answering those questions. So thank you for testifying today.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Southerland. I probably exceeded my 5 minutes; I
apologize.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman for his questions. And any
others seek recognition?
[No response.]
Mr. Mica. If not, let me just conclude this hearing by
saying that I have tried to follow up again, I think, in a
responsible oversight manner. Mr. Oberstar, the former chair,
and myself had committed to do this. For the most part, the
funds that were spent, we have had a partial success story.
My concern has been that we did not put even more money
into infrastructure, get it out faster and put more people to
work, rather than paying unemployment benefits for social
programs, for artificial subsidization of a whole host of
things that turned out to be--and the best possible description
would be a total failure. We did put some people to work, and
not enough people. There are not permanent jobs for anyone, but
we can do longer term jobs, and we can also wisely invest the
limited tax dollars that we have available.
Unfortunately, the stimulus dollars too--every dollar we
spent, 42 cents was borrowed money, and at a very expensive
premium for the future.
So, I am disappointed overall in the stimulus, again, $787
billion. We have tried to be good stewards over the limited
amount--some $48 billion in the Department of Transportation,
and some $63 billion total. I would like to continue our
discussion of the expenditure of the money, particularly in the
rail area.
We do need a successful program in this country of high-
speed rail. I associate myself with the remarks of the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Capuano, that we should
focus--we have a corridor that we own that is a national asset,
an asset to Amtrak, and would be the perfect model for us, and
have the highest value of return for the entire Nation.
What's a guy from Florida saying, ``Put the money in the
Northeast Corridor'' for? Because 75 percent of the chronically
delayed flights in the Nation start from the Northeast
Corridor, because we have the fixed transit systems to
interconnect like they did in Europe, which I don't have in
Florida. Orlando still doesn't have any fixed transit, Tampa
does not. And trying to make that work is not going to happen.
And now we face the same thing with the California project
between Bakersfield and Fresno, neither, again, that have the
population or the transit systems to connect into. And I know
you start with a small segment, but what we need is a
successful segment.
And we have a corridor in which that can happen. So I look
forward to working with the members of this panel, with the
administration, Secretary LaHood, with the Vice President and
the President to try to have a success, not a failure, in that
regard.
I appreciate, again, the work of the inspectors general,
the General Accountability Office, and the under secretary for
policy of the Department of Transportation. We will have
additional questions which we will submit and be made part of
the record, and we will leave the record open for a period of 2
weeks to request that information, also receive answers.
There being no further business today before the House
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, this meeting is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

