- RAILROAD AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS: REFORMS AND IMPROVEMENTS TO REDUCE REGULATORY BURDENS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RAILROAD AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS: REFORMS
AND IMPROVEMENTS TO REDUCE
REGULATORY BURDENS

=======================================================================

(112-23)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
RAILROADS, PIPELINES, AND
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 7, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-645 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California           CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JERROLD NADLER, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RICK LARSEN, Washington
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 LAURA RICHARDSON, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JEFF DENHAM, California                (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)
VACANCY

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Bruno, Stephen J., Vice President, Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen.........................................     5
Chambers, Ray B., Executive Director, Association of Independent
Passenger Rail Operators.......................................     5
Conley, John L., President, National Tank Truck Carriers.........     5
Fauver, Toby L., AICP, Deputy Secretary, Local and Area
Transportation, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation......     5
Hamberger, Edward R., President and CEO, Association of American
Railroads......................................................     5
Hart, Hon. Christopher A., Vice Chairman, National Transportation
Safety Board...................................................     5
Hart, Thomas A., Jr., Esq., Vice President, Government Affairs
and General Counsel, US High Speed Rail Association............     5
Inclima, Rick, Director of Safety, Brotherhood of Maintenance of
Way Employes Division..........................................     5
McHugh, Joseph H., Vice President, Government Affairs and
Corporate Communications, Amtrak...............................     5
Millar, William, President, American Public Transportation
Association....................................................     5
O'Connor, Kevin B., Assistant to the General President,
International Association of Fire Fighters.....................     5
Parker, Leonard, National Legislative Director, Brotherhood of
Railroad Signalmen.............................................     5
Paul, Scott N., Executive Director, Alliance for American
Manufacturing..................................................     5
Pileggi, Mary L., North American Logistics Manager, Dupont, on
behalf of American Chemistry Council...........................     5
Self, Gary, Vice President and General Manager, Nelson Brothers,
Inc., representing the Institute of Makers of Explosives.......     5
Simpson, Thomas D., President, Railway Supply Institute, Inc.....     5
Sramek, Helen M., President, Operation Lifesaver, Inc............     5
Stem, James A., Jr., National Legislative Director, United
Transportation Union...........................................     5
Timmons, Richard F., President, American Short Line and Regional
Railroad Association...........................................     5

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Bruno, Stephen J.................................................    46
Chambers, Ray B..................................................    53
Conley, John L...................................................    56
Fauver, Toby L., AICP............................................    58
Hamberger, Edward R..............................................    62
Hart, Hon. Christopher A.........................................    87
Hart, Thomas A., Jr., Esq........................................    97
Inclima, Rick....................................................   103
McHugh, Joseph H.................................................   118
Millar, William..................................................   128
O'Connor, Kevin B................................................   145
Parker, Leonard..................................................   152
Paul, Scott N....................................................   160
Pileggi, Mary L..................................................   169
Self, Gary.......................................................   173
Simpson, Thomas D................................................   177
Sramek, Helen M..................................................   183
Stem, James A., Jr...............................................   187
Timmons, Richard F...............................................   196

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Brown, Hon. Corrine, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, request to include the statement from the Air Line
Pilots Association, International, entitled, ``Reducing
Regulatory Burdens and Ensuring Safe Transportation of
Hazardous Materials''..........................................    33
Inclima, Rick, Director of Safety, Brotherhood of Maintenance of
Way Employes Division, request to submit the following
documents for the record:

Letter to Hon. Bill Shuster, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Pennsylvania, and to Hon. Corrine Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........   199
Docket No. DOT-OST-2011-0025: Regulatory Review of Existing DOT
Regulations, Joint Written Comments of Rail Labor
Organizations................................................   201
Hazardous Materials: Improving the Safety of Railroad
Transportation of Hazardous Materials, Docket No. FRA-2011-
0004, Joint Written Comments of Seven Rail Labor
Organizations................................................   207
Risk Reduction Program ANPRM, Docket No. FRA-2009-0038, Joint
Written Comments of Seven Rail Labor Organizations...........   213
Evaluation of U.S. Department of Transportation/Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Hazardous Materials
Instructor Training Program (HMIT), 2009-2010 Program Year,
Railway Workers Hazardous Materials Training Program--
National Labor College (tables, appendices, and chart
omitted).....................................................   229

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Bennett, Bruce, President, Stage 8 Locking Fasteners, statement
for the record.................................................   265
Capon, Ross B., President and CEO, National Association of
Railroad Passengers, statement for the record..................   268
Wilkins, Phyllis, Chairman of the Board, United States Maglev
Coalition, testimony for the record............................   271

RAILROAD AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS: REFORMS
AND IMPROVEMENTS TO REDUCE
REGULATORY BURDENS

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines
and Hazardous Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:07 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Shuster
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Shuster. The hearing will come to order. I thank
everybody for being here this morning. I apologize for being
tardy. I would blame it on the traffic, but really I have to
blame it on myself. I did not plan to deal with the traffic, so
I should have got up earlier and put more time out there to
make sure I could get around town. But we are here, and again I
want to thank everybody for being here this morning.
We are going to do a transportation bill here in the coming
months, and we wanted to have an opportunity for stakeholders
to be able to have one last shot at telling us what they think
we should be doing. So we are going to get everybody on record
today.
We have got 19 witnesses today. They tell me that Jimmy
Duncan did the same amount of witnesses in 2 hours. So if those
of you in the room believe that rail is more efficient, we are
going to do it in less time than Jimmy Duncan did it in his
highways hearing. Four minutes per witness, I am going to be
brutal with the gavel. I will probably start tapping when the
yellow light comes on, just to remind you that your time is
going to end.
But again, we are looking forward to hearing from everybody
here today. John Mica and myself and others on the committee
crisscrossed the country, listening to folks to hear across
this country what they wanted to see in a new transportation
bill. Our message was very clear, that we are going to have to
figure out ways to do more with less. And that is the reality
of Washington and this country today.
But I am confident, after traveling the country, that we
can do more with less. The States are on board. The
stakeholders that we heard from across the country understand
that we have to do this. And it is going to be incumbent upon
us here in Washington to produce a bill that gets the Federal
Government out of the way, or at least gets them lined up as we
move these projects forward to move them forward with speed and
to be financially responsible, as we move forward.
I am going to give Members an opportunity--first of all,
yield to the Ranking Member, Ms. Brown, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, thank you. I want to thank Chairman
Shuster for holding today's hearing, allowing all of the
stakeholders to express their views on the upcoming bill to
reauthorize the Nation's surface transportation program.
I believe wholeheartedly that authorizing a 6-year surface
transportation bill with the appropriate funding levels and
policy will give the economy just the kind of kick-start it
needs.
We are experiencing a renaissance in passenger rail in this
country. And if we want to keep up with our international
competitors, we need to make a significant investment in
passenger and high-speed rail. I have advocated for the support
of a dedicated source of funding for rail that would encourage
the committee to include a minimum of $53 billion for high-
speed and intercity passenger rail over the life of the bill,
and $53 billion is what the administration had requested.
Compared to the funding levels in the overall bill, and the
money being spent in other countries on rail, $53 billion is a
drop in the bucket.
Although we have some very small-minded governors, support
for high-speed rail is still very high in this country. The FRA
received more than 90 applications from 24 States, the District
of Columbia, and Amtrak for the $2.4 billion that Florida
turned back. The request was for nearly $10 billion.
I also believe that this reauthorization offers us an
opportunity to improve the Railroad Rehabilitation and
Improvement Finance, RRIF, loan program. RRIF can help
railroads, shippers, and State meet their rail infrastructure
investment needs. But I do not think we are taking full
advantage of the program. I met with several railroads and
others, and they tell me time and time again how difficult the
application process is to navigate, how time consuming, how
expensive, how they cannot use studies from one DOT agency to
the other. I really do believe this is an area that we can work
together to do better.
The draft surface transportation authorization act of 2009
made significant changes in the RRIF program, which I proposed.
The bill authorizes the Secretary to reduce the interest to be
paid on direct loans provided to railroads, State and local
government, and eligibility for the sole purpose of installing
positive train control, allowing applicants to use private
insurance, including BUN insurance, in lieu of credit risk
premiums, allowing applicants to pay the credit risk premium
over the life of the loan.
The draft bill also authorized appropriations to the
Secretary in reducing the interest rate for loans using--
installing PTC. I hope that these provisions will be included
in the new bill.
I want to take this time to also express my strong support
for Amtrak. Congress has micro-managed and financially starved
them for most of their existence. We created Amtrak because the
freight rail could not make a profit on passenger service, yet
we continue to hammer Amtrak for not making enough money. The
Bush administration even went so far as to propose zero funding
for Amtrak, trying to bankrupt it.
I know that Chairman Mica wants to revisit some issues in
the Amtrak bill that was signed into law on 2008. I hope that
whatever he proposes, that we can work together and that we do
negotiations like we did during the 2008 negotiation of the
bill.
Our subcommittee is also making major strides in improving
the safety in the railroad industry. We are improving hours of
service and training standards, improving the working and
living conditions of railroad employees, and implementing
several critical NTSB standards, including positive train
control, which can save both lives and money.
All of the stakeholders are working very hard together to
implement these rules and make adjustments where we needed--we
need to do this working together.
Another issue that is critically important to the Gulf
States--and really, the entire Nation--is restorement of the
Sunset Limited route. This route served my home State of
Florida and other States along the Gulf Coast. But sadly, it
has been shut down since Hurricane Katrina. The people of the
State have been denied the ability to travel by rail, and most
important, they have lost the ability to move from harm's way
during a disaster. If Amtrak is unwilling to operate the line,
then we may very well be a good place for a private company to
provide service on this route.
Lastly, I want to encourage the committee to include
language that ensures that minorities, veterans, and women-
owned businesses are getting their fair share of the
transportation pie. Federal transportation spending has
historically served as a critical means to empower socially
disadvantaged business. Thanks to the effort of the
Congressional Black Caucus and a bipartisan group of members of
the House Transportation Committee, including former Chairman,
Bud Shuster, every major transportation bill since 1983 has
mandated minimum levels of participation for minorities or
women-owned companies.
Unfortunately, because the Federal Railroad Administration
has not historically been a significant grant-making agency, it
is not currently authorized to require opportunities for
disadvantaged business. I strongly encourage the committee to
take steps necessary to provide the FRA with the authority and
to develop other programs such as small business set-aside,
subcontracting, setting goals, and other avenues that ensure
that minorities and disadvantaged businesses have their fair
share of Federal funding contracts.
During the hearing process, we heard from witnesses who
want to limit the scope of the bill to just build roads. That
would be a mistake. We need a comprehensive bill that improves
our transportation system for everyone who uses it, whether
they are driving, walking, or taking public transportation--
public transit. My transportation person is here, Mr. Mike
Blalie, who runs my transit system and my roads system. Wave,
Mr.--thank you.
The stimulus bill has proven that transportation
infrastructure funding provides benefits to the community and
puts people back to work. From every billion dollars in
infrastructure funding, 32,000 permanent-paid jobs are created.
And that is exactly what this country needs.
With that, I want to welcome our panelists, and I am
looking forward to the hearing. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the Ranking Member. If nobody took
notice, she is fired up this morning.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. I am glad I am not the governor of Florida.
Thank you for that opening statement. None of the other
Members have an opening statement, so we are going to proceed.
I trust that Jimmy Miller has explained to you how we are going
to do this. After you get done, get up, the next person is
going to sit in your seat, and we are going to roll through
this. Again, we have got to make sure we do it faster than
Jimmy Duncan did it.
But--and if you have a longer statement, it will be in the
record. So, as we move forward to write the bill, we will have
all your thoughts on paper and in the record.
So again, thank you, everybody, for coming. Remember, 4
minutes.
And we will start with the Honorable Christopher Hart, who
is the vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board.
So, Mr. Hart, proceed, please.

TESTIMONY OF HON. CHRISTOPHER A. HART, VICE CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD; JOSEPH H. MCHUGH, VICE PRESIDENT,
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS AND CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS, AMTRAK; EDWARD
R. HAMBERGER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN
RAILROADS; RICHARD F. TIMMONS, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN SHORT LINE
AND REGIONAL RAILROAD ASSOCIATION; WILLIAM MILLAR, PRESIDENT,
AMERICAN PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION ASSOCIATION; THOMAS A. HART,
JR., ESQ., VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, US HIGH SPEED RAIL ASSOCIATION; RAY B. CHAMBERS,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT PASSENGER RAIL
OPERATORS; TOBY L. FAUVER, AICP, DEPUTY SECRETARY, LOCAL AND
AREA TRANSPORTATION, PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION;
THOMAS D. SIMPSON, PRESIDENT, RAILWAY SUPPLY INSTITUTE, INC.;
SCOTT N. PAUL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALLIANCE FOR AMERICAN
MANUFACTURING; HELEN M. SRAMEK, PRESIDENT, OPERATION LIFESAVER,
INC.; JAMES A. STEM, JR., NATIONAL LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, UNITED
TRANSPORTATION UNION; STEPHEN J. BRUNO, VICE PRESIDENT,
BROTHERHOOD OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND TRAINMEN; LEONARD
PARKER, NATIONAL LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, BROTHERHOOD OF RAILROAD
SIGNALMEN; RICK INCLIMA, DIRECTOR OF SAFETY, BROTHERHOOD OF
MAINTENANCE OF WAY EMPLOYES DIVISION; GARY SELF, VICE PRESIDENT
AND GENERAL MANAGER, NELSON BROTHERS, INC., REPRESENTING THE
INSTITUTE OF MAKERS OF EXPLOSIVES; JOHN L. CONLEY, PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL TANK TRUCK CARRIERS; MARY L. PILEGGI, NORTH AMERICAN
LOGISTICS MANAGER, DUPONT, ON BEHALF OF AMERICAN CHEMISTRY
COUNCIL; AND KEVIN B. O'CONNOR, ASSISTANT TO THE GENERAL
PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE FIGHTERS

Mr. Christopher Hart. Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member
Brown, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for giving
the National Transportation Safety Board the opportunity to
appear today to discuss improving transportation safety. I am
Christopher Hart, Vice Chairman of the NTSB.
My written testimony addresses the safety of several
railroad and hazardous materials transportation programs,
including positive train control, air transportation of lithium
batteries, wet lines on highway cargo tanks, loading and
unloading of hazardous materials in railroad tank cars and
highway cargo tanks, and highway cargo tank rollovers.
In the few minutes I have this morning, I will focus on the
first of these topics--positive train control--and the
significant improvement to rail safety that it will bring. The
competent, highly trained professionals in the railroad
industry all share a common trait. No matter how good they are,
they may occasionally make mistakes, just like any other human
being. Positive train control provides a very important back-
up, a redundancy, against the inevitability of human error in
four railroad accident scenarios that are most likely to cause
injury and death.
Those four scenarios are: collisions between trains,
overspeed derailments, incursions into work areas, and going
through a switch that is incorrectly aligned. That is why the
NTSB placed positive train control on its Most Wanted List when
it created the Most Wanted List in 1990. Positive train control
remained on that list until we removed it when Congress, in its
wisdom, enacted the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008. This
Act requires Class I railroads to implement positive train
control by December 31, 2015, over rail lines that carry
poisonous by inhalation or toxic by inhalation hazardous
materials, or that carry regularly scheduled intercity or
commuter passenger trains.
In the past 5 years, the NTSB has investigated 20 railroad
accidents that involve collisions or derailments, some of which
are shown on these slides. Of those 20, most resulted from
operator error, and more than half could have been prevented or
mitigated by positive train control.
The redundancy that is provided by positive train control
is becoming even more crucial as we are beginning to see a very
disturbing increase in operator distraction from personal
electronic devices in all modes of transportation. An example
of this is the distraction that led to the tragic collision in
2008 between a passenger train and a freight train in
Chatsworth, California, that resulted in 25 fatalities and more
than 130 injuries.
Another technology implementation success story occurred
with the airlines, with the advent of terrain awareness warning
systems to warn pilots when they are dangerously close to
terrain, and dangerously close to one of the most lethal types
of aviation accidents, commonly known as controlled flight into
terrain, or CFIT. That warning system serves as a very
important backup or redundancy for the occasional human error
by competent, highly trained pilots.
Thanks to the requirement in the U.S. for terrain awareness
warning systems, we have not had a domestic CFIT fatality
involving a passenger air carrier since 1996, despite the fact
that CFIT is the second leading cause of aviation accidents
worldwide.
The Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008 and the Federal
Railroad Administration's 2009 rulemaking implementing the Act
will significantly improve rail safety by creating much-needed
safety redundancy for the inevitable failures of human
performance, such as those listed in this slide.
In closing, the NTSB was created to advocate for
transportation safety, and to push Federal and State agencies
and industry to do the right thing for safety. Chairman
Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and members of this
subcommittee, implementing positive train control is the safe
thing to do and the right thing to do.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. Mr. Stephen Klejst, director of the NTSB's office of
Railroad, Pipeline, and Hazardous Materials Investigations,
will remain to respond to questions. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Hart. I appreciate
that.
And next, Mr. Joe McHugh, vice president of government
affairs and corporate communications for Amtrak.
Mr. McHugh. Thank you, Mr. Shuster, Ms. Brown. It is very
nice to see all of you here, members of the committee. Thank
you for this opportunity to testify.
Briefly, we have been doing very well at Amtrak. We have
just this week announced our 17th consecutive month of
ridership increases. And over the period from 2000 we have had
a 40-percent increase in ridership for the corporation.
Briefly, we at Amtrak like the broad contours of the
administration's fiscal year 2012 budget proposal, which begins
to move rail in the direction of making it an equal partner in
surface transportation funding and policy. The proposal would
consolidate traditional Amtrak and high-speed rail programs and
provide some degree of funding stability and certainty that
would help us to advance our systems, and would make it similar
to those available for highway and aviation systems.
As the only intercity rail passenger provider, and the only
currently operator of high-speed service in the United States,
we believe that a rail title--the surface bill should build on
the proposal advanced initially by the administration. And we
would recommend five objectives to that.
First, we would recommend that the rail title provide a
multiyear dedicated funding source for high-speed service and
for intercity passenger rail. We can define what high-speed
means, but we should begin to look at opportunities to advance
rail passenger service, particularly connecting major
metropolitan areas. Major capital programs such as railroad
construction require a commitment of funds, and are very hard
to initiate, let alone accomplish, without some funding
certainty.
Second, we would hope to establish a national investment
strategy to guide project planning and execution. We would look
to future trends, and we would look to work with the FRA,
regional body, State governments, and other key stakeholders
that we have traditionally worked with.
Third, we would ask that the legislation not overlook some
of the unique assets and practices that Amtrak has to offer. We
have a lot of experience now, over 40 years of operating
service throughout the United States, in 46 States, and we have
an incredible amount of reserves, assets, and knowledge. We
would hope that the committee would seek to leverage some of
those capabilities as they move forward on the legislation.
Fourth--five ideas here--fourth, the rail title should also
ensure coordination between various stakeholders, better
planning, and project execution among FRA, Amtrak, the region
States, and our host railroad partners as a requirement to
ensure that new and existing services are integrated with other
systems. And that will help maximize benefits and provide
better economies of scale. Planning coordination should
facilitate and not hinder multistate partnerships, such as what
we have in the northeast corridor and what we have also seen
developing in the Midwest, with the Midwest regional rail
initiative.
Finally, we would ask that--the rail title is an
opportunity to bring some order to licensing and insurance
requirements for passenger rail operators. Amtrak is required
by statute to have $200 million in insurance coverage. Other
operators do not necessarily have to carry insurance, even if
they receive funding under other Federal programs other than
PRIIA. The lack of a standard Federal liability requirement is
a major impediment, and makes it difficult to develop new
services, and raises the risk that liability for damages could
be offloaded on the taxpayer.
It is very clear that the basic assumptions about travel
that had governed our policy for decades have changed. Even the
development of electric automobiles raises the implicit
question of whether a gas tax will continue to be a reliable
funding mechanism 8 years out.
So, we look forward to working with you on addressing those
problems, and we hope that this surface reauthorization bill
will become a revolutionary and not evolutionary advancement in
transportation. And we hope that we will reduce some of the
funding silos and have a more results-based funding
requirement.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. McHugh. I appreciate that.
And next up, Mr. Ed Hamberger, president and CEO of
Association of American Railroads. Mr. Hamberger, please
proceed.
Mr. Hamberger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, for the opportunity to present the views of AAR
members on reauthorization of SAFETEA-LU.
An efficient and safe transportation system is, of course,
essential to the growth and prosperity of our Nation. The
system today is overburdened. And it is important that you have
acknowledged this problem, and are seeking ways to fix it. Be
assured that America's railroads stand ready to work with all
policymakers and stakeholders to be part of that solution.
Indeed, moving more freight and passengers by rail can
provide enormous public benefits: less pollution, less
congestion, less energy consumption.
As you work toward legislation, we would like you to
consider three key points. The first is the importance of a
level playing field to freight railroads. This does not exist
today. America's freight railroads operate almost exclusively
on infrastructure that they own, build, maintain, and pay for
themselves. Indeed, we pay taxes on our own right of way.
By contrast, trucks operate on publicly financed highways,
and the taxes they pay do not come close to covering the damage
they inflict on the Nation's highways. This already places
railroads at a competitive disadvantage. A recent study of DOT
data indicates that 80,000-pound trucks underpay their fair
share today by $.28 a gallon. Yet there are several proposals
to increase the current size and weight limit on trucks. None
of these proposals contains measures that would meaningfully
reduce the tax subsidy enjoyed by larger trucks.
In fact, at 97,000 pounds, the taxpayer subsidy to the
trucks would be $1.17 a gallon. And the result would be
significant diversion of freight rail to highway--freight from
rail to highway, with particularly dire consequences for short
line railroads.
The second point we would like you to consider is the
importance of regulatory certainty for railroads. Thanks to
partial deregulation brought on by the Staggers Act, railroads
were able to significantly increase investment and
infrastructure and equipment. Since 1980, we have invested some
$480 billion private funds--that's $.40 out of every revenue
dollar--into infrastructure and equipment. The industry
appreciates the letters sent by the bipartisan leadership of
the full committee and this subcommittee to the Surface
Transportation Board opposing changes to the regulatory system
that would impeded our ability to continue to make these needed
investments. This year alone we anticipate a record $12 billion
of investment in CapX.
However, our ability to continue this level of investment
is threatened and undercut by uncertainties created by issues
such as: an overly broad positive train control mandate, as we
discussed with this committee last month; high potential
liability stemming from the common carrier obligation to carry
extremely hazardous materials; proposals to impose a safety fee
on railroads not charged to other industries; and proposals to
create a freight fund to be financed by a fee on freight
shipments.
This imposition of such a fee would be especially
egregious, since, as I have just noted, we already pay for our
own infrastructure.
Finally, there are a number of existing programs covered by
this legislation that work very well, and we would hope they
would continue. Among these is the section 130 grade crossing
program that financing grade crossing safety improvements,
which, along with educational programs and outreach from
Operation Lifesaver, is credited with the fact that today grade
crossing accidents, deaths, and injuries are at historic lows.
We also believe Congress should continue to encourage
metropolitan planning organizations to consider freight
transportation needs, and we support, including the short line
tax credit, CMAQ program, and public-private partnerships.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you this
morning.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Hamberger. And next,
General Richard Timmons, president of the American Short Line
and Regional Railroad Association. General, please proceed.
General Timmons. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and members of
the committee. Thank you for the invitation to be here today. I
am Rich Timmons, president of the American Short Line and
Regional Railroad Association. We represent 550 Class II and
Class III railroads across North America. I appreciate the
opportunity to list those items the Short Line Association
believes should be included in the rail title of the SAFETEA-LU
reauthorization bill.
First, let me say that we endorse the concepts presented by
Mr. Hamberger and the AAR, and I will expand on a number of
those in this testimony. But each of their recommendations help
the short line industry or make for a stronger Class I
industry, which is good for the entire railroad industry, as a
whole.
Our first priority is to extend the short line
rehabilitation tax credit, which expires at the end of this
year. We know this is dealt with in the tax title of the bill,
but our hope is to include the extension in your final SAFETEA-
LU reauthorization. And we want to emphasize how important this
is to the short lines, to members of this committee.
Congressman Shuster and Congressman Costello are original
cosponsors of our current extension legislation, H.R. 721. In
the last Congress we had 262 House cosponsors, including 57
members of the Congress' T&I committee. We hope every member of
the current T&I committee will sign on as a cosponsor of H.R.
721.
We also hope that in your discussions with the Ways and
Means Committee you will take the time to emphasize how
important the tax credit is to maximizing investment in
infrastructure, preserving service to small and medium-sized
shippers, and improving track safety. In a fiscal environment
where Federal funds are funds for maintaining freight rail
infrastructure will undoubtedly be constrained, the fiscally
responsible step is to encourage private enterprise to fund
private sector improvements with private dollars, and the
section 45D does just that.
We strongly encourage the committee to enact the so-called
SHIPA legislation extending the current freeze on longer and
heavier trucks to the entire national highway system.
Increasing truck size and weights will divert rail traffic to
the highways, increasing congestion and highway repair costs.
The change will also create a huge shortfall between the truck
share of highway damage and their contribution to those costs.
As indicated, we support the AAR recommendation on positive
train control. In addition, we believe the Federal Government
should help pay for this unfunded mandate. Funding PTC is well
beyond the resources of short line railroads. It will force
short lines to reallocate money from much more important
rehabilitation projects to a highly complex system that will
result in virtually no safety benefits for the typical short
line operation.
As Chairman Mica and many other members of the committee
have stressed repeatedly, the RRIF program has the ability to
invest $35 billion into rail improvements without an
appropriation, and using private sector commitments to repay
the loans. However, absent improvements, this program will
remain stuck where it has been for the past 10 years.
In February, the short line industry testified before this
committee concerning the RRIF program. And last month we
participated in a T&I staff workshop on the same subject. We
have made a number of recommendations, including providing a
TIFIA-like subsidy that would allow more flexible loans,
increasing FRA staffing resources, bringing the credit council
and OMB participation into line with the 90-day requirement,
and easing certain collateral requirements. We will work with
the Congress to draft language on these subjects.
We encourage the committee to eliminate the unintended
impact on small railroads, the hours of service provisions in
the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008. Clearly, they were
drafted to address long-haul conditions, but do not fit the
mostly daylight short-haul operations of small railroads.
Granting relief from restrictions not at all relevant to small
railroad operations will not impact safety, and continue the
service which shippers expect from their Class II and Class III
carriers.
Finally, we urge you to reauthorize the rail relocation
program. This is a--one of the very few programs that provide
direct financial assistance to railroads. While railroads were
able to compete for last year's Tiger funding program, the rail
relocation program is geared specifically to railroads, and can
be enormously effective in addressing rail safety issues
associated with grade separations and improving movement in and
out of yards and industrial parks.
I appreciate the opportunity to present the views of the
short line industry. We would be pleased to answer any
questions that you may have at the appropriate time. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, General. Next, Mr.
William Millar, the president of the American Public
Transportation Association.
Mr. Millar, please?
Mr. Millar. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Brown. On behalf of APTA's 1,500 public and private sector
members, it is my pleasure to be here.
APTA urges the Congress to enact a well-funded, 6-year,
multimodal surface transportation bill as soon as possible. It
is one of the most important actions Congress can take to
improve mobility while preparing our Nation for the coming
economic and population growth.
Increasing ridership on commuter railroads and Amtrak
indicates that Americans are clamoring for options to avoid
high gas prices, congested roadways, and crowded airports.
Commuter railroads are eager to meet demands for more service,
but face significant obstacles in that effort.
At the same time, operators want to improve safety. We are
grateful that this committee, on March 17th, held a hearing on
the Rail Safety Improvement Act, which requires, among other
provisions, that commuter railroads implement positive train
control by December 31, 2015.
As the APTA witnessed explained that day, there are three
key items needed to implement positive train control: first,
adequate Federal funding; second, sufficient radio spectrum;
and, third, more time to develop, test, and implement the
required technologies. Implementing PTC on the Nation's
commuter railroads will cost more than $2 billion. These costs
are forcing commuter railroads to consider reducing service or
deferring other critical system safety and state of good repair
projects, in order to redirect limited funds to get PTC online
by 2015. Examples of these deferrals include bridge
replacements, electrical substation modernization, and shop and
yard improvements.
Deferring safety projects or cutting service should not be
the price of implementing PTC. We urge the Congress to fund at
least 80 percent of PTC costs for commuter railroads, extend
PTC implementation deadline for commuter railroads by 3 years,
and direct the Federal Communications Commission to set aside
adequate radio spectrum at no cost to commuter railroads. If
these things are done, PTC can happen very quickly.
Turning to high-speed and intercity passenger rail, a
recent survey of nearly 25,000 Americans found that 62 percent
expected to use high-speed rail, if it were available, while
only 11 percent said they would not. Amtrak reported record
ridership last year with its higher speed Acela service
ridership growing twice as fast as its regular service.
Some 32 States plus the District of Columbia are forging
ahead and planning and implementing rail improvements. A recent
study found that each billion dollars invested in high-speed
rail supports at least 24,000 jobs. That means that the 6-year
investment proposed by President Obama would spur nearly 1.3
million jobs in construction, manufacturing, and service
industries. APTA supports the President's proposal, and we urge
this committee to carefully consider the importance of creating
and sustaining 1.3 million mostly private sector jobs.
In order to properly fund--besides properly funding high-
speed and intercity rail, a long-term legislative authorization
is also required. APTA supports passenger rail that connects
with other modes of transportation, encourages the growth of
rail freight service, provides for strong investment by the
private sector, requires open and fair competition, expedites
program delivery, and establishes common standards across DOT
agencies for the efficient implementation of NEPA provisions,
while adhering to Federal rail laws, Americans with Disability
Act, and the inclusion of disadvantaged business enterprises.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to be with you.
I will look forward to answering your questions at the
appropriate time.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Millar.
Next, Thomas Hart, the vice president of government
affairs, and general counsel for the US High Speed Rail
Association.
Mr. Hart, proceed, please.
Mr. Thomas Hart. Thank you, Chairman Shuster and Ranking
Member Brown. On behalf of the United States High Speed Rail
Association, its president, Andy Kunz, and its 250 members, I
extend greetings to this prestigious subcommittee on railroads,
pipelines, and hazardous material. I am here representing the
USHSR as its vice president for government affairs and general
counsel. I also serve as the director of the Washington office
of the national law firm of Quarles and Brady.
The United States High Speed Rail Association is a non-
profit trade association committed to advancing the state of--
and our nationwide true high-speed system, completed in phases
across the country. Our mission is to build widespread public,
business, and political support for a major investment in the
Nation's high-speed rail network. We support a 6-year
authorization bill under consideration by this subcommittee.
The United States High Speed Rail Association is pleased to
share its thoughts on how to expedite the development of high-
speed rail in the United States through the investment of
private funds in this infrastructure.
On January 27th I had the pleasure to testify in New York
before the full committee. Many of you were there in New York.
And the issue of public-private partnerships was discussed at
great length. Shortly thereafter, we had a summit hearing in
Washington, where subcommittee Chairman Bill Shuster and
Ranking Member Corrine Brown and other Members of Congress and
over 400 attendees participated in that focus discussion on the
deployment of high-speed rail in America.
We are delighted today to offer model legislation to
establish a Federal program that will assist in the rapid
creation of a true high-speed rail system funded in part by
innovative public-private partnerships. Mr. Chairman, the model
legislation is part of my testimony. I would like to have it
introduced into the record.
Mr. Shuster. It will be in the record. Thank you.
Mr. Thomas Hart. Thank you. Presently, most of our national
transportation systems are overloaded and in a state of
disrepair. This causes delays and costs more than $100 billion
per year in lost time and wasted fuel. The price of oil is
already traded at over $100 a barrel, and is expected to
continue to rise. The quicker we can build alternative forms of
transportation, the better for the Nation.
There are many corridors in the United States that are of
high interest to private investment. One, of course, is the
northeast corridor, which we have discussed among this panel,
and among the committee on numerous occasions. The northeast
corridor is ripe for high-speed rail investment and private
investors stand ready to assist in that effort.
Chicago is also a hub for high-speed rail traffic that
could be very profitable. And the West Coast systems in
California and Las Vegas also have great potential.
To very quickly focus on the legislation that is being
offered by the US High Speed Rail Association today, let me
highlight a couple of key provisions. Section 19 talks about
the small business initiatives that are necessary. It is true
that the FRA has not yet developed a small business program,
and they should do so rapidly. Also, we propose an economic
development credit for transportation infrastructure developed
around the train stations for high-speed rail.
We also propose a creative way for private investment to
come into Amtrak. There is only one shareholder of Amtrak, and
that is the United States Government. We suggest that a private
offering be made of Amtrak stock up to 5 percent. So let us
test the market and see if Amtrak can stand the test of Wall
Street.
We also encourage expanding the RRIF program and the TIFIA
program, and we do support the creation of an infrastructure
bank.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, we are pleased to work
with you through these issues, as this legislation moves
through Congress and the Senate. Thank you again for your
leadership in this issue, and we are ready to answer any
questions or comments that you have regarding the legislation.
Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Hart. Next, Mr. Ray Chambers,
who is the executive director of the Association of Independent
Passenger Rail Operators. Mr. Chambers, please proceed.
Mr. Chambers. Thank you.
Our organization is only about 6 weeks old. We are
dedicated to increasing the passenger rail network and
increasing the development of the Nation's rail infrastructure.
We testified before you on March 11th. We outlined a specific
program at that time for reforms in the Passenger Rail
Investment Improvement Act.
At that time, Chairman Shuster, you made a statement that--
on PRIIA--``For the first time, rail capital infrastructure
programs were established that gave the States primary control
to improve and expand intercity passenger rail services.''
Expanding on that idea is the heart of what our association is
all about.
We are recommending a self-contained section to the rail
title that would promote public-private partnering and
passenger railroading. We are calling for a strong passenger
rail commission that would oversee that program. One role of
the commission will be to identify regulatory burdens and put
forward new and expedited procedures.
In the written testimony here I have outlined several areas
where we believe reforms can be taken in the rail title of this
bill. One of those is RRIF. What Ranking Member Brown outlined
is very much in accord with where we would like to see RRIF go.
We believe the section 214 passenger pilot program is too
complex and should be streamlined. Similarly, the State-
supported rail program should be reformed. On that program, we
believe that the authority of the States should be increased
over State-supported routes of fewer than 750 miles, and that
competition for operations should be encouraged.
Also on the regulatory front we think that the
environmental and other regulatory permitting of work,
particularly on existing track, is too lengthy, too expensive,
and is too complex. Right now, if a freight railroad wants to
build a second track on an existing right of way with private
money, it can be done with no regulatory approvals. If public
funds are used to do exactly the same thing, there is a full-
blown environmental permitting and approval process. We
recommend that if the line exists and a public project is
approved, the freight standard for permitting improvement
should be applied.
Now, while passenger expansion is essential, we also
believe it must not be at the expense of the freight railroads
or labor. Negotiations for access should be arm's length, in
terms of the freight railroads. PRIIA labor protections should
be carried forward.
Now, public-private partnering is relatively new to the
American rail scene, and that is why we need a specific
initiative or proposal to support it and enhance it. Many
issues need to be worked through, and that is the purpose of
the commission that we are proposing.
We know that, in the final analysis, private partners will
create efficiencies and cost savings that will be passed back
to the States that will lower operating subsidies, will help
guarantee loan repayments, and will improve services. These
partnerships, by definition, include private sector
participation.
We think that our proposal is in direct line with what
Chairman Mica and Shuster have called for to reduce regulatory
burdens, to increase competition and private sector
participation in passenger rail service. We also think that it
is the best way to reach President Obama's goal of putting
high-speed and intercity passenger rail option within the reach
of most Americans.
Finally, we applaud the leadership of this committee with
the decision to make the next 6-year surface transportaion act
a full inter-modal bill, along the lines of Ms. Brown's
comments.
We believe that a strong P3 program in the rail title with
Federal oversight and State responsibility can begin to
establish rail as the third American transportation option,
along with highways and aviation. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chambers. Next, Toby Fauver,
who is the deputy secretary of local and area transportation
for the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Or, as we
like to call him, he is the Rail Guy.
Mr. Fauver. Right.
Mr. Shuster. So----
Mr. Fauver. Correct. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Proceed, please.
Mr. Fauver. I am going to spend a little bit of time giving
you some highlights of some of my written testimony. I want to
start off by talking briefly about the projects that we have
done in Pennsylvania and, in particular, just to give you a
highlight of what we have accomplished.
In 2006, we completed a partnership program with Amtrak to
restore the Keystone Corridor between Harrisburg and
Philadelphia. There is still a lot of work that needs to be
done there. But we achieved a lot of success. We reduced travel
time in that corridor to make it competitive with the
automobile. Our express trains actually--you can travel between
Harrisburg and Philadelphia faster than the automobile. And
since 2006, ridership on that line has grown by 45 percent.
But there is still a lot of challenges. Thirty years after
the ADA law passed, we still have stations that do not meet
ADA, that are not accessible. We still have challenges with
equipment that does not meet ADA, and is not accessible. And we
need to address that. Much of our infrastructure is still 80-
plus years old, needs to be replaced and meet state of good
repair and improve reliability of the line.
So, where are investment priorities? High-speed and
intercity rail programs are about connecting high-density city
areas. And doing so will promote higher levels of
sustainability. In Pennsylvania, our population increased about
1 percent over the past decade, but our population spread out
in Pennsylvania, consuming a 50-percent increase in land for
that population growth. And I believe that promoting intercity
rail and good development around stations will help to reduce
that trend.
It is important to note that Federal dollars we were
talking about for high-speed rail and the cost--they are
focused on the cost for building systems. States and cities
still have to address with how they are going to pay for the
operating expense and maintenance expense, long term. In
Pennsylvania, we have made those choices, and have been doing
that since the 1980s, and have been contributing more and more
every year. This past year we are contributing over $9 million,
just the service between Harrisburg and Philadelphia.
Many States, including Pennsylvania, are struggling with
the new Federal requirements under section 209 of PRIIA, and it
is something that States and AASHTO are working actively with
Amtrak to try to address. But a State like ours will face a
four to five times increase in charges for operating expense
that we are not going to get any additional service or any
improvements for. And that is going to be something that is
going to be hard for our State legislature or governor to have
to deal with, especially when it is a federally owned company,
Amtrak, and our State has no say in labor contracts, overhead
spending decisions, or work practices.
We cannot ignore investing in rail infrastructure and
expect that some day we are going to emerge with the best
system in the world. We also cannot bury ourselves in
bureaucracy that slow down projects and system development. I
want to focus on a couple things that I would suggest for
reauthorization.
One of the things is that we need to eliminate the
overlapping authority for NEPA clearance between our Federal
departments, Federal agencies, under USDOT. We have experienced
numerous projects where we have started with one source of
Federal funding in a project, and then added another source of
Federal funding from a different agency, had NEPA clearance
from one agency, and then had to go back, spend a year-and-a-
half, two years, getting NEPA clearance from a second agency.
That creates--number one, it creates a big time delay in
delivering projects. It adds cost, cost growth in the project
cost, and it also costs our State taxpayers more money, which
didn't change the project or change the results. That is a big
problem.
NEPA is one law. It applies to all those agencies in the
same way. But they have all interpreted it differently in the
way they apply it.
In the case of passenger rail, we need to learn from the
rest of the world and think about separating infrastructure
ownership from infrastructure operation, especially if we are
going to expect to introduce competition and look at innovative
practices, going forward. It is a big challenge. How do we
introduce public-private partnerships when we have a railroad
that owns the infrastructure or an area that owns the
infrastructure and is also responsible for operating it? And we
have got to find a way to deal with that.
So the next thing I wanted to focus on, I guess, is----
Mr. Shuster. That means you are going to wrap up.
Mr. Fauver. OK. We need to have dedicated funding for both
capital and operating expenses going forward, and that is in
partnership between State and Federal Government. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much. Just do not tell the
Secretary I cut you off.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. And thank you very much for being here today.
Next is Mr. Thomas Simpson, who is president of the Rail
Supply Institute. Mr. Simpson, please proceed.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am honored to be
here today. I am here on behalf of over 225 members of the
Railway Supply Institute, the companies that provide goods and
services to our Nation's freight and passenger railroads. They
employ somewhere between 100,000 and 150,000 people.
The--I would like to talk a little bit about the economic
downturn, the effect it has had on my industry. Strong railroad
capital expenditures continued through the downturn, and that
benefitted communications, the maintenance of members. The
catastrophic loss of freight traffic, however, adversely
affected the freight car and locomotive builders. Only now are
they starting to enjoy a tenuous rebound. And, of course,
sporadic investment in our city passenger rail has not allowed
that sector to grow like it should be able to.
I am going to refer you to my wonderfully written
testimony, and simply list the issues that are of importance to
us, and would like to discuss them at length, if you would like
me to.
We think you should continue the section 130 highway rail
grade crossing safety program, the program that allows lights
and gates to be installed at highway rail intercrossings, and
also continue to fund Operation Lifesaver. The Railway Supply
Institute was a founding founder of the Operation Lifesaver,
Incorporated. I sit on its board of directors. It is hard not
to argue that Federal investment in the section 130 program and
Operation Lifesaver has led to the dramatic decrease in
accidents at highway rail grade crossings, with an increase in
traffic expected on both our highways and our railroads. With
faster passenger trains and more passenger trains, now is not
the time to stop funding those two very important highway rail
safety initiatives.
I join my friends, Joe McHugh and Bill Millar, to argue for
a dedicated source of funding for intercity and high-speed
passenger rail that will allow Amtrak and the States and, yes,
suppliers to plan and invest in the future without having to
wait year in and year out for appropriations.
You should simplify the Buy America regulations. Currently
there are three different Buy America policies: one for
transit, one for Amtrak, and one for high-speed rail. At best,
this is confusing to suppliers, and they ought to be unified
and uniform.
I ask you to retain the current truck size and weight
policy that the Federal Government has. An increase in truck
size and weights will devastate the freight car-building
industry, the car-leasing industry. And only now, as I pointed
out, are they enjoying a tenuous rebound.
We, of course, endorse the short line infrastructure tax
credit.
And all these programs that we endorse are incredibly
important to the railway supply industry, and incredibly
important to creating--preserving and creating jobs in this
country.
I will bring it in on time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate that. You made up for PennDOT
going over.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. I will take note of that. Thank you very much,
Mr. Simpson.
Next, Mr. Scott Paul, who is the executive director of the
Alliance for American Manufacturers. Mr. Paul, please proceed.
Mr. Paul. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. I speak to you as the
executive director of a labor management partnership that
includes many stakeholders that make rail and make products
that go into the rail infrastructure, including the workers at
ArcelorMittal in Steelton, in Pennsylvania. And I also come to
you as a one-time resident of Addison, Pennsylvania, in
Somerset County, which, as you know, you can miss if you go by
too quickly.
Mr. Shuster. Addison?
Mr. Paul. Addison, yes. I am here to talk about Buy America
today. We believe strongly that every effort must be made to
ensure that American-made iron, steel, and other manufactured
goods are used extensively in our rail infrastructure.
Buy America is not a new concept. For nearly 80 years, the
United States has had domestic sourcing or Buy America laws on
the books. To support our national security capabilities, Buy
America laws were expanded in the 1940s to apply to defense
spending. And in the early 1980s, Buy America requirements were
signed into law by Ronald Reagan for highway and transit
projects for federally funded grants.
In a nod to the benefits of domestic sourcing, Federal
policymakers have applied Buy America provisions to Amtrak and
to the high-speed rail, intercity rail passenger programs. A
Buy America provision was first applied to Amtrak when the Rail
Passenger Service Act was passed by Congress in 1978. And when
Congress passed the Amtrak Reorganization Act of 1979, it
reiterated its desire to reinvest U.S. tax dollars in jobs,
noting in the conference report that ``It is the conference
committee's strong belief that Amtrak equipment purchased with
U.S. tax revenue should continue to be returned to the U.S.
economy by strongly favoring American suppliers and U.S.
labor.''
That U.S. tax dollars should be reinvested in the economy
is a view echoed by today's policymakers. The Federal Railroad
Administration recently observed, relative to the high-speed
rail program, the Buy America requirements that ``encouraging
grantees to use manufacturers or suppliers who maximize
domestic content will help it to achieve its goal of 100
percent domestic content in the near future.''
To realize the job-creating and economy-expanding potential
of Buy America preferences in our infrastructure laws, it is
important that the preferences apply to all manner of Federal
aid infrastructure programs in a way that maximizes domestic
content. As stated in a 2010 Northeastern University study,
``Full domestic sourcing would dramatically increase
employment.''
In the context of passenger and freight rail, this means
that the Buy America provisions should be applied across
programs in a manner that maximizes U.S.-produced content. This
will create more jobs, expand economic opportunity for U.S.
businesses, and enable businesses to better manage their supply
chains.
The domestic content requirement currently applies to the
high-speed rail program. It should be applied to all Federal
aid programs for rail infrastructure.
For instance, the domestic content Buy America provision
should extend to the railroad rehabilitation improvement
financing program to require a preference for U.S. taxpayer-
produced goods in return for the $35 billion in tax dollars
authorized to the RRIF program for direct loans and loan
guarantees to finance the development of rail infrastructure. I
would add that the Buy America program does include safeguards
to present--to prevent monopolization or high costs, and there
is scant evidence that Buy America requirements raised costs
for projects that are underway.
We strongly believe that the waiver process for Buy America
waivers needs to be made much more transparent and airtight. We
urge the subcommittee to review ways to increase and streamline
transparency when waivers are requested and issued. Some, but
not all, government agencies make waiver requests available to
the public for 15 days before approving the purchase of goods
manufactured abroad. We believe that needs to be strictly
enforced and applied to all Buy America programs.
I would also point out that the Buy America requirements
have enabled a supply chain to be developed for the manufacture
of rail products, that they are fully consistent with our
international trade obligations, and that they are longstanding
U.S. policy.
Thank you for your consideration, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Paul.
Next, Ms. Helen Sramek, who is the president of the
Operation Lifesaver.
Ms. Sramek. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and members of the
subcommittee, for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss a small, but very important and effective program that
Congress has supported for almost 40 years.
Operation Lifesaver exists because of a startling fact:
About every 3 hours in the United States, a person or vehicle
is hit by a train. We are the only nationwide public safety
organization whose sole mission is to save lives and reduce
injuries at highway rail crossings and on or around railroad
tracks.
On our website, you will see the story of Robin Potter, a
mother from Fresno, California, who lost her 15-year-old son 2
years ago because he foolishly decided to play chicken with a
train. That game cost him his life. Robin is now an Operation
Lifesaver certified presenter. She talks to audiences in her
community about that horrible day.
Our website also features the story of a locomotive
engineer who tells what it is like to be part of a train crew
watching helplessly as a train is slammed into emergency
braking, hoping it will stop in time to prevent a collision.
Operation Lifesaver began as and remains a grassroots-
driven organization. All 50 States have independent OL programs
under the umbrella of our national program. The national
organization gives focus, consistency, and expertise to the
work that is being done in the States. We develop customized
training programs for target audiences like new drivers, truck
and school bus drivers, law enforcement and emergency
responders. We develop the safety messages and materials that
are used by our volunteers, and we will soon be launching a
state-of-the-art eLearning program for professional truck
drivers.
Because we know that 18- to 30-year-olds are an important
audience, we are reaching out to them, using social media. Long
ago, Congress recognized that a modest investment in the
efforts of a national organization to bring cohesiveness and
expertise to public outreach efforts would yield results.
My purpose today is to urge Members of Congress to maintain
your investment in this national program. The highway trust
fund dollars that flow to the national organization demonstrate
that safety is a shared responsibility between the public and
private sectors.
Consider the following: A collision between a train and
vehicle is likely to be devastating, usually resulting in loss
of life or catastrophic injury. These collisions tie up
crossings for hours, wreaking havoc in communities, and
impeding the flow of commerce. Forecasts are projecting more
trains in our future. Freight traffic is increasing as the
economy improves. We expect more commuter and light rail
systems to come online as passengers turn to rail to meet
growing transportation demand.
The rate of pedestrian rail casualties has increased,
bringing with it the need for OL to enhance its efforts on the
trespass issue. An impatient risk-taking population either does
not know or ignores the fact that walking or playing on train
tracks is illegal and possibly fatal.
Today's Operation Lifesaver recognizes that its traditional
methods of public outreach have moved us forward and saved
lives. But a small national organization like ours is nimble,
adapting to today's world, where technology dominates every
form of communication.
To conclude, in the four decades since its founding in
1972, OLI's grassroots network has become part of the national
rail safety solution through partnerships, presentations,
organized media events, and more recently, the enhanced use of
technology.
I urge Members of Congress to maintain your investment in a
national Operation Lifesaver program. As the need for safe
transportation grows, so does the value of Operation Lifesaver.
Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Ms. Sramek.
Next, Mr. James Stem, Jr., the national legislative
director for the United Transportation Union.
Mr. Stem, please proceed.
Mr. Stem. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our viewpoint, and the
concerns of the 70,000-plus men and women that are working
today, as we speak, operating the trains that are moving
freight and passenger trains around the country.
The bipartisan leadership of this committee in the last two
decades have held several dozen hearings and--confirming the
direct relationship between adequate rail safety oversight and
the profitability of our Nation's railroads.
Safety is not just good public policy in our rail industry.
It is also good business practice. The record profitability,
the record productivity of our industry are the results of the
current regulatory scheme affecting the rail operations. Today
an average manifest freight train will contain more than $150
million worth of equipment and commodity. And the operation of
that train over hundreds of highway, rail at-grade crossings
also could potentially involve hundreds of millions of dollars
in potential liability for that railroad company.
And we, the United Transportation Union, and every aspect
of this industry, supports Operation Lifesaver. And I would
like to point out that, by definition, high-speed rail is the
solution that eliminates grade crossings.
The United Transportation Union and other rail unions have
been an integral part of this committee's actions on rail
safety and railroad development. And we commit to you that we
will continue to offer our view of reality for your
consideration.
Our railroad industry does not have a problem today with
the current oversight process for the movement of hazardous
materials. That does not exist in our industry. We do have a
major problem in the application of the current hours of
service laws for safety-critical operating employees. I will
discuss the needed corrections and application in a moment.
The most important point that we will make today is that
the current regulatory process in place within the USDOT is
working very well for our Nation's railroads and other
departments in the industry. In these times of economic strife,
our Nation's freight railroads are enjoying record
profitability and record productivity. We urge this committee
to keep in mind that the laws and regulations that are in place
today have not hampered the ability of our Nation's railroads
to prosper significantly during the current economic downturn.
The key to this regulatory success is a consensus-based
negotiated rulemaking process called the Railroad Safety
Advisory Committee. Virtually every person that is delivering
testimony before you today is a part of that process. RSAC has
top-level representation from Class I railroads, passenger
commuter railroads, short line railroads, the NTSB, the rail
suppliers and equipment. RSAC was first chartered during the
Clinton administration, and was widely accepted because, for
the first time ever in our history, every constituency had an
opportunity to present their ideas and concerns in the presence
of other subject matter experts in the industry.
In our discussion today concerning the safe movement of the
hazardous materials, no action would produce a higher level of
return in safety than giving the operating employees a
predictable work schedule. The Rail Safety Improvement Act, as
signed into law, provides 10 hours of undisturbed rest between
work assignments. The current application of that required rest
period is immediately following safety-critical service. This
application is misplaced, because it does nothing to improve
the predictability of the work schedule.
One small improvement that will make a tremendous
difference in the safety of all train operations is to simply
move the required 10 hours of undisturbed rest from immediately
following service to immediate preceding service.
We have included in our testimony today some bullet points
that we would like to work with this committee to have
introduced that will provide some hours of service technical
corrections.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Stem.
Next, Mr. Stephen Bruno, the vice president of the
Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen.
Mr. Bruno, please proceed.
Mr. Bruno. Good morning, Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member
Brown, and members of the committee. Thank you for holding this
hearing. My name is Stephen Bruno. I am the national vice
president and the interim director of regulatory affairs for
the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen.
In the short time I have available, I would like to address
the issue of removing regulations in the industry before I move
on to our specific concerns for the surface transportation
reauthorization.
Many of the regulations that exist were created in response
to tragedies. The most effective regulations in the complicated
railroad regulatory scheme were developed by stakeholders,
usually done through the Federal Railroad Administration's
railroad safety advisory committee process, in response to
safety concerns. Adding, amending, or removing regulations
should use the same process.
I would like to briefly mention a few proposed regulations,
including emergency escape breathing apparatus and positive
train control, and the existing regulations for the movement of
hazardous materials. Such regulations will and so save lives by
preventing accidents and fatalities.
I would like to draw your attention to positive train
control, or PTC. PTC is a safety overlay that will
significantly reduce human factor-related accidents, and
prevent loss of life. The railroads' suggestion last month that
they will implement other alternative safety practices and
devices which will provide an equivalent level of safety is a
disingenuous statement. These technologies that they cited have
been available for decades, and they are now only proposing to
install them to avoid the PTC mandate. If the mandate is
removed, the railroad's incentive to install these alternatives
will also be removed. It will never happen.
Regarding the hazmat, in March, last March, we filed
comments with FRA on special movement permits for leaking tank
cars. The number of these movements has steadily increased over
the past 16 years, and it has doubled since 2007. This is a
significant increase, and it must be investigated.
I would like to turn to another issue that might be
included in the surface transportation reauthorization which
concerns the BLET. For 40 years, Amtrak has run our Nation's
passenger rail system in an unparalleled way. Amtrak and its
skilled employees have managed to move passengers in the
safest, most efficient means possible, despite being
appropriated only enough money to fail. Congress can best
ensure the public good by maintaining Amtrak as our Nation's
passenger rail service provider.
History warns us that private service would only be
provided where it is profitable for investors and shareholders.
The public good would be ignored. Therefore, instead of
threatening our citizens with privatizing Amtrak, you should
instead be funding it at levels that will let it thrive.
We are in the process of finalizing technical corrections
to the hours of service portion of the Rail Safety Improvement
Act. And I would like to urge the subcommittee to seriously
consider adopting them. Specifically, these corrections
establish the 10-hour call for duty, and a reduction of excess
limbo time, which will greatly reduce fatigue, improve safety,
and ultimately improve the quality of life for our members.
In summary, the BLET believes although Congress has a place
in broadly defining areas of safety that must be addressed as a
matter of public policy, regulation is the best--excuse me--
regulation is best written in a fashion that allows for those
with a stake in the rules to have a hand in their creation and
amendment. Railroad regulation should be crafted, revised, or
removed only after careful consideration by the subject matter
experts from the railroad industry.
So, thank you for your time, and I will be happy to answer
any questions that you may have.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Bruno. And next, Mr.
Leonard Parker, the national legislative director for the
Brotherhood of Railroad Signalmen. Mr. Parker, please proceed.
Mr. Parker. Mr. Shuster, Ranking Lady Brown, we thank you
for inviting BRS to participate in this hearing. The
Brotherhood of Railroad Signalmen is highly supportive of
development of high-speed passenger rail, expansion of
intercity passenger rail, and expansion of commuter rail
service. This is a long time coming, and we are pleased that
the Congress and the administration have recognized that rail
is an underutilized resource that can be utilized to provide
safe, efficient, effective, and environmentally sound passenger
transportation.
But it is important to recognize that safe and effective
passenger rail transportation depends on highly skilled and
professional railroad workers, many of whom, especially
signalmen, are certified to perform various forms of railroad
work.
Railroad work involves unique skills and training, and
sometimes special certification. That is certainly true of
signal work. Consequently, railroad workers on the major
freight railroads, Amtrak, and the major commuter lines is
performed by railroad workers in the traditional crafts
recognized by the NMB.
Professional railroad employees have a proven record of
accomplishment of successful work on joint-owned commuter rail
systems. Furthermore, professional railroad employees are
responsible for the operating, dispatching, construction,
rehabilitation, and upgrade of freight lines, and signal
systems used in commuter passenger service throughout the
United States. Especially in the northeast, rail workers
operate and maintain the major commuter rail systems MBTA,
Metro North, Long Island Railroad, New Jersey Transit, SEPTA
Metro.
For the same reason, work on new high-speed rail operations
and expanding intercity passenger rail operations should be
done by railroad workers. Certainly persons who do work for the
higher speed passenger operations, whether train movements,
control track and signal work, equipment work, or
administrative work, should be no less skilled and no less
qualified than persons who do such work involved with the
movement of cargo.
The ability of entities that do work connected to high-
speed rail operations to hire qualified employees to perform
their work will depend on those entities being rail carriers.
Because rail carriers will not accept jobs--rail employees will
not accept jobs with entities that are not rail carriers, since
railroad workers who leave career employment lose substantial
vested railroad retirement benefits, and the rights and
protections provided under Federal railroad laws.
There are some who want to enter the railroad industry and
perform work on railroad lines, but who seek their own economic
advantage by attempting to perform railroad work without being
rail carriers under the Federal railroad laws, and by using
workers who do not have the rights and benefits mandated by the
Federal railroad laws. The race to the bottom must be resisted.
While certain small commuter railroads have engaged in
the--railroad work among multiple contractors who are not rail
carriers, this unfortunate practice is not followed on any of
the major freight railroads, major commuter railroads, or
Amtrak. All those entities recognize that integrated railroad
operations and a single-carrier operating employing railroad
workers to perform traditional railroad work is the safest and
most effective and efficient method of railroad operations.
As the Federal Government encourages and helps fund the
promotion of high-speed and expansion of intercity passenger
rail transportation, it should make sure that it is providing
real rail transportation that employs real rail workers, not
knock-offs. We are the real McCoy, rail transportation that
utilizes real rail workers. To the extent that Amtrak is used
to provide new service, they must be rail carriers who employ
workers covered by the Federal railroad laws.
Talk of privatizing the northeast corridor passenger rail
service ignores recent history. The current private freight
railroads once provided passenger service, too. Freight and
passenger service were not separated. Passenger service was
part of the common carrier obligation. However, the freight
railroads were dramatically losing money over the passenger
service, and could not continue to provide the service. Amtrak
was created because the private sector could not provide
passenger rail service. The freights were relieved of their
common carrier obligation for passenger service.
In return for allowing Amtrak to operate on their lines,
intercity passenger service is provided by Amtrak, not because
the government sought to provide this service, but because the
private sector was unable to do so.
The PRIIA all--PRIIA provides the collective bargaining
agreements applicable on a railroad whose right of way is being
used to remain in full force and effect, and that the rights,
privileges, and benefits of railroad workers be preserved. This
is a mandate that the employees who perform work related to
high-speed rail and intercity passenger rail supported by the
Federal railroad funds must be railroad workers covered by the
RLA or FELA. This mandate must be continued. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Parker. And next, Mr.
Rick Inclima, who is the director of safety for the Brotherhood
of Maintenance of Way Employes. Mr. Inclima, please proceed.
Mr. Inclima. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Brown, and members of the subcommittee. My name
is Rick Inclima. I am the director of safety for the
Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employes Division. On behalf
of our 35,000 members, thank you for holding this hearing on
regulatory reform.
In the short time available this morning, I would like to
touch on just a few regulatory issues here. You have already
heard about the Railroad Safety Advisory Committee. It was
created in 1996 to develop a consensus by all interested
parties for FRA rulemakings. It has been very successful in
mitigating regulatory burdens upon the industry. Railroads and
safety have benefitted from regulations developed through the
RSAC. Regulatory review in the railroad industry is a constant
and ongoing consensus-based effort between labor, management,
and government, and we encourage this subcommittee to continue
its support for the RSAC process.
Regarding DOT/OSHA jurisdiction, it is vitally important to
maintain the current shared jurisdiction between OSHA and DOT
over hazmat safety. The issue of shared jurisdiction has long
been established between FRA and OSHA. In its March 1978 policy
statement, FRA determined that it should not attempt to
regulate areas already covered by regulations issued by OSHA.
The 1978 policy statement established the current complementary
jurisdiction between FRA and OSHA, and continues to guide the
shared jurisdictional authority which has served the safety
needs of the industry and the public for well over 30 years.
It would be an ironic mockery of regulatory reform to
eliminate the role of OSHA in protecting worker safety and
forcing DOT to expend considerable taxpayer dollars to hire and
train personnel, develop requisite experience, and promulgate
rules to fill the resultant regulatory void.
Regarding DOT training grants, the National Labor College,
here in Silver Spring, Maryland, has provided over 28,000 rail
workers with comprehensive, quality hazardous material training
since 1991. This program continues to be funded by non-DOT
grants and private grant sources, and is considered a model of
worker training.
In 2008, the DOT awarded a train-the-trainer grant to the
college to train hazmat instructors. Under this competitive
grant proposal and award, 221 DOT regional trainers completed
hazmat instructor's training. In turn, these regional trainers
have already delivered quality hazardous material training to
over 2,600 additional rail workers back at their home
locations, including mixed group of frontline rail workers and
rail management, local firefighters, EMTs, and emergency
personnel. The DOT grant program is funded by hazmat
registration fees, not through Federal tax dollars. It does not
add to the Federal deficit.
We implore the subcommittee to continue its support for
this highly successful and nationally recognized worker
training program.
Concerning hazardous material regulations, comprehensive
hazmat regulations are necessary to protect the public. The
railroads, under oath, have stated to regulators that some
cargoes are too dangerous for them to carry safely, given their
cost benefit analysis. However, the railroads themselves have
never advocated that less regulation is the solution to these
problems.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, our written testimony also
addresses other areas of regulatory oversight. Labor has also
recently submitted substantial comments directly to DOT
regarding issues of regulatory review and regulatory reform.
With your permission, Mr. Chairman, we would like to submit
additional information to the record.
The DOT, through the FRA and the RSAC, has made every
effort not to unduly burden railroads through excessive
regulations. If the FRA is erred in this regard, it has been on
the side of under-regulating. The Rail Safety Improvement Act
was a congressional declaration of that fact. Railroad
regulations are sufficiently flexible, are subject to frequent
and comprehensive review through the RSAC, and contain liberal
waiver provisions that render complains about over-regulation
largely moot.
Mr. Chairman, thank you and the subcommittee for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Inclima. And if you
have additional information for the record, we will be happy to
take that and put it into the record.
Mr. Inclima. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you. Next, Mr. Gary Self, who is the
vice president and general manager of Nelson Brothers,
Incorporated, and he is representing the Institute of Makers of
Explosives.
So, Mr. Self, please proceed.
Mr. Self. Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
share our efforts to comply with the requirements imposed on
our industry by PHMSA by the special permits program.
It is a cautionary tale that underscores the grave concern
the commercial explosives industry has with the agency's use of
its special permit authority to mandate unproven and untested
technologies on motor vehicles transporting these materials.
PHMSA has power to modify special permits for new conditions
without the cost benefit analysis that would be required of
rulemaking.
In August of 2009, PHMSA issued notices to holders of
special permits that authorized bulk explosives vehicles that
it was modifying the conditions of the permits, including one
change requiring a battery disconnect switch activated from a
remote location.
Between August and December 2009, the battery disconnect
standard was rewritten 3 times. In January 2010, Nelson
Brothers began the process of trying to comply. We wanted to
pursue an installation schedule to meet a January 1, 2011,
compliance deadline that would be the least disruptive to our
operations. We were able to identify only one foreign sourced
supplier of a battery disconnect system that promised to meet
the performance standard stated in the special permit.
Company and OEM engineers and disconnect manufacturers and
technicians were involved in the initial installation of this
high-end after-market system. After successful testing, all
affected company vehicles were retrofitted with a disconnect
system at a cost of approximately $5,000 per vehicle.
Initial problems began in January of 2011 with the
excessive corrosion around the poles of the constant duty
solenoid. Replacement of solenoids and protection of both poles
appeared to address these problems. A program was put into
place to protect all solenoid poles at subsequent truck
inspections.
On January 27, 2011, moisture build-up in a 3-pin control
cable of the battery disconnect caused the system to fail,
resulting in a non-controlled shut-down of the truck traveling
on a public highway. A review of the incident indicated that
extra dielectric grease was needed in the three-pin connector
to protect it from moisture. Again, a plan was put into place
to add the dielectric grease during the next vehicle
inspections.
Five days later, a second vehicle with this system
experienced failure and uncontrolled shut-down. The failure was
traced to a butt connector that corroded and came loose. The
vehicle was traveling, again, on a public highway. In both
cases, the drivers were able to keep the vehicles under
control, helped by good weather and a straight, uncongested
roadway. But the risk posed to the public and to company
personnel caused us to immediately disconnect the retrofitted
system from all vehicles.
Nelson Brothers engaged in a good faith effort to comply
with PHMSA's battery disconnect standard in advance of the
January 1, 2011, deadline. PHMSA engineers have been unable to
show how they would configure a disconnect system to comply
with their own standard. We submit that the type of
sophisticated shut-down systems envisioned by PHMSA and the
modified special permits are not advanced enough to be safely
and reliably used on today's trucks. Furthermore, agency
efforts to impose a remote or self-actuated or multiple battery
disconnect requirement without major research places the public
at grave harm.
We have learned over the years to pay attention to close
calls or near misses. These warning signs should not be ignored
by PHMSA or Congress. Congress never intended that special
permits be a long-term placeholder for permanent regulation.
Rather than continue the rewriting of the effective special
permits to impose unproven technology, PHMSA should be focused
on incorporating into the regulations current industry
standards that have demonstrated over decades the safe
operation of bulk explosives.
We welcome your help to stop PHMSA's demands to retrofit
vehicles carrying explosives with untested technology.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Self. Thanks for
coming here today.
Next, Mr. John Conley is the president of the National Tank
Truck Carriers. Mr. Conley.
Mr. Conley. Good morning, Mr. Chairman Shuster, Ranking
Member Brown, and members of the committee. My name is John
Conley. I am president of National Tank Truck Carriers. My
association represents trucking companies that deliver
materials in bulk, such as petroleum products, chemicals, food
products, and cement. Our membership also includes companies
that provide equipment and services to the tank truck industry.
I first would like to commend the safety professionals at
the Pipeline Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, and
their predecessor agency, with whom I have worked for over 35
years. As Chairman Shuster has observed, the United States is
served by a very safe hazardous materials transportation
network. This system that is copied by countries around the
world is a credit to and verification of the close cooperative
relationship between the agency and the industry in our shared
goal of hazardous materials incidents reduction or elimination.
We sometimes disagree on how to meet that shared objective,
and I am here today to discuss two issues that cause my members
real concern.
The first issue involves the transportation of flammable
materials in the loading line of cargo tanks, the so-called wet
lines issue. Certainly this is not a new topic to veteran
members of this committee.
The second issue concerns a rulemaking from PHMSA which I
believe would compromise hazardous materials transportation
regulatory compliance enforcement, and safety. That rulemaking,
HM-241, would result in severely restricted public access to
the regulatory process, and to currently applicable regulatory
requirements in the hazmat regulations.
NTTC appreciates the work that both the Chairman, and
especially Ranking Member Brown, of this subcommittee devoted
to the wet lines issue in the 111th Congress. This issue has
now taken on a life of its own, as PHMSA recently published
another proposed rulemaking to ban wet lines. Unfortunately, in
an attempt to adapt economic cost benefit facts to fit a failed
theory, PHMSA bases much of its HM-213D on an unproven manual
purging device available only from one commercial provider. To
our knowledge, no carrier has purchased or tested this manually
operated device, which is supported only by the claims of its
manufacturer. Our analysis of this recent wet lines ban reveals
that its cost far exceeds its potential benefits.
We also remain concerned that any retrofit requirement
could be detrimental to the safety of the workers in the tank
truck facilities and, therefore, ask this committee to mandate
a study of the wet lines issue while enjoining PHMSA from
finalizing the rule proposed on January 27th. Such a study
should consider the actual scope of the perceived problem, the
advantages and disadvantages of possible operational solutions
to the perceived problem, including the potential increased
risk of exposure to shop workers, and whether or not the issue
should be addressed at the petroleum loading rack, or in the
thousands of pieces of equipment operated throughout the
country.
The second issue I would like to briefly address is a PHMSA
rulemaking that would turn over the cargo tank rule-writing
function it now so competently exercises in title 49 parts 178
and 180 to third-party service providers. The cost-free and
immediate availability of the current regulations and, more
importantly, ready access to the open regulatory process would
be severely impacted for no safety reason.
The existing process would be replaced by a closed process
where private entities develop copyrighted materials to be
adopted by the agency, and purchased by the regulated public
and enforcement communities. This would cost up to $600 for a
carrier, law enforcement person, or anyone else to have access
to publications and regulations that are currently in the
regulations and free to the public.
I would be happy to answer any questions when the time
comes. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Conley. Thanks for
coming today.
Next, Ms. Mary Pileggi, who is North American logistics
manager for DuPont, and she is here on behalf of the American
Chemistry Council. And I must ask you. Are you any relation to
the majority leader of the Pennsylvania State Senate, Don
Pileggi?
Ms. Pileggi. No, I am not.
Mr. Shuster. OK. It would have been a bonus for you, if you
were.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Pileggi. OK. I change my answer.
Mr. Shuster. Please proceed.
Ms. Pileggi. Thank you, Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member
Brown, and members of the committee. My name is Mary Pileggi,
and I am here to testify on behalf of the American Chemistry
Council. I am the North America logistics manager for DuPont. I
am responsible for freight transportation in the United States
and Canada.
DuPont purchases approximately $550 million in freight
transportation. So you can understand why the topic of today's
hearing is of great importance to us, as well as other members
of ACC.
Chemical producers and their customers rely on carriers to
deliver chemicals where they are needed, from water treatment
plants to farms to factories. Because some of the materials
that we ship are hazardous materials, we work with our
transportation partners to find ways to build upon an already
impressive safety record. Through ACC's Responsible Care
initiative, member companies and our partners are committed to
continuous transportation safety improvement. We have invested
billions of dollars in training, technology, and tank car
safety.
The Federal Government has and must continue to play a
central role, when it comes to ensuring the safe transportation
of hazardous materials. Congress wisely established a uniform
national regulatory system under the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act. The goal is not to prevent the movement of
these materials, but to ensure they are delivered safely,
securely, and reliably. This program has worked well in making
hazmat transportation safe for workers, our communities, and
emergency responders.
Congress will soon consider legislation to reauthorize the
act. ACC would like to go on record in strong support of this
regulatory program which ensures that all aspects of hazmat
transportation are consistent across the Nation.
ACC is concerned about one aspect of DOT's administration
of the program. Special permits allow safety-based variation
from DOT's regulation. Special permits can only be granted when
DOT finds at least an equivalent level of safety. With special
permits, industry gains flexibility with no loss of safety to
the public, and DOT learns whether new procedures and
technologies can be incorporated into its rules.
Unfortunately, DOT has recently imposed onerous paperwork
barriers that have slowed the approval of special permits, and
increased cost to industry. We urge Congress to direct DOT to
rescind those complex and burdensome interpretations.
ACC also supports a sensible approach to implementing the
Rail Safety Improvement Act, which will deploy new
technologies, like positive train control. PTC and other risk
mitigation measures can advance safety and enhance productivity
throughout our national rail system. DOT, and possibly
Congress, will reconsider important aspects of the PTC rule. We
support exploring less burdensome approaches. But as that
effort moves forward, whether through regulation or
legislation, any changes to the PTC rule must remain consistent
with the common carrier obligation. It also must allow
producers to ship products where customers need them, now and
into the future.
In addition, it is critically important to ensure that the
cost of implementing PTC is allocated fairly. The country needs
to maintain a safe and reliable system of hazardous material
transportation that is governed by uniform national rules. The
challenge is to ensure that all stakeholders work together so
this system continuously improves.
Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the
subcommittee, we look forward to working with Congress and the
DOT to achieve this goal.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Ms. Pileggi.
And, before we go to our final witness, would Mr. Fauver
please come back to the table? The Ranking Member has a
question for you.
I just want to remind the Ranking Member he works for
PennDOT, not FDOT, so take it easy on him.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Brown. That is a good thing.
Mr. Shuster. And we are going to have some questions for
those that are still in the room, if there are questions for
some, after we get done with Mr. O'Connor, Mr. Kevin O'Connor,
who is the assistant to the general president for the
International Association of Fire Fighters.
Mr. O'Connor?
Mr. O'Connor. Thank you very much, Chairman Mica,
Subcommittee Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and
members of the committee. My name is Kevin O'Connor, and it is
my privilege to lead the governmental and public policy
division of the International Association of Fire Fighters. But
more importantly for this conversation, I have experience as
both a career and a volunteer firefighter, and specific
experience in hazardous materials response.
During my career in Baltimore County, Maryland, I had the
unique opportunity to respond to one of the worst train
disasters in American history, the tragic Amtrak accident on
January 4, 1987, in Chase, Maryland. I was assigned a hazardous
materials company in the southeast portion of Baltimore County,
and responded to several hundred hazmat incidences over my
career.
My testimony today will focus on a very narrow, albeit
important, aspect of this conversation on railroad, pipeline,
and hazardous material safety, and that is protecting both our
communities, making sure our citizens are safe, and doing that
through ensuring that firefighters in communities large and
small, career and volunteer, have adequate training to respond
to these very, very complex incidences and responses.
Let me first thank you both, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Brown, for your service in the Congressional Fire
Services Caucus. We are in town meeting today. And, in fact,
this afternoon there are educational components on this very
topic.
In spite of our best efforts and our friends' in industry,
we all recognize that accidents will occur. In fact, there are
over 350,000 responses to hazardous materials incidents across
the country on an annual basis. And I am sad to report that in
its second needs assessment of the U.S. fire service, the U.S.
Fire Administration reports that 38 percent of all fire
fighters do not have any training with respect to hazardous
materials response. More troubling, 29 percent of all fire
departments admit that they do not provide any training to
their first responders in this very, very important and life
safety issue.
Beyond initial training, OSHA also requires that people
trained in hazardous materials response are re-certified and
have annual re-certification training to keep up their skills
and competency. I am very happy to report that, through this
committee, and through the Department of Transportation's
hazardous materials emergency preparedness grant program, the
International Association of Fire Fighters has been able to
address this very serious problem.
We have a very unique and effective train-the-trainer
program, which is funded through DOT. Essentially, it is a
peer-to-peer program, where firefighters actually go out into
the communities and train other firefighters in the train-the-
trainer type model. The program has received rave reviews from
GAO and anyone else who has looked into this program. It is a
very effective program to ensure that revenue is appropriately
expended. We get the most bang for our buck through this
program.
Over the years, the IAFF has been able to train directly
3,000 providers who have, in turn, trained over 70,000 first
responders to the operations level, so that their communities
have this modicum of protection. The program is provided free
of charge to any jurisdiction. If a jurisdiction seeks this
training for any of its responders, it simply asks the IAFF, we
go out and provide the training. What we ask is that, in any
reauthorization, this program be funded to its current level.
It is a successful program. It works in large cities and small
communities.
We have two other related requests with respect to this
program. First, OSHA 1910.120 specifies various levels of
training for hazardous materials, from awareness level all the
way through incident command. We feel that it is appropriate to
be very specific that any training to first responders rise to
the level of operations. That is, when a firefighter gets on
the scene or an emergency responder, they know what to do, and
they can adequately respond.
The third ask that we have is this program right now is
limited to train the trainer. While that is very effective on
an aggregate basis to provide operations training, we would
like to see the program expanded so that we can do direct
training for the technician level, which is the higher level of
response for communities.
Thank you very much, and I stand ready to answer any
questions.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. O'Connor. Thanks for
coming today.
Also, I would like to ask that Mr. Hamberger please come
back to the table.
Mr. Hamberger. [Off mic.]
Mr. Shuster. Well, you know, you are Jay Rockefeller's
favorite lobbyist.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hamberger. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shuster. And Mr. Steve Klejst, who is with the NTSB,
who is going to sit in for Mr. Hart? Thank you.
And remember, he is PennDOT, not FDOT, so--and I recognize
the Ranking Member for a question.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And part of the bill is to just wipe
out Florida DOT, at least.
I have a, first of all, a unanimous consent to include a
statement by the Air Line Pilots Association on this hearing,
for the record.
Mr. Shuster. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Brown. My question to you, sir. We talked about the
RRIF loan. And you indicated that some DOT agencies, if you
apply for a loan, you have already gotten some permits, and
they won't accept that one. And we heard this testimony when we
went to California and different places, that that was one of
the problems that we are having. We have over $300 billion, and
I don't think we have lent out but about $100 billion. To me
that would be one way, with the shortness of funds, to get some
of our communities working.
What are some of your recommendations, additional?
Mr. Fauver. Well, I think my specific comment was in regard
to NEPA, and NEPA coordination and NEPA clearance.
Ms. Brown. Right, right.
Mr. Fauver. We have got----
Ms. Brown. How can we better----
Mr. Fauver. There is a rule within USDOT that encourages
the separate administrations to coordinate those activities.
But, in my opinion, NEPA is one law. It applies across the
board. If one Federal agency is going to oversee and provide
clearance for NEPA, then--and it is the same project, then the
other Federal agencies should automatically be able to approve
that, or be able to accept that approval or that clearance, and
be able to move on.
The difficulty, I think, compared to 20 years ago, is that
we are seeing more and more mixes of Federal funds from
different agencies involved in projects. We are seeing Federal
Transit Administration's funds, Federal Highway Administration
funds, and Federal Aviation Administration funds, and Federal
Railroad Administration funds all being mixed together to come
up with an inter-modal project. And if we start with one source
of funds and get environmental clearance and then we have to go
back and get the other agencies to independently approve, we
have experienced 2-year delays in some cases on being able to
advance projects.
So, I think that, in reauthorization, if it was just--if it
was made very clear that if one agency approves the project
then--and you get--from one agency, then it covers the whole
project across the entire funding spectrum.
Ms. Brown. I would like some additional information on
that----
Mr. Fauver. Sure.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Particular area, because we have
heard testimony around the country on that.
My question is on positive train control. I have heard from
the railroads, both publicly and privately, that the
implementing of the positive train control is very expensive.
We want safety, but based on the cost, there are other
measures.
And I know that we are negotiating, but you all are not
very comfortable with these other measures. Or can you all
discuss that a little bit for us, that--you know, I am not
trying to change anything that is going on in the courts, I
just want to know where we are.
Mr. Hamberger. We are, as you so rightly point out,
Congresswoman Brown, in discussions with the Federal Railroad
Administration, not the NTSB. And I appreciated very much the
testimony of Mary Pileggi, who I am sure has now discovered a
relationship to the majority leader of the senate in
Pennsylvania.
Ms. Brown. That is Pennsylvania.
Mr. Hamberger. Yes, and on behalf of the ACC, indicating
that perhaps it is time to take a look at are there other
approaches that can address the overall risk of an accidental
release of TIH, not just the preventable--PTC preventable risk,
but the overall risk profile.
Only 4 percent of the over-the-road accidents in the
freight rail industry are PTC-preventable. Now, they are
horrific when they happen. But we do not really run trains into
one another too often. And so, what is a major cause of over-
the-road accidents would be mechanical failures or track and
structure failures. And so, being able to focus more on the
overall risk profile, rather than just the PTC-preventable
profile, we think, would improve safety, at least as much as
installing PTC, and might do so in a more effective, efficient
way.
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir?
Mr. Klejst. Yes. The positive train control system does
have many benefits----
Ms. Brown. The microphone, sir, is it on?
Mr. Klejst. Yes.
Ms. Brown. OK.
Mr. Klejst. The light is on. The positive train control
system does have significant benefits to railroad safety. It
provides a safety overlay for some of the accidents that we
have heard through the vice chairman's testimony today in
derailments and collisions.
It also provides safety overlays with respect to roadway
worker incursions, temporary and permanent speed restrictions.
Whenever there is a situation where a person is involved in the
operation of a train, there always exists the potential of a
human error. And this PTC system will provide an additional
safety overlay to eliminate or minimize the impact of these
types of accidents.
Ms. Brown. I think--and this is my last comment--one of
the--some of the testimony said that it was what--human error,
and it would be better if we made some adjustments in that, as
opposed to some of these other measures that we are
recommending.
Mr. Klejst. Well, the human error element, while the
railroads are working diligently to have--for training
programs, rules and procedures, there is always present the
possibility of an error made on the decisionmaking process of
the locomotive engineer. And the positive train control system,
when implemented on a particular territory, will provide that
overlay and would, again, prevent these types of accidents when
there is an error in the rate in which a locomotive engineer
slows the speed of the train down, involved in a speed
restriction, or misjudges distance when approaching a red
signal or a stop signal that could result in a head-on
collision, a side collision, or a rear-end collision.
Ms. Brown. The accident that we had here, what--the problem
was maintenance not doing the work on the brakes and other
things. And it is supposed to be a grants program to help the
transit system.
I had asked the question earlier what was the status of
those grants and those monies to help those local systems. And
I know it is not your agency, but could there be other things,
in addition to the positive train control, that we need to do,
as far as making sure that we have the inspections on the
systems?
Mr. Klejst. The current regulatory environment has, through
the Federal Railroad Administration, regulations for the
condition of track, signal systems, and rolling stock, and
other types of equipment--locomotives, for example. And the--
when there is an accident that is related to any of these cause
categories, the safety board investigates and makes
recommendations, if appropriate, in each of these areas. So
that is one of the areas that we do examine when we conduct
investigations.
We do rely on rail carriers to follow through with the
proper inspection and maintenance procedures and, when
necessary, go beyond those, which--each carrier does have the
opportunity to do so, should they desire to.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you. Yes, sir----
Mr. Hamberger. Might I just----
Mr. Shuster. Certainly.
Mr. Hamberger [continuing]. Emphasize for the record--I was
thinking I was still back in the PTC here, and I want to
emphasize, as I did a month ago, that when we are talking about
these alternative risk reduction approaches, we are not talking
about any passenger lines. We are talking about only for those
lines which are required under the statute to be implemented
with PTC because of the TIH shipments. And we are not looking
at any other approaches where passengers are involved.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much. And could I excuse Mr.
Klejst, excuse you from the table? I think we are done
questioning you. And also Mr. Fauver, you can go back to
Pennsylvania.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. And again, thank both of you for being here
today. But I would also--no, Mr. Hamberger, you are still
requested to be here at the table.
Mr. Simpson, could you come back to the table? Ms. Pileggi,
if you come back up to the table? Mr. O'Connor, Mr. Paul, Mr.
Timmons, and Mr. Stem.
And I believe, Mr. Larsen, I recognize you for 5 minutes
for questions.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have one
question. It might be a set of questions for Ms. Pileggi. I
don't know anybody in Washington State named Pileggi, so we
will start there.
Your testimony with regards to special permits--I recall
from last year we had some hearings on this issue of special
permits. I believe, as I remember, the problem that this
committee faced was that PHMSA had authority to issue special
permits, but they were not issuing them according to the
process they were supposed to use. And I believe we had this
discussion about safety effectiveness reviews, or something
along those lines.
And so, the end result of this was PHMSA did, in fact,
change their process because of--in part, because of concerns
expressed by this committee that the special permit process
seemed to be a little loose. And that--and so your testimony on
page three, and your oral testimony sort of runs counter to
what we thought we were looking into last year--it could have
been 2 years ago; I forget the exact date--and so I think we
all agree special permits, as you know, are a win-win process.
There is flexibility. But I guess we determine there is a
little too much flexibility and not enough oversight from PHMSA
on the special permit process.
Could you talk--could you help me understand if I am--if we
have a conflict in how we see this?
Ms. Pileggi. OK. I was not part of that particular
discussion, or involved in that. I can speak from my experience
from my company's working with special permits.
Processing time for the permits is a very lengthy period of
time, where a renewal of a permit in the past may have taken
hours or days. And given what you have just talked about
oversight, maybe that is too short. But it shouldn't take
anywhere from 6 months to a year, either, which is some of the
situations that we have at hand. And I have heard some of my
colleagues at other companies discuss it, as well.
When you talk about a fitness factor and how that is to be
measured, I know ACC specifically asks that there be some type
of a rulemaking where you could talk about fitness factors, and
understand what the criteria are. That is something that we are
specifically pointing to. One of the others was the factors for
inclusion.
So, asking for the listing of all the locations that the
permit is going to apply, well, when you have a transportation
container that is being used, it is very difficult, unless you
list every place in the country that it possibly could pertain
to, in the application. So it makes it very difficult to go
through the process in a timely manner, given some of these
examples that I know that we have dealt with.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Well, I appreciate that. That is a little
more detail for me than in your testimony, and that is good to
hear. I just did not want to--I did not want this hearing to
end without sort of exploring this--what we found last year,
because I think what your testimony sort of outlined for us
is--well, the way I read it and the way I heard it was,
``Whatever you did last year, we want you to do the 180.''
Well, we tried the 180. And we had a hearing to find out we
did not want to be there. And your testimony seemed to say,
``Well, no, we do want to be there.'' But I guess after a
little--after hearing from you a little bit more, you have some
concerns, but you are also saying there are some things that
need to be done in the special permit process to ensure that
special permits are issued to folks who should have them, but
also that they are going to be complying with some rules that
otherwise they were perhaps not complying with, which is why we
had the hearings in the first place last year.
Ms. Pileggi. That is correct. And I would suggest, since I
am quoting from my experience, my company's experience----
Mr. Larsen. Sure, yes.
Ms. Pileggi [continuing]. ACC can follow up on that with
you, to answer it fully.
Mr. Larsen. Love to hear that. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Brown. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Larsen. I have 42 seconds. I will yield them all to the
Ranking Member.
Ms. Brown. You know, I just wanted to remind you the
hearings that we had, there were major problems in the
permitting process. That is why we instituted additional
regulations. So we are willing to work with you, but it was
blanket permits, people that had them for years, there was no
follow-up. It was a mess. So we corrected it, and I hope we did
not overcorrect it. We are willing to revisit the issue, but we
cannot go back to where we were. And the fact is the auditor
general and the GAO gave horrible reviews of the permitting
process.
Ms. Pileggi. And, Ranking Member Brown, I do not think we
are saying that we are asking you to go completely back. There
is a middle ground----
Ms. Brown. Yes.
Ms. Pileggi [continuing]. That needs to be met for this to
work.
Ms. Brown. We are willing to work with you.
Ms. Pileggi. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much. And now I recognize for 5
minutes for questioning Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, members, if
we could answer real quick, because I have got six questions
here.
Mr. Hamberger, last Congress the freight railroads had a
proposal for a tax credit for PTC implementation. Do you guys
still support that?
Mr. Hamberger. Yes.
Ms. Richardson. OK. And, Mr. Simpson, some witnesses have
expressed concerns over the slow development of PTC technology.
Can you talk about what your members are doing to ensure that
this technology is readily available by the deadline of
December 31, 2015?
Mr. Simpson. Oh, my lord, I am a government relations guy,
not a communications signaling engineer. But they are
cautiously excited about it. Understand the financial situation
facing the railroads on the cost of implementation, but I think
they think they can do it by the date certain. I would be happy
to provide additional information from someone who--a
communications signal engineer, as opposed to me.
Ms. Richardson. So, Mr. Chairman, we would like to have
that information submitted for the record.
Mr. Simpson. I would be happy to do that.
Mr. Shuster. Certainly.
Ms. Richardson. Mr. Stem, the hours of service changes in
2008 law were designed to provide workers with more rest to
reduce fatigue on the job. Do you think that this has been
achieved? And, if not, why not? And what further changes should
we consider?
Mr. Stem. Thank you, Ms. Richardson. Mr. Hamberger took my
seat, as normal.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Stem. Hours of service changes that were made in the
RSIA in 2008 were a step in the right direction. And if those
hours of service corrections had been implemented as this
committee passed them, they would have been a lot more
appropriate than they are today.
Currently, the safety-critical employees that are operating
the trains today have a totally unpredictable work schedule.
The prior notification that would produce a predictable work
schedule was moved to the end of service. So today, an employee
has no clue within 40 hours when the employee will be expected
to return to work. And the only hours of service improvement
was a mandated 10 hours of undisturbed rest when he gets off
duty.
And our suggestions are that logic fatigue science
indicates it is only a simply change to move that required 10
hours of undisturbed rest to immediately preceding service, so
that that safety-critical employee will have a predictable work
schedule.
Ms. Richardson. OK. Thank you. And Mr. Simpson, in your
testimony, in support of Buy America requirements, you
recommended improving transparency and accountability of
domestic content requirements, as well as introducing
incentives to increase domestic content. Could you please
elaborate?
Mr. Simpson. Yes, I would be happy to.
Ms. Richardson. On what specific incentives----
Mr. Simpson. First of all, there are--as I said, there are
three different Buy America regulations: one for intercity
passenger rail, one for transit, and now one for high-speed
rail. And that seems relatively ludicrous to us, that if Amtrak
is buying a car it is one regulation, but if Metro is buying a
car it is a different one. And then, if a high-speed rail, it
is a different one.
So, we ought to try to attain 100 percent, because we are
strong supporters of Buy America. And, as I understand it, that
is not currently attainable. But some companies can get close.
The closer a company gets to getting to that 100 percent, it
seems to us, that company ought to get some kind of reward,
whether it is a tax benefit or a check--when the buying
decision is made, a check that this guy can--this company can
get the--close to 100 percent, so he is a better candidate than
a company that is only approaching 50 or 60 percent.
And finally, the waiver process. Every once in a while I
get a phone call from the Federal Railroad Administration
saying, ``There is a Buy America waiver request. What do you
think about it?'' Well, that is hardly a very transparent
method of granting waivers. And I think that the waiver process
ought to be more transparent and done more quickly than that.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you. And my last question is for Mr.
O'Connor. And that is you talked a lot about the--having the
need for training. Could you give us some specific examples of
not having the training? What is the monetary loss, and the
economic impact? Because I think we all agree that the training
should be there. But if you--given the other side of the aisle,
I think it would be helpful to tell them what those economic
impacts are.
Mr. O'Connor. Well, at this point I am not really prepared
to give you specific anecdotal evidence of one specific
incident and what the cost was.
I can speak in terms of the overall fire service, and I did
have the privilege of chairing the Congressional Fire Services
Institute for a number of years, which is a compilation of all
the organizations, career and volunteer.
And some of the issues that this committee has considered
in the past have been rerouting issues, making sure that every
community is, you know, appropriately trained and equipped to
handle--whether it is rail, over-the-road--those type of
instances.
We could certainly have our staff research and provide you
places where there has been a hazardous materials incident,
whether by rail, whether over-the-road, and in jurisdictions
where they have not had adequate training, what that has
necessitated, in terms of an overall State response, a private
response, et cetera. But right here today I cannot, off the top
of my head, just say, ``On such and such a date this occurred
and this was the economic impact.''
But I think it was articulated very well that when these
things occur it certainly interrupts commerce. And the more
quickly that you can mitigate these incidences and move on, the
better it is for the community and for commerce, as a whole.
Ms. Richardson. If you could--and if it could be accepted
for the record--if you could submit some of those examples, and
also give us a sense, when the training does not occur, how
many more men and women it requires, and so on. Thank you, and
I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much. And I want to again thank
everybody for coming here today, and testifying. I appreciate
the back-and-forth from the table and back into the crowd.
But again, thank you all very much for coming here today.
It will all be in the record. And I look forward to working
with you as we move forward. Thank you very much, and this
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

