- EPA MINING POLICIES: ASSAULT ON APPALACHIAN JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA MINING POLICIES:
ASSAULT ON APPALACHIAN JOBS--PART I

=======================================================================

(112-29)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 5, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-185                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment
BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         Columbia
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            BOB FILNER, California
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington,   GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
Vice Chair                           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               LAURA RICHARDSON, California
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFF DENHAM, California              NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma               (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)
VACANCY

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Gardner, Michael B., General Counsel, Oxford Resource Partners,
LP.............................................................     9
Marks, Teresa, Director, State of Arkansas Department of
Environmental Quality, and Secretary-Treasurer, Environmental
Council of the States (ECOS)...................................     9
Peters, Leonard K., Secretary, State of Kentucky Energy and
Environment Cabinet............................................     9
Quinn, Hal, President and CEO, National Mining Association.......     9

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Gardner, Michael B., and Exhibits A-N............................    35
Marks, Teresa....................................................   163
Peters, Leonard K................................................   167
Quinn, Hal.......................................................   172

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Quinn, Hal, President and CEO, National Mining Association:

Photographs of reclaimed land.................................. 25-27
GEI Consultants, Inc., ``Final Report--Technical Review: A
Field-based Aquatic Life Benchmark for Conductivity in
Central Appalachian Streams,'' submitted to National Mining
Association, September 2010, Project 091380..................   182
GEI Consultants, Inc., ``Final Report--Variability of Benthic
Invertebrate Communities of Headwater Streams in Southern
West Virginia,'' submitted to National Mining Association,
March 2011, Project 091380...................................   262

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Peters, Leonard K., Secretary, State of Kentucky Energy and
Environment Cabinet:

Letter regarding permit delays to Nancy Stoner, Acting
Assistant Administrator, Office of Water, Environmental
Protection Agency..........................................384, 385
``EPA Specific Permit Objection--CY2000 to Present''--
Spreadsheet showing EPA objections to Kentucky permits.......   389
ECOS, ``Objection to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's
Imposition of Interim Guidance, Interim Rules, Draft Policy
and Reinterpretation Policy''................................   393
National Mining Association Memorandum Opinion.................   395
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.009

EPA MINING POLICIES:

ASSAULT ON APPALACHIAN JOBS--PART I

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources
and the Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The committee will come to order, Water
Resources and Environment Subcommittee of Transportation and
Infrastructure. Welcome.
I am going to start. My Ranking Member, Mr. Bishop, has to
leave, and he wants to do his quick opening statement. So
proceed.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you very much
for indulging my schedule.
As a representative of Long Island, I am not faced with the
day-to-day implications of surface coal mining. However, I have
quickly learned that few issues have energized or engendered a
more passionate response from industry, from mine workers, and
from everyday citizens than recent actions by the current
administration to provide oversight of surface coal mining
operations.
Mr. Chairman, your decision to hold this series of hearings
provides an opportunity for our Members to learn more about
this important issue. It also highlights the complex balance
that policymakers face in providing well-paying jobs for
American families, and ensuring the continued growth and
economic health of our communities, and in protecting our
natural environment for current and future generations. In my
view, this balance is often times most evident in relation to
providing safe and reliable sources of energy for our Nation.
We recognize that energy generation is an essential element
of modern society, and is critical to growing the U.S. economy
and protecting American jobs. However, we are also coming to
recognize that energy generation itself comes with a
significant cost. As the experiences of the past few years have
demonstrated, the goals of domestic energy generation and
protection of the environment are not mutually exclusive.
However, the reality is that the pendulum cannot sway too
far to either side. I am hopeful that these hearings start the
debate on reaching that careful balance point, and I yield back
the balance of my time with my gratitude for your indulgence of
my schedule.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I have an opening statement, but
first of all I want to welcome everybody again to this hearing,
``EPA Mining Policies,'' a discussion about assault on jobs.
And we will have a part two of the hearing next week.
Coal mining is an important aspect of the Nation's mining
industry and is woven into the fabric of Appalachian life.
Today coal is mined in 26 States. While Wyoming is the leading
coal-producing State, it is closely followed by West Virginia
and Kentucky. The United States consumes 1.1 billion tons of
coal every year. Thirty-three percent of the coal--
approximately 390 million tons annually--comes from the
Appalachian region of the United States, and 50 percent of the
power in the Nation comes from coal as a fuel source.
Coal is an abundant and domestic source of energy. Its use
does not subject us to the whims of a foreign cartel, nor does
it tend to thrust us into international conflicts. In addition,
using domestic coal creates American jobs.
While it is important to continue our research and
development into new sources of energy, it is clear that coal
will and must remain a major source of energy well into the
future. And therefore, it is important that we keep coal as a
safe and inexpensive alternative to other energy options.
For this reason, I am concerned about the Environmental
Protection Agency's recent policy decisions regarding coal
mining activities. It would appear that the objective of the
Agency is to make coal mining so expensive that alternative
sources of energy will become more attractive. The effect of
such a policy is to significantly drive up the cost of energy.
Since energy cost is a factor in all aspects of our economy,
this policy will act like an anchor that drags down our short-
term economic recovery and our long-term economic global
competitiveness.
While Congress has passed no law amending the Clean Water
Act, and the Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated
new regulations changing the Clean Water Act, EPA has issued
draft and interim guidance and--substantively changes how the
Clean Water Act applies to surface mining, and is using it as
de facto law to unlawfully delay or kill Clean Water Act
permits for surface mining operations in Appalachia.
In doing this, I am extremely concerned how the
administration is attempting to short-circuit the process for
changing substantive Agency policy under the Clean Water Act
without following the proper, transparent rulemaking process
that is dictated by the Administrative Procedure Act. By
ignoring the Administrative Procedure Act, EPA is changing the
Clean Water Act and its implementing regulations. EPA is taking
these actions with little regard to economic consequences, with
little regard to national security, and most importantly, with
little regard to the law.
Much of the Clean Water Act is a delegated program. States
that have received approval to implement Clean Water Act
programs have demonstrated to the Environmental Protection
Agency that they have adopted laws, regulations, and policies
at least as stringent as the Federal laws, regulations, and
policies, and these States have developed and demonstrated the
capability to maintain existing and assume new responsibilities
under the Act.
Congress, in the Administrative Procedures Act and
environment statutes, established a formal administrative
rulemaking process that provides a mechanism for public
comment, proposing amendments, or allowing States to object and
provide its standards for judicial review of the agency
actions.
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act assigns the EPA to two
tasks in regard to fill material. First, EPA must develop the
guidelines in conjunction with the Corps of Engineers in
determining whether to permit a discharge of fill material.
Second, the Act confers EPA the authority, under specified
procedures, to prevent the Corps from authorizing certain
disposal sites. EPA guides the Corps' review of the
environmental effects of the proposed disposal sites. For
example, no permit shall be issued if it causes or contributes
to any water quality standard violations.
EPA may comment on the Corps' application of the Section
404 guidelines to particular permit applications during the
interagency review period required for each permit. In
addition, EPA has limited authority under Section 404 to
prevent the Corps from authorizing a particular disposal site.
To exercise that authority, EPA must determine, after notice
and an opportunity for a public hearing, that certain
unacceptable environmental effects on municipal water supplies,
shellfish beds and fishery areas, wildlife, or recreation areas
would result. But, EPA does not have the authority to revoke an
already issued Section 404 permit.
Even though the EPA is very much involved in the permit
application process along with the State, the Corps of
Engineers, and other Federal agencies, the EPA is now revoking
permits that have already been issued. That is illegal. That is
not legal.
EPA is clearly ignoring the Clean Water Act and other laws
as it relates to surface mining activities in Appalachia. EPA's
continued imposition of interim guidance, interim rules, draft
policy or reinterpretation of policy has led to uncertainty
regarding actions taken by the State and Federal regulatory
bodies.
In addition, it is simply not a responsible way for
government to act. This regulatory overreach should be
considered a property rights issue. What does it really mean to
get a permit? Shouldn't it come with some certainty that the
activity can move forward unencumbered, but within the bounds
of the permit, particularly those activities on private lands?
This no longer seems to be the case and it is going to have
a stifling effect on not just mining operations in Appalachia,
but on economic development projects nationwide. While the
President and his administration talks a good game about job
creation and removing unnecessary governmental burdens on
business, in reality the Environmental Protection Agency is
crippling economic growth with little or no benefit to the
environment.
I welcome our witnesses to the hearing today, and I look
forward to hearing from each of you in the next coming minutes.
But at this time I want to recognize the Ranking Member of
the T&I Committee, Congressman Rahall.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs. I appreciate very
much your holding this hearing, and I welcome our witnesses
today, and extend my appreciation for their participation.
You know, the subject of this hearing is one of great
interest to the Appalachian region. But it is of acute concern
to the people in the district that I am honored to represent.
This hearing is intended to delve into a matter that we, in
southern West Virginia, have been struggling with for decades,
for decades: The delicate balance between producing domestic
energy while preserving our national resources and the health
and safety of our coal field residents.
In fact, I would wager to say that there is nowhere in this
Nation--nowhere in this Nation--where our citizens know better
the difficulty and the tensions entailed in trying to strike
that balance than in the communities I represent.
The people in southern West Virginia love--love--the
natural beauty of our land. We want clean water, clean air. We
want our children and grandchildren to live and breathe and
grow up in clean environments. But we want jobs, as well. We
want jobs for our children and grandchildren, as well.
We do not condone coal companies' failure to ensure the
safety of their miners and the well-being of the communities in
which they operate. That is simply wrong. But it is also wrong
for a Federal agency to circumvent the law and treat guidance
as binding policy, particularly when that policy targets only
one industry in only one region of the country. And I know you
referred to that, Mr. Chairman, in your comments.
As I have said before, the EPA has a legitimate role to
play in the Clean Water Act permitting process. And early on in
this administration, many had high hopes that the EPA would
provide the clarity and the certainty that coal mining
constituencies throughout Appalachia have been asking for,
pleading for, for many years. Unfortunately, we have been
disappointed, as a result of the guidance that the EPA issued
in April of last year, guidance with far-reaching consequences
that was made effective immediately, without the opportunity
for the public to comment.
Through that guidance, the EPA is not only dictating the
Army Corps of Engineers 404 permitting process, but it is also
intervening in State-issued 402 discharge permits, bypassing
existing law and longstanding regulation in substituting a
wholly new, barely studied, entirely confusing criterion for
determining water quality, along with new timelines for review
and approval of petitions. Instead of offering that clarity and
certainty, the regime set forth in that guidance has thrown the
entire permitting process throughout the region into utter
turmoil.
Nobody can say with any certainty what will gain a mine an
approved permit, and what will earn one a refusal. Or, still,
nobody can now say what it will take to keep an existing permit
because the Agency has used criteria in that guidance to veto a
permit that was granted years before the guidance document was
ever written.
As a result, coal miners in my district are consistently
concerned about losing their jobs, and communities fear that
they will not generate sufficient revenue to support schools,
to keep the lights on, and to build basic infrastructure and
provide basic services such as law enforcement.
As well, the work to shore up the long-struggling economy
of Appalachia and ensure that our children and grandchildren
can have a future there is further hindered because the entire
region is being subjected to inequitable treatment under
Federal law, in comparison to the rest of the country. It is,
after all, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Unfortunately, the effect of all this is that we are not
finding common ground. Instead, the parties on all sides of the
issue have dug their heels in even more deeply. So, I
appreciate today's hearing, I appreciate the testimony that we
are going to hear, and which I have already reviewed. And the
next week I hope--it is my fervent hope that we may help to
inform this government and guide this Nation in our long-
running endeavor to reach that delicate balance between energy
development and the protection of our natural resources.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for calling what I consider to be a very, very
important hearing. And I appreciate the statement that you have
made and that the Ranking Member just gave.
I am in my 23rd year in the Congress, and I have never
heard as many complaints about any agency as I have heard about
the Environmental Protection Agency over the past couple of
years. It seems to me that that Agency has gone power-mad. And
in any heavily regulated or over-regulated industry, what
happens? First the small businesses are run out. Then the
medium-sized businesses. And these industries end up in the
hands of a few big giants.
And so, extremely big government, slowly, over the years,
becomes the best thing that ever happened to extremely big
business. But it sure hurts the little guys and the medium-
sized guys.
And then I have noticed over the years that almost all
environmental radicals come from very wealthy or very upper-
income families. And perhaps they don't realize how much they
hurt the poor and the lower income and the working people by
destroying jobs and driving up prices. But that is what they
do, and that is what they have done in so many instances, in so
many industries over the years. And I have seen it. These
groups, they don't want you to drill for any oil, they don't
want you to dig for any coal, they don't want you to cut any
trees. And they drive up these prices.
I mean, for instance, President Clinton vetoed the
expansion of drilling for oil in Alaska in the mid-1990s, which
would have meant a million barrels of oil more a day coming
down to this country, and gas prices wouldn't be anywhere close
to where they are today if that hadn't happened. And yet, we
have a Secretary of Energy in this administration who says we
need to be paying the same price for oil as they pay in Europe,
$8 or $9 a gallon. And, obviously, the goal is to force people
to drive less.
And the same thing, as you noted, Mr. Chairman, is
happening in the coal industry. Apparently, environmental
radicals want to destroy the coal industry so that people use
less coal. But the United States has been referred to as the
Saudi Arabia of coal. They oppose nuclear power, they oppose
coal, they oppose oil, they oppose every kind of energy. And
the only thing they really help, they help foreign energy
producers. But they hurt our people, especially the lower and
middle-income people.
I want to tell you what has happened in east Tennessee. I
was told several years ago that there were 157 small coal
companies in east Tennessee. Now there are none. We used to
drill--we used to produce about 12 million tons a year in coal.
Now about 2 million.
We opened up, at that time, in--around the late 1970s we
opened up an office of surface mining in Knoxville. And very
quickly, within just a few years, all the small coal companies
and all the medium-sized companies were run out of business.
Once again, big government had helped the big giants. But they
had hurt all the little people.
And what does this do? It drives up the utility prices.
Everybody's utility prices are higher today because of this.
And, once again, going back to President Clinton, he locked up
the largest low-sulfur coal deposit in the world after the
Ryati brothers in Indonesia became his biggest contributors.
But, once again, it hurt the--there are a lot of people out
there who are having trouble paying their utility bills now
because of that action, and because we put so many limitations
on coal production.
I chaired this subcommittee for 6 years, and I want clean
air and clean water as much as anybody. But you have to have a
little balance and common sense in these areas, and you cannot
always give in to the far left environmental radicals. And if
we don't wake up and realize what is happening in this country,
we are going to destroy this country, economically, and we are
going to send even more jobs to other countries. We are going
to help the foreign energy producers, like I said earlier.
And people, all these college students getting out now
wonder why they can't find jobs and have to work as waiters or
waitresses in restaurants. And the left-wing environmental
movement is a large part of that cause.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Mr. Crawford, you have an opening
statement?
Mr. Crawford. Yes, I do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
welcome all the witnesses today. I appreciate your time and
your testimony. One in particular I want to say welcome, as a
fellow Arkansan, to Ms. Marks. And I have the pleasure of
introducing Teresa Marks today, the director of Arkansas
Department of Environmental Quality, and the secretary/
treasurer of the Environmental Council of the States.
As Arkansas is the natural State, Ms. Marks is responsible
for protecting Arkansas' air, water, and land from the threat
of pollution. And so we welcome her leadership before the
committee today. Thank you.
After graduating from the University of Arkansas at
Monticello, Ms. Marks became a high school teacher where she
taught secondary level students in geography, history, and
civics. She returned to the classroom the following year,
graduating from the Bowen School of Law at the University of
Arkansas at Little Rock with a juris doctorate degree.
In 1995 Ms. Marks began serving the State in the office of
attorney general, a job that lasted almost 12 years. Eventually
Ms. Marks was named Arkansas attorney general's public
protection department deputy attorney general, where she
supervised several lawyers and support staff in representing
the interests of consumers and State agencies in consumer
protection, antitrust, utilities, and environmental matters.
These experiences make her well-suited to testify today
regarding the EPA's practice of combining interim guidance with
objection authority.
EPA actions have the practical effect of ensuring that no
permits are issued and none are reviewable, because they only
provide interim guidance. The EPA should finalize their
guidance so that courts are able to review whether the final
guidance complies with the Administrative Procedures Act.
Once again, Ms. Marks, I thank you for your leadership, and
I look forward to your testimony today. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Mr. Cravaack?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member
Rahall for holding these important hearings today on how they
affect EPA as not only mining jobs in Appalachia, but also how
it affects the mining operations in the mines of Minnesota's
iron range.
I would also like to welcome our witnesses, and thank you
very much for taking your time out of your busy schedules to be
here today to help educate us on the best way to proceed. And I
look forward to hearing your testimony regarding the new
procedures the EPA has developed for permitting Appalachian
coal mining operations.
As we all well know, about 50 percent of our Nation's power
comes from coal. And 3 percent of that coal comes from the
Appalachian region. Coal mining provides thousands of jobs and
supports numerous communities throughout the region, and is the
essential core of our energy production.
I am concerned at some of the steps taken recently by the
EPA to expand its oversight and to impose increased burdensome
regulations on the coal mining industry. These new rules seem
to bypass the established protocols, making the permitting
process more complicated and more time-consuming.
I find the EPA's new regulations and ``guidelines'' very
troubling, and I worry about their unprecedented overreach and
the effect that they are going to have on mining jobs and
mining communities.
I look forward to hearing from your testimony today from
the witnesses on this current situation of the coal mining
industry, and their thoughts on what steps can be taken to
protect thousands of jobs, harvest our own natural resources
smartly, and keep energy costs low.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to hearing from
your testimony. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Mrs. Capito?
Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and the
Ranking Member Rahall, who--I am a fellow citizen of the State
of West Virginia, and we are--we have been blessed to be one of
the largest producers of coal, and also natural gas.
We consider that a gift in West Virginia, and we want to be
able to weave the delicate balance that Congressman Rahall
talked about between the economy and the environment. Recently
it has been difficult for us to watch as, we feel, the
administration has targeted our cheapest and most abundant
resource, and that is our coal. We just feel that this is
putting us on a path of higher energy prices at a time we can
ill afford this.
There is so much uncertainty and concern throughout the
State of West Virginia--those who are involved directly in coal
mining. But whether it is the local gas station or restaurant,
any kind of retailer, we feel this. It just tremors all through
every economic part of our State.
So, as we are attempting to get our economy moving in the
right direction, I believe we shouldn't be placing undue
burdens on our manufacturers who are depending now on our
reasonably priced energy. Simply put, coal is and must be a
part of our Nation's energy portfolio.
The title of the hearing that we are going to have today is
``EPA Mining Policies: Assault on Appalachian Jobs.'' I have
explained I live in Appalachia, and am a proud daughter of our
State. But in several--in a meeting that I had with the EPA,
point blank, that was the comment that was made to me, that the
decisions that we make, we make regardless of the impact it has
on jobs and the economy. And that was a pretty startling
statement, especially in the economic times we are in now, but
in any time, from an administration official.
And so, I think it is time for us, as Members of Congress,
to take back the issue of how we are going to weave the balance
between the economy and the environment, do it in a smart way,
a smart way for our future, but a way that eases the anxieties
that we see every day in our State, and that I know a lot of
other States across the Nation are feeling.
Thank you. I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Just for a point of information, I am
told they are going to call votes, two votes here, in a little
bit. And we are watching here, we will just have to break and
have to come back. So I just want to give you--we are trying to
move forward as much as we can, but we will have to recess for
a short period of time.
At this time I want to introduce our panelists. We have a
doctor, Leonard Peters, who is the secretary of the State of
Kentucky energy and environment cabinet, and Congressman
Crawford already introduced Ms. Marks. And we also have Mr.
Harold Quinn, he is president of the National Mining
Association, and Mr. Michael Gardner, who is the general
counsel for Oxford Resources.
At this time, Dr. Peters, we look forward to your
testimony. Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF LEONARD K. PETERS, SECRETARY, STATE OF KENTUCKY
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT CABINET; TERESA MARKS, DIRECTOR, STATE
OF ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, AND SECRETARY-
TREASURER, ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL OF THE STATES (ECOS); HAL
QUINN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL MINING ASSOCIATION; AND
MICHAEL B. GARDNER, GENERAL COUNSEL, OXFORD RESOURCE PARTNERS,
LP

Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am
secretary of Kentucky's Energy and Environment Cabinet, and we
are the State's executive branch agency that has been
delegated, by the Federal Government, primacy over
environmental protection and coal mine permitting programs. The
cabinet's mission also includes development of the State's
energy resources in an environmentally responsible manner,
including implementing programs for energy efficiency and
renewable energy. I will provide a brief overview of my written
comments.
In October of last year, the Commonwealth of Kentucky
intervened in support of the Kentucky Coal Association in its
lawsuit against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. We
took this very unusual step because we strongly believe that
EPA's actions since April 1, 2010, when it issued its interim
final guidance, are arbitrary, requiring Kentucky's regulators
to adhere to permitting conditions that have not been
promulgated in line with the Federal Administrative Procedures
Act.
Specifically, in our complaint the Commonwealth of Kentucky
contends that, not withstanding the State's delegation under
the Clean Water Act in developing water quality standards, and
without promulgating a standard to require notice and comment
procedures, EPA has, since April 1, 2010, unlawfully reviewed
and objected to 402 permits proposed for coal mining operations
in 6 Appalachian States, including Kentucky, for compliance
with an unpromulgated water quality standard for conductivity.
In fact, since EPA issued its interim guidance last April
it has objected to permits that staff in my cabinet drafted in
accordance to standards that EPA had, prior to April 1, 2010,
supported. The interim objection letters reference the April 1
guidance. From a regulatory viewpoint, we are concerned that
interim guidance is not a legally defensible policy for the
States or for EPA, yet it is still being used as a basis to
object to State-delegated permitting actions.
Now, as someone responsible for overseeing the State's
environmental protection programs, I support regulations
necessary to protect our land, air, and water resources.
However, regulators and the regulated community need certainty
in the process. In Kentucky, coal mining employs 18,000 people,
brings in more than $3.5 billion from out of State each year,
and pays more than $1 billion in direct wages. Kentucky is the
third largest coal producing State.
And our low electricity rates, based on our primary
production of electricity from coal, allow us to produce a
large share of the Nation's stainless steel, aluminum,
automobiles, and other manufactured goods. It is for these
reasons that Kentucky's governor, Steve Beshear, reminds us
that coal is not a local issue, it is not a State issue, it is
a national issue. And the importance of coal to our Nation's
economy and security cannot be overstated.
There are many discussions regarding states' rights on this
and other regulatory issues. Governor Beshear and I recognize
and respect that EPA has a responsibility and obligation to
revise and update regulations and program requirements, as
necessary, to protect human health and the environment.
However, EPA should not create new regulatory requirements
that have not undergone the appropriate congressional or
rulemaking processes. As it is, today EPA is preventing,
through its objection process, the delegated States from
issuing permits with no recourse for the States or the
regulated community. There is no recourse because, currently,
an EPA permit objection is not deemed to be a final Agency
determination subject to potential judicial review by an
affected or interested party.
Additionally, EPA is not bound by specific timeframes for
making a final permit determination, and becomes the permitting
authority for a permit action, instead of the delegated State.
It is troubling that, absent a timeframe to make a final permit
determination, whether that is permit issuance or permit
denial, there is currently no obligation upon EPA to take any
final action, leaving both the State and the regulated
community in a prolonged state of uncertainty. This uncertainty
costs jobs and affects the livelihoods of thousands of families
in Appalachia.
I will conclude by saying that we have not been silent on
the issue with EPA, nor have we been in a combative
relationship. As I mentioned, we respect their mission and
authority to establish Federal rules to ensure consistency and
fairness. My staff and I have been in ongoing discussions with
our regional EPA administrator--that is in region 4--attempting
to resolve the issues to the satisfaction of all parties: the
EPA, the State, the regulated community, and the citizens of
Kentucky.
Unfortunately, I am not highly optimistic that such a
resolution will occur, especially in light of a recent meeting
with region 4 EPA. Indications are that these earnest
discussions to arrive at resolution are not being accepted by
EPA headquarters. I am disappointed that EPA Administrator
Jackson can be so dismissive of such an important issue.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide these
comments.
Ms. Marks. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Ranking Member, for inviting me here today. And thank you,
Congressman Crawford, for the introduction. I am Teresa Marks.
I am the director of the Arkansas Department of Environmental
Quality and an officer of the Environmental Council of the
States, or ECOS, for which I am testifying today. ECOS is the
membership organization of all the State environmental agency
leaders.
The reason I am testifying is to let this committee know
that the States and ECOS are concerned about the manner in
which the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is combining
interim guidance with its objection authority powers. This
combination creates a situation in which EPA can require a
State to insert virtually any provision EPA wants into a class
of permits without the benefits of the due process procedures
of the Administrative Procedures Act, such as public comment
and judicial review. This practice is unwelcome and is
potentially dangerous. It obviously thwarts the cooperative
procedures that the APA was designed to foster. It is not a
transparent way to create public policy.
States issue the vast majority of water discharge permits.
These permits must comply with Federal and State law and rules.
EPA then reviews these permits, and the Clean Water Act allows
EPA to object to them for cause. We believe this power was
rarely exercised until recently.
Last year, EPA issued an interim guidance to its regional
administrators, instructing them to object to permits that did
not follow the steps indicated within the guidance, although
the guidance itself stated that it was not legally binding. EPA
is not required to publish guidance, nor is it required to
accept public comments on such guidance. EPA can issue interim
guidance and expect full implementation in the permitting
process, in spite of the fact that there is disclaimer language
issued with the guidance, or that the guidance has not been
finalized.
Guidance, by the way, is seldom reviewed by the Office of
Management and Budget, and so is usually issued directly from
the Agency without further executive oversight. ECOS has no
general concern about the use of guidance, or objection
authority in principle.
But there is a difference between issuing interpretive, as
opposed to substantive guidance. EPA's use of interim guidance,
coupled with objection authority to create substantive and
binding changes in the permitting process amounts to final
agency action, and warrants the due process protections of the
Administrative Procedures Act. ECOS does not believe that EPA
has ever attempted to require States to implement interim
guidance by coupling it with objection authority until
recently.
Finally, there is another matter of how courts treat any
Federal action that is not final. Courts routinely decline to
review cases when requested to rule on a matter which does not
involve final agency action. When EPA issues an interim
guidance it follows that a court would not be inclined to
review it, since it would not, obviously, be a final agency
action.
Similarly, courts refuse to rule on permits that have not
been issued. This could create a situation in which EPA could
object to a State-issued permit, then fail to make a permitting
decision itself, or fail to make one in a timely manner,
resulting in the permit applicant being stymied for months, or
perhaps years, in obtaining a permit decision. Fortunately, in
the case under discussion today, the court has indicated that
EPA's actions could amount to final agency action, and
therefore, reviewable by the court.
We hope that the committee can see why the issue of interim
guidance, coupled with the use of objection authority, is an
unfair and indefensible position in which to place the States
and the regulated community, and must not be allowed to
continue.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. There is a call to vote, but we have got 13\1/2\
minutes, so we will--you testify, then we will recess, then we
will come back for Mr. Gardner.
So go ahead, Mr. Quinn. Welcome.
Mr. Quinn. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, Congressman Rahall, members of the subcommittee. I want
to thank the subcommittee for holding this hearing to exam
policies that continue to choke off job-creating opportunities
in the Appalachian coal fields.
Over 2 years ago, when the Nation was in the throws of a
deep recession, and losing about 600,000 jobs a month, EPA
embarked upon a series of actions that prevented coal companies
from obtaining permits necessary to expand or start mining
operations, projects that would preserve and create thousands
of highway jobs in Appalachia.
At the beginning of 2009 a backlog approaching 150 Clean
Water Act 404 permit applications had developed, while
litigation over the Corps' permitting process was being
resolved. On February 13, 2009, the fourth circuit court of
appeals issued a decision upholding the Corps' processing for
permitting coal mines, thereby removing the obstacles to
clearing the backlog. Shortly thereafter, EPA announced that it
wanted to revisit some of the applications. Many had been
pending for over a year. These are permits EPA already had
ample time to review and raise any concerns to the Corps.
In response to our reaction that it appeared EPA was
instituting a permit moratorium, the Agency issued a statement
that was ``EPA is not halting, holding, or placing a moratorium
on any of the mining permit applications,'' plain and simple.
As it turns out, EPA had already requested the Corps to develop
a list of over 100 permits that were ripe for a decision by the
Corps. And then, EPA unleashed a series of new policies in the
form of memoranda and guidelines, altering the process, rules,
and standards for issuing coal mine permits.
EPA crafted a process that did not resemble anything in the
law or the regulations. EPA commandeered the entire 404 process
from the beginning to the end by displacing the Corps of
Engineers. The new process allows the agencies to ignore all
timeframes and the regulations for reaching decisions. New
process allows EPA to run roughshod over the States that the
Clean Water Act empowers to establish and apply water quality
standards for waters within their borders.
The centerpiece of this policy was a so-called enhanced
coordinating process, outlined in a memorandum issued on June
11, 2009. By the time the permit backlog--by this time, the
permit backlog had grown to about 230 permit applications. How
well did the so-called enhanced coordination process work?
Well, well over a month later, the Army Corps of Engineers
reported that EPA had yet to provide them with the criteria EPA
was using to review the permits. In fact, detailed guidance was
not issued until almost a year later, April 2010.
A report by the Government Accountability Office requested
by the Ranking Member, Congressman Rahall, found the following:
``EPA and the Corps did not begin meeting with permit
applicants until January and February of 2010, more than 6
months after they created this new, enhanced process. EPA did
not document the concerns it presented to the applicants. EPA
and the Corps often met separately with the applicants, not
together. EPA did not send to these meetings officials
authorized to make any decisions.'' And finally, ``While the
process imposes 60-day time period for reviewing the permits,
the 60-day period did not begin until EPA said so. And even
then, EPA was free to suspend or extend it.'' This hardly
resembles a coordinated process, let alone an enhanced one, or
one that we were told would lead to expeditious review of these
permits.
Companies have been worn down. Today, far more permits have
been withdrawn by companies than permits issued. And most
permits are still languishing in a regulatory limbo. Permits
delayed are jobs denied. If the purpose of all this policy is
to discourage new investments and job-creating opportunities,
well, EPA can declare a mission accomplished.
Let me close by saying that when you talk to coal miners
about mining coal, you hear in their voices the great pride
they take in what they do and how well they do it. They often
speak about their families, their country, and jobs. But the
jobs they speak about first are not their own jobs. Rather,
they typically talk about all the other jobs they know depend
upon them doing their job well. Today I often get questions
from them about why their government at times seems to put so
much effort into working against them, rather than supporting
them in what they do for their country. I wish I had a good
answer; they certainly deserve one.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, we are going to have to recess to go vote
for two votes. There is still almost about 9 minutes in this
first vote, and it will be a 5-minute vote after that. So we
will try to reconvene before--between 11:00 and 11:15.
So, when we are back we will have Mr. Gardner's testimony,
and then I look forward to having questions and dialogue. So
please excuse us. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Committee will come back into order.
And at this time I welcome Mr. Gardner for your testimony.
The floor is yours.
Mr. Gardner. Good morning. My name is Michael Gardner, and
I am general counsel of Oxford Resource Partners, a top-20
domestic producer of steam coal in the largest surface coal
mining company in Ohio. In addition to operations in northern
Appalachia in Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania, Oxford has
operations in western Kentucky in the Illinois basin. I have
been asked to share some of Oxford's experiences in dealing
with EPA's mining policies. But first, on behalf of Oxford, let
me thank you for conducting these oversight hearings, and for
the opportunity to present my testimony.
It is imperative that this Congress carefully review EPA's
recent activities in the area of water resources policy. On
June 11, 2009, EPA announced its enhanced coordination
procedures, and published an initial list of 108 section 404
permits. I sometimes refer to this as EPA's black list. On
September 11, 2009, EPA published its final initial black list
of permits subject to enhanced coordination. Only four of
Oxford's eight permits on the initial list made the final cut,
the others having been previously issued.
And then, on September 18, 2009, Oxford's CEO, Chuck
Ungurean, sent an urgent letter to EPA Administrator Lisa
Jackson. This was a plea, as a stakeholder, to meet with EPA to
discuss the critical nature of three of our four permits on the
black list. No response has ever been received.
The first project on EPA's final black list that I want to
highlight for you is Oxford's Kaiser Mathias permit. It is the
poster child for the absurdity of EPA enhanced coordination. On
November 4, 2008, Oxford submitted an application for a
Nationwide 49 Permit. Nationwide 49 is a general section 404
permit, pre-approved by EPA specifically for remining
activities, because the benefits of remining so clearly
outweigh any adverse environmental impacts.
In this instance, Oxford proposed to backfill 4\1/2\ miles
of dangerous high wall, reclaim 450 acres of previously
unreclaimed mine land, and restore all the land to meet current
standards. It wasn't until March 5, 2010, that EPA finally
authorized Kaiser Mathias. This was after 9 months of EPA
enhanced coordination of a permit that should never have been
on EPA's radar to begin with, and a permit decision that was,
quite literally, a no-brainer.
But it doesn't stop there. Three days later, EPA published
a press release, taking credit for an 80 percent reduction in
impacts to streams, and a 70 percent reduction in impacts to
wetland at Kaiser Mathias, all as a result of its enhanced
coordination. The only problem with this self-serving press
release was that the starting points for these claimed
reductions were completely fabricated. Oxford could not have
submitted a Nationwide 49, had it proposed the kind of impacts
for which EPA claimed a reduction. And there was no mention of
Nationwide 49.
Next I would like to share with you what happened at our
Halls Knob permit. On October 2, 2008, Oxford submitted an
individual section 404 permit application. Almost a year later,
on September 11, 2009, Ohio EPA issued its section 401
certification that the project met stringent State water
quality standards. One week later, in our September 18th plea
to EPA Administrator Jackson, Oxford asked about EPA's
environmental concerns, given that Ohio EPA had none. It was
not until May 27, 2010, after nearly 1 year of EPA enhanced
coordination, that we found out what EPA wanted to exact from
Oxford for this permit.
On June 6, 2010, the court drafted the permit, as
instructed by EPA, with a host of special conditions that
Oxford had never seen before and could not accept. EPA
recommended denial of the permit without these special
conditions. Now faced with shutting down the mine and laying
off 25 coal miners, Oxford went to its congressional delegation
for help. On June 18, 2010, a meeting was held with the EPA in
the office which I believe is now occupied by Chairman Gibbs.
And on July 12, 2010, the Corps reproffered the permit with
marginally acceptable conditions after 13 months of EPA
enhanced coordination.
These two examples, and the others being submitted to the
committee for the record represent five Oxford section 404
permit applications. Permit delays from EPA enhanced
coordination have put at risk more than 200 direct coal mining
jobs and thousands of secondary jobs, which translates into
nearly 2 million tons of annual coal production.
At a time when our Nation still needs reliable, affordable
energy to fuel economic growth and prosperity, EPA's water
resources policies are crushing employment opportunities and
thwarting capital investment in the coal industry that provides
and can create high-wage, shovel-ready jobs still needed and
valued in Appalachia. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I will start with some questions. We
will have a round of questions, because there is a lot of, I
think, information that needs to be brought to light.
I am going to start with Dr. Peters, since you are a
chemist, by trade, I believe. I think I want to have a lot of
discussion on the enhanced coordination, and also the
conductivity test. Can you, first of all, explain the
conductivity test, and then numerical versus narrative, and how
it relates to what is going on?
Mr. Peters. The conductivity is a measure of the actual
electric conductance that water would carry, and it is affected
by various species that are in water. So, you can have various
species in that water that may give the same conductivity, but
in fact, they could have different biological impacts,
different chemical impacts.
So, conductivity is a measure that, by itself, does not
give the complete picture of the contaminants in water. And
what EPA has done is specified limits of 500 microsiemens per
centimeter as the break-off point in that particular regard, as
opposed to a narrative water quality standard, where you look
at much broader issues, and not simply conductivity in
assessing water quality.
Mr. Gibbs. So then, numerical standard and conductivity, it
is narrowly focused, so it is maybe not giving a whole picture,
but it could distort the picture?
Mr. Peters. It is certainly not giving you the whole
picture, because you could have the conductivity of--I mean,
pick a number, 600 or 700 in one place. You could have the same
conductivity in another place. And the chemicals making up
that, or that are causing that conductivity, could be
distinctly different, and they could have different impacts on
health and welfare.
Mr. Gibbs. Now, in different areas, geographical areas,
different streams, would you get different results?
Mr. Peters. Very frequently. One of the dominant features
of conductivity is the geology in the area, so that the geology
that you have in the Appalachian area is going to be different
than what you might have in Kentucky, at least, in our western
coal fields, so that the same conductivity, because of
differing geologies, would probably represent different
chemical constituents in that water.
Mr. Gibbs. So you could get false assertions?
Mr. Peters. You certainly don't get the entire picture, and
you would not be able to make--I have argued, starting 2 years
ago, that they shouldn't focus simply on conductivity in and of
itself. It is an early indicator. It is not the conclusive
indicator that you need to really evaluate the quality of the
water.
Mr. Gibbs. And so my understanding is you're head of the
Kentucky EPA?
Mr. Peters. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. And that is pretty much the standard that
the U.S. EPA is using?
Mr. Peters. That is the standard that came out in the
interim guidance on April 1, 2010.
Mr. Gibbs. And in regards to interim guidance, were you, as
the State Agency, able to object or was there hearings on that
new procedure?
Mr. Peters. No, there were not hearings on that new
procedure. We had to adapt that particular procedure.
And if I could amplify for--just very briefly--over the
last 7 months--well, prior to April 1st, we had been putting in
permits, 402 permits, the water permits, that were being
accepted by EPA even as late as March 31st. Suddenly, on April
1st, those permits that we had been submitting were no longer
acceptable.
We had been in discussion for 7 months with region 4, which
is the cognizant region that we have, to try to develop a
template permit. What would be an acceptable permit? My staff
and region 4 staff developed a permit that was acceptable. We
thought we had an agreement, and I just found out, actually
yesterday, that that agreement was overruled in EPA
headquarters.
Mr. Gibbs. So this practice was changed when the
administration changed.
Mr. Peters. That is correct.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Let's where I want to go next. There is so
many questions in my mind, here. I am almost out of my time. I
am going to go to Representative Rahall for his--for a series
of questions, and we will rotate.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask
the panel--you heard both myself and Chairman Gibbs reference
during our opening comments concerns with EPA applying national
standards and practices in order to target a particular
industry--a single industry, if you will--and a single area of
the country: coal mining in Appalachia, of course, which is
part and parcel of the April 2010 guidance statement.
Are any of you aware of any other instance where EPA has
ever done this? And are you aware of any other situations where
EPA is seeking to enforce conductivity as a de facto water
quality standard?
Mr. Gardner. I am not----
Mr. Quinn. Congressman Rahall, no, I am not aware of, in my
career, of ever seeing something like this: one industry, one
region, and this type of approach.
Mr. Rahall. That is a negative from all four of you, then?
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rahall. All right. The April 10th guidance document
became effective immediately with a public comment, almost as
an afterthought. To those of you on this panel, is this
practice normal in your dealings with the Federal Government,
to have such a guidance issued and then the public comment just
kind of thrown in at the last minute?
Mr. Quinn. Not for something that changes the rules of the
game so substantially. And what should have been done was, if
it was some science they wanted to have reviewed, is peer
reviewed it out in the open, as well as in terms of their
policies, since they are all substantially changing the rules
of the game in midstream.
Mr. Rahall. Anybody else wish to comment?
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir. I think the big problem that ECOS--
from an ECOS point of view--is that there is a difference
between interpretive and substantive guidance. Interpretive
guidance, of course, is necessary, and it needs to be issued,
and it serves a purpose and would probably block things or jam
things up if it had to go through the procedural due process
requirements of the EPA. But when you are dealing with
substantive guidance, you are dealing with almost a rulemaking,
basically, and you are not--you do not have those due process
requirements that are necessary to make sure that everyone has
a chance to be heard, and that there is a chance for judicial
review. So, that is our concern.
Mr. Rahall. So interpretative and minor clarifications are
a standard----
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rahall [continuing]. But not such a major----
Ms. Marks. They basically change the rules.
Mr. Rahall [continuing]. Such a major ruling?
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rahall. To have it become the force of law, almost.
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gardner. I would agree with Ms. Marks. And our
experience in Ohio is that when--and we are familiar with the
Agency's publishing guidance and not necessarily of a
substantive nature, though, but to interpret their existing
rules and regulations. And when they do that, in Ohio, it has
always been a collaborative effort, where you meet with all the
stakeholders and you pound things out and you come up with, you
know, a consensus, if you will, of how this is going to apply,
how this is going to work to move things forward. That never
happened in this instance, that I am aware of.
Mr. Rahall. Yes. I know we are here, and this committee's
jurisdiction is over the Clean Water Act and its application to
coal mining. But I do not believe we could have this
conversation without reference to the Federal office of surface
mining and SMCRA. I, having been in the Congress when SMCRA was
enacted, served on the committee when it was passing the law in
1977. And I am sure the witnesses know that SMCRA explicitly
provides for a variance from the requirement that mine lands be
reclaimed to their approximate original contour if certain
conditions are met--in layman's terms, mountaintop removal
mining and valley fills--provided that post-mining land use
supports some type of economic development--industrial,
commercial, agricultural, and the like.
Let me ask you, Mr. Quinn, are you aware of EPA challenging
proposed post-mine land uses of this nature as part of its 404
permit reviews?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, I am. Two examples, I guess, for brevity
purposes.
In your State, if I recall, there was two--three
operations, and two operations involved King Coal Highway. And
the post-mining land use was designed to allow the road bed,
flat or rolling terrain, to accommodate the road bed for that
highway. My understanding is there was an estimate that that
work would save the taxpayers $100 million.
There was another case where EPA questioned the need for
post-mining land use being proposed down in Logan County, in
your district, for leaving land suitable for an emergency flood
housing, and they questioned the need for such housing. And, of
course, anybody who is familiar with that county down there
knows that flooding is a situation that emergency housing is
necessary. And this was to be operated by FEMA.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you. I appreciate the Chairman's
indulgence while I ask one more question of the whole panel. I
think it is extremely important that the science used to
support government environmental policies be peer-reviewed. Are
any of you aware of, and can you comment on the science used to
support the EPA's April 2010 guidance, and whether it was peer
reviewed?
Mr. Peters. There was a peer review that took place
subsequent to the issuance of it. It had not taken place prior
to it. And there are differing views on the science. At this
point in time, probably the best terms to use for the science
is that it is incomplete, at best. It is not totally
conclusive, in that particular regard.
So, there is certainly not unanimous and uniform agreement.
But it was only peer-reviewed after the interim final guidance
was issued, and that was a number of months after the case.
Mr. Gibbs. Dr. Peters, would it be fair to say that they
developed the policy and then kind of figured out what the
science should be?
Mr. Peters. Well, they did have some science ahead of time,
but that was science that had not been peer-reviewed prior to
that point in time. And I think we all recognize that the peer
review is a very important step in evaluating the quality and
the voracity of that science.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Cravaack, do you have questions?
Go ahead.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gardner, if I
could, sir, why do you think the EPA issues guidance? Why don't
they just issue a rule? What is your opinion on that?
Mr. Gardner. Well, I think the Administrative Procedures
Act is, you know, difficult. It is a long process. And guidance
documents are easy to generate. On every guidance document I
have ever seen there is always a disclaimer that says, ``This
guidance document does not have the force of law,'' yet at the
same time it is being foisted on the industry, and you are
required to meet the standards that are established in that as
binding conditions for getting a permit.
Mr. Cravaack. So, what you have found in your experience is
that these guidances have, in de facto, become rules.
Mr. Gardner. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Cravaack. That is what I hear. Thank you, sir.
Also, Director Marks, in your opinion as a State
legislator, do you feel the EPA has overreached its authority?
Ms. Marks. In a situation where EPA--such as this, where
EPA has combined their guidance authority with their objection
powers to make it basically binding, to make sure that they
guidance followed in permitting decisions made by the States,
yes sir, we do think that they have gone too far. As far as
that goes, there should be due process and a chance to comment
from the States.
Mr. Cravaack. And what rule do they state that says that
they can interfere with states' rights?
Ms. Marks. I am not aware of any rule. The response,
generally, we have received from EPA is that they use guidance,
and they have used it for years, which is absolutely true.
And we see the need for guidance. We don't think that there
is a problem with the use of guidance, as long as that guidance
is not used to basically change the rules and make them binding
on the regulated community and the States, without that ability
to challenge.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Quinn, sir, compared to previous permitting timelines
and costs, how do you expect the future--the expected timelines
and cost to change in this new process?
Mr. Quinn. Well, right now it is taking several years,
where it used to take us maybe 4 to 6 months. So now are seeing
an increase four or five-fold.
In terms of cost, it is--what is happening now is it is not
only taking longer, but with the conditions they are trying to
place on these permits, the productivity of these operations is
dropping. And, in fact, the Energy Information Administration
recently came out in its energy outlook and has lowered the
productivity projections for surface coal mines in Appalachia
by 20 percent. That is a very substantial regulatory penalty
that is being assessed against the operations in this region.
Mr. Cravaack. Yes, we are experiencing the same kind of
operations in Minnesota, as well, in our iron range region. We
are trying to get some open pit mining done, as well, for
precious metals. So we are finding the same kind of--the
permitting process in the coal industry is also reflective of
other mining operations, as well.
Mr. Quinn. Mine permitting in this country is the largest
impediment to new domestic investment in the mining industry in
this country, with taking up to 10 years to get permits.
Mr. Cravaack. And I totally agree with you on it being a
national security issue, as well. So--and depending on our own
natural resources. So I agree.
Dr. Peters--thank you, sir. Dr. Peters, why do--what do you
think the driving force is behind the EPA's changing their
process?
Mr. Peters. I wish I could answer that. It is very
difficult----
Mr. Cravaack. I really wish you could, too.
Mr. Peters [continuing]. To do anything other than
conjecture at this particular point in time. When you ask EPA
what does a good mining permit--what does an acceptable mining
permit look like, we cannot get a definitive answer today. So
when you cannot get that definitive answer, you begin to ask
yourself, ``What is the motive?'' And all you can do is
conjecture and hypothesize. And being a scientist, I would
rather not hypothesize on that.
But it is definitely stymying the industry. It is not--not
only is it not valuable for the--hurting the industry and the
regulatory community in the State, it is really, in a very
significant way, breaking that Federal-State cooperative
partnership to protect the environment that we had for so many
years.
The only thing I could say is if that partnership is not
entirely broken at this point in time, it certainly is severely
fractured. And that is, I think, one of the fatalities of--or
certainly one of the fatalities of what we are seeing at this
point in time.
Mr. Cravaack. I am almost out of time. But America's
Commitment to Clean Water Act was passed in the House last
year, and did not go forward. But what I am seeing now is they
are trying to implement the America's Commitment to Clean Water
Act, not through legislation, but through mandatory rulemaking.
And do you see that, as well?
Mr. Peters. That is certainly one of the reasons that
people are offering for it, yes.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you very much, sir. And, Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I think we are hitting conductivity
pretty good, but I have got one more follow-up on that of Dr.
Peters. I have got a report here that talks about the guidance
effectively established the regionwide--and we talked about the
geographical problems and issues with that--but the
conductivity levels should not exceed 500 siemens.
It is my understanding that this bottle of water exceeds
that level. Would that be true?
Mr. Peters. I cannot speak for that bottle of water, but
there are many bottles of water that do exceed that value, yes.
Mr. Gibbs. So you are telling me that the standard that
would be applied under the permit to pass the test would have
to be cleaner than most bottled water?
Mr. Peters. That is correct. And it varies from region to
region to region. But, yes, absolutely.
Mr. Gibbs. That is absurd, but I mean I--that is hard to
understand, but that makes it, gives me a red flag that there
is a different agenda going on here.
I want to talk, Mr. Gardner, to the enhanced coordination.
In your written testimony, it talked about, on the
applications, filed--it was kind of like going in a black hole,
you couldn't get any answers, you couldn't get back--can you
expound a little bit on the enhanced coordination? I believe
the enhanced coordination is dealing with the Corps, the EPA,
and the Department of the Interior, is that correct?
Mr. Gardner. In theory, yes. But, I mean, it is all being
directed by U.S. EPA, you know. The example I gave you, Halls
Knob, that was a permit that, you know, we received a copy of a
letter from U.S. EPA to the Corps saying, ``These are the
special conditions to put in the permit,'' and the Corps
obediently drafted the permit with those conditions in it.
So, as far as coordination goes, you know, we tried to
coordinate with the Corps on it, and they said, you know, ``You
are not going to get your permit unless you have these
conditions in it,'' and that is when we went to the
congressional delegation.
Mr. Gibbs. Let me just----
Mr. Gardner. You know----
Mr. Gibbs. It is my understanding, then, that the enhanced
coordination is something that kind of supersedes that, maybe
the whole permit application process too, that they can put
road blocks up in front of you before you really get into the
permit process with the Corps?
Mr. Gardner. Yes, exactly. I mean initially it came out
they published a list of permits that were subject to enhanced
coordination. And I call it the black list, not just because it
was permits subject to enhanced coordination, but because,
literally, the permits went into a black hole. You couldn't get
any information out of EPA, you know, why your permit got on
the list, how you get your permit off the list. It was just,
you know, radio silence for months and months and months. And
then they come out, you know, and start issuing the permits.
But that's been our experience with enhanced coordination.
The procedures that they are deploying are more suitable for
courtroom litigants than the regulatory process, where you
first--you know, you ignore your opponent and then you stall
and delay and--until they either run out of money or time or
both, and they are forced to settle or go away.
Mr. Gibbs. I don't believe there is anything in the Clean
Water Act or law anywhere that talks about enhanced
coordination. So I don't know where they get the jurisdiction
to do that. I don't know if you agree or not. When did this new
policy and procedures come into effect?
Mr. Gardner. I would say with the publication of their
announcement June 11, 2009. Coordination is kind of a term of
art. You know, we have been coordinating with the Corps years
before that to get our permits. The initial step in that
process is generally what is called a jurisdictional
determination, where you submit a preliminary mine plan to the
Corps, and they go out and review where the jurisdictional
waters are that are proposed to be impacted, and that is
coordination. Enhanced coordination is a, you know, figment of
EPA's imagination.
Mr. Gibbs. Oxford, I believe, is surface operations, right?
Mr. Gardner. Correct.
Mr. Gibbs. In your written testimony--I was reading it last
night--you talked about filling in where high walls are, the
dangerous high walls, which would be, I guess, hundreds of
feet. Can you explain a little bit, you know, the reclamation
process that Oxford uses, and what the end result is, and the
regulatory process you have to go through?
Mr. Gardner. Sure. I mean, ordinarily, most all of our
operations are remining operations, to some extent. That means
we are going back in to areas that were mined before SMCRA was
passed in 1977, where there were, you know, miles of exposed
high wall hundreds of feet high that are dangerous for people
driving ATVs in the wilderness and falling off of high walls,
or they were abandoned final-cut pits from the prior mining
that had acid mine water in it.
And we are--in our permitting operations, we proposed to go
back in there, remine the area, which means we go back in and
we have to get rid of all the toxic water that was there, and
we will go back in and remove additional coal reserves that
were left, because it was easy coal that was taken, you know,
40, 50 years ago. We will go back in and remove additional coal
and then backfill, from our operations, the hundreds of feet of
abandoned high wall and restore the land to meet current mining
standards.
Mr. Gibbs. Did you give this to us, the committee, these
pictures?
Mr. Gardner. I think that is from Mr. Quinn, but----
Mr. Gibbs. Oh, OK. Well, I guess, Mr. Quinn, I will just go
to you here. I guess I am out of time, but I will yield myself
a little bit more. I don't think the Ranking Member will mind.
I understand these are pictures of reclaimed land?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, that is reclaimed land. That is in eastern
Kentucky, where we have an arrangement with the Rocky Mountain
Elk Foundation. We have introduced the largest set of Rocky
Mountain elk in the east.
Mr. Gibbs. Pretty nice looking pictures to me with the elk
on there. And I was reading--I think it was your testimony--
that there has been some issues on permitting on your--I mean
you're doing a mining operation during the permit to get the
reclamation plans, I guess. There was some issues with the EPA
about the issue of wildlife being on the reclaimed land and
the--I guess, lack of better term--manure from the wildlife
coming into the streams. Is that an issue?
Mr. Quinn. Well, they are questioning, as Mr. Rahall is
indicating, they are questioning the post-mining land uses that
are being chosen by the companies. In some cases it is wildlife
habitat, in other cases it is industrial development or housing
development. So they are getting way outside their scope and
sphere by getting into the areas that the office of surface
mining and the State mining regulators are the ones who are
qualified and empowered to make those decisions.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, thank you. Mr. Rahall?
Mr. Rahall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a general
thought I would like to throw out to the panel, as I am sitting
here listening to questions, especially those from the
gentleman from Minnesota. And I have thrown this out before in
the public arena.
But in looking at why all this is happening to this generic
arena of applications that are out there, is it possible that
during the previous administration, that perhaps EPA was told
not to exercise their legal right under the CWA to review these
permits? In other words they were told to stay out.
And with the advent of a new administration, could there be
those within the EPA that felt they were wrongly shut aside
during the previous administration, and now, with a vengeance,
want to come back, and we see the pendulum swinging too far the
other way, in which they are exercising a personal vendetta or
agenda, whichever you want to use, because of not being allowed
to do what they thought was proper during the previous
administration?
In other words, pendulum went too far one way, now it is
going too far the other way. Don't we need to get back to the
middle?
And I don't reference permits that have been granted, such
as a spruce permit in my district. That is totally beyond what
I am talking about. I am not talking about previously approved
permits being revoked. But I am just talking about the generic
field of surface mine applications out there.
Mr. Gardner. I will take a stab at that for you. I don't
know that there was any administration that told EPA to stay
out of coal mining permits. But the Clean Water Act itself
delegates responsibility under section 404 to the Secretary of
Army and the Corps of Engineers, and wisely so, because they
are more familiar with it. EPA has its hands full with, you
know, an number of different regulatory programs.
And I think it is fair to say, though, when this
administration came in, they stepped up the efforts,
particularly after the fourth district court of appeals
overturned or reauthorized or upheld the Corps' authority to
issue 404 permits under the Clean Water Act. That is when they
really ramped up their efforts to get involved with reviewing
what was previously the Corps' exclusive jurisdiction.
Mr. Quinn. Let me say that I have heard that, and perhaps
that might be some motivation, but I would say the following
things.
One, I think it is more likely that coal mine permitting
was not a priority. Nobody ever told them they couldn't
comment. It was not a priority because it is already well
regulated. You already had the Surface Mining Control
Reclamation Act, which already evaluates much of what EPA now
says it wants to look at, which is operation plans, water
impacts, water management, post-mining land use, things along
those lines.
If EPA felt it was shunted aside in the prior
administration, then the answer would have been return to their
normal authorized role, which is to file comments with the
Corps of Engineers about pending permits. Instead, they have
created a process that has displaced the Corps of Engineers
from the front end of the process. The Corps--actually gets to
screen which permits it will allow the Corps to actually
review. And at the end of the process, whatever decision is
made by the Corps has to align with what EPA wants.
So, if that was the sole concern, which was commenting,
that is--they have gone well beyond that.
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir. I would have to say that I have not
heard anybody express that concern among the States. ECOS does
not have an official position on that issue. But I have not
personally been concerned that there has been some type of
policy swing in that regard. And I have not heard other States
express that.
The concern that we have, of course, is it is easier--it is
certainly quicker, it is easier to go ahead and institute
guidance. And if you can do that without the due process
issues, then it is easier to get it in place and get it
started. The problem is, when you are dealing with these
substantive issues, you just cannot ignore the due process. It
has to be in place, and--for the States to have a cooperative
relationship with EPA. And that is certainly what we strive to
have, is a cooperative relationship.
Mr. Rahall. Mr. Peters?
Mr. Peters. I was not present in--I was not in my current
position during the prior administration, during President
Bush's administration, so I have no firsthand knowledge of
that. Some of my staff have said that is the case, but that is
simply what they have indicated.
Mr. Rahall. Some of your staff who were around during the
previous administration?
Mr. Peters. That is correct.
Mr. Rahall. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Before I go to you, I want to ask for unanimous
consent to have these put in the record, Mr. Quinn, these
pictures of the reclaimed land.
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. I heard no objection. Enter into the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66185.012

Mrs. Capito. Thank you. Thank you. Pardon if you have
answered this already, but as you have probably figured out, we
like to have things answered several times, to make sure we
clearly understand.
Part of the things that I am hearing in West Virginia, in
terms of working with the EPA and trying to reach a sense of
fairness is the prolonging, or the time spans are becoming so
much lengthier, and--that you are really not getting a yes or a
no answer, it is just a continuation of changing the process or
redoing the process. And sometimes I think in life it is better
to get a no than a maybe. Or, ``That might work.''
Do you find this to be the case, that it is more of a
moving the goal post with the different provisions and working
with the Corps and the DEPs, or do you find that it is more a
sense of an absolute answer, one way or the other? I am curious
to know about that. Dr. Peters?
Mr. Peters. Certainly in our case it has greatly prolonged
the process. And it has prolonged the process to the point
where some companies are simply withdrawing permits because
they do not see the end in sight. And that prolonging of the
permits, of course, costs them money.
Mrs. Capito. Right.
Mr. Peters. And they have to make a business judgment as to
whether or not they can persist for that length of time.
But, you know, our data clearly show that it is much, much
longer to get a permit today than it was 3 years ago or 5 years
ago. We have, right now, 162 permits that we are about ready--
we are trying to figure out what we need to do with them so
that they will be acceptable to EPA. And they are OK and
approved by the State standards. But by the same token, if we
begin to move forward with submitting them to region 4 for
their comment, they are just going to be delayed much longer.
So, that is why we have been in great discussions with
region 4 as to how we can expedite the process. But it is
definitely prolonging the process without a definite yes or no.
Mrs. Capito. Does anybody else want to comment on that?
Mr. Quinn. Well, I agree with Dr. Peters. That is the
experience of our members. There is no end in sight. As I
indicated in my testimony, the results of this process is more
permits have actually been withdrawn by the operators than
actually issued.
If I have a $50 million or $100 million or $150 million
initial investment, if I am faced with the prospect of not
getting a permit 2, 3, 4, 5 years, I can take that money and go
to another State, get a return on my investment sooner. Or,
even worse--or even perhaps take that investment to another
country and get it a lot sooner. And that can make a big
difference, in value proposition.
Mrs. Capito. Going along the lines of the topic, which is
the jobs issue--and I think we all addressed this in our
statements--I know that part of the permitting process is
obviously public comment period, probably public hearings in
the affected areas where individuals who are more deeply
affected maybe have a chance to voice their opinion. And also,
I would imagine in the--and I know this to be true in West
Virginia, that when a project is on the table it is quantified
many times in terms of how many jobs it might be.
Going along the lines of my opening statement, when the EPA
looks at these particular issues in terms of permitting, they
readily admit that the job data is irrelevant to their
decision. How would you characterize that, in terms of how you
think your individual States or your individual communities
would feel about that, when they have obviously poured their
heart out at a public meeting, talking about job and ability to
stay in their own community and live and work in a place where
they love? Have you heard this as a theme throughout the--this
process? Dr. Peters?
Mr. Peters. Certainly in Kentucky we have heard that
expressed. And we take the position in our cabinet that it is
not something that we can ignore. We cannot ignore the jobs
involved in it. It is finding the right balance between what we
need to do with getting a permit issued and the jobs in place.
Because not only are you putting those--by delaying the
permits, not only are you putting that business in the dark,
you are leaving those miners in the dark, wondering when they
are going to be able to get back to work.
So, we do look at that. We do try to make some assessments
in that particular regard. And we do remind region 4 EPA that
jobs are something that we must consider, and we do need to
consider within our State, even though they tell us that jobs
is not one of their considerations.
Mrs. Capito. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Altmire, do you have any questions?
Mr. Altmire. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Quinn, I know
that the NMA has commissioned some scientific studies that
raise concerns with the EPA's studies, and specifically the
methodologies that they use. And you referenced that in your
testimony and in the Q&A today also.
And I was just wondering. Has the EPA responded to any of
NMA's concerns or studies?
Mr. Quinn. Thank you, Mr. Altmire. No, they have not. And I
have the studies here with me, if the Chairman will accept them
for submission in the record. They have looked at--we retained
an independent, well-known firm to look at EPA studies and the
methodology. They came back and found that there was no causal
relationship proven, in terms of EPA's work. EPA was actually
imposing a standard that is higher than background levels, and
also did not use its standard methodology for reaching its
conclusions.
So, the short answer is no, we have yet to hear anything
from EPA about----
Mr. Gibbs. Without objection, we will accept those into the
record.
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Hearing none----
Mr. Altmire. Yes, it would seem to me, even if they may be
skeptical of the source of the commission, this is something
that--you are owed a response, at minimum, from the EPA.
Mr. Quinn. I would think so, even more--for more reasons
than just a courtesy. Because I think if they want to have
confidence in their own work, they would take a look at this
and consider it. And if they find it persuasive, then look into
it further. If not, then respond publicly about why it is not--
lacks merit.
Mr. Altmire. And I would just say that, being a member of
the committee, I would appreciate the EPA giving a response to
these concerns, too.
Mr. Quinn. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Altmire. Dr. Peters, thank you for being here, as well.
I was wondering if the EPA's conductivity benchmark was derived
using West Virginia data, but has been applied to all streams
within central Appalachia, including my home State of
Pennsylvania. Do you agree that it is appropriate for the EPA
to apply the conductivity limit in this way?
Mr. Peters. Conductivity is a measurement that does not
give the complete picture of what is in the water. And it is
very, very dependent on the geology, the local geology, in many
cases.
In fact, in Kentucky, I have asked our department of
environmental protection, who has primary responsibility in
this area, to look at our data that we have across the State.
And we are not able to draw any firm conclusions across the
State, at least at this particular point in time. It varies
from region to region. It probably varies from microgeology to
microgeology, as well.
Mr. Altmire. Thank you. And on that point, Mr. Quinn--back
to you--do you believe that the EPA's conductivity guidance
represents a substantial change to prior regulations?
Mr. Quinn. Oh, absolutely. It is a substantial change in
regulations. And, actually, they are asserting themselves in
the State water quality process, which--they don't have that
authority, certainly not in the way they have done it.
Mr. Altmire. Right. Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I would ask Mr.
Gardner.
You talk in your testimony about addressing past
environmental problems through Oxford's remining operations.
Can you tell the committee who would be responsible for
addressing these environmental problems if the mining industry
was unable to take on this remediation through its active
mining projects?
Mr. Gardner. Well, yes. You know, the mining industry
itself pays a severance tax to the Federal Government, 35 cents
a ton, that goes into an abandoned mineland fund. And those
monies, in addition to whatever taxpayer monies, would be all
that is available to reclaim abandoned mineland.
Mr. Altmire. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Mr. Cravaack, you have another
question?
Mr. Cravaack. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Quinn, I have
got a quick question for you in regards to--I don't know if you
have the data, but because of these new processes that are
being implemented, do you know what the average cost to the
average American would be in regards, not only--but in
electrical costs, heating costs, what we would also have to
charge, you know, buying a gallon of milk off the shelf at the
store?
Mr. Quinn. From this policy? I don't have any numbers along
those lines, Congressman, but what I can tell you is this, that
21 of the 25 States with the lowest electricity costs depend on
coal for 40 percent or more of their electricity. And it is no
coincidence that those same States have the highest
concentration of manufacturing in our country, because of low-
cost, affordable coal.
So, I think it is clear, as you raise the cost of coal and
raise the expense--electricity, not only are you affecting
those businesses, but you are affecting households, which
probably 50 percent of households in this country already spend
20 percent of their aftertax income on energy.
Mr. Cravaack. Yes. My electrical bill is high enough,
thanks.
But, anyway, Director Marks, if I could ask you--we are all
concerned about our environment. You know, I live in a
beautiful State called Minnesota, land of 10,000 lakes. We are
very concerned about water quality. And it has been my opinion
that nobody takes care of Minnesota better than Minnesotans.
So, with that said, in your opinion, what does a perfect
EPA look like to you, as a State representative?
Ms. Marks. Well----
Mr. Cravaack. You have a blank slate, here.
Ms. Marks. That is a pretty dangerous thing. But I think
that one thing that the States are all concerned about--and you
know we all come from different areas, we come from different
backgrounds. There is very few times that we agree on anything,
all 50 of us, wholeheartedly. And this was one, when we did the
resolution about this issue, this was one we did agree to.
I think what the States desperately need EPA to understand
is that we are actually implementing their rules and
regulations. We are implementing those delegated programs, on a
case by case basis, in our States. We need the resources and we
need the background to be able to do that. We also need the
science to support what we are doing. And, most importantly, we
need to have a voice in that process.
And that is what I would envision for EPA, is to have--to
let the States have more of a voice in the process of what is
going on in their States. Because, truly, they do know more
than anybody--locals know better than anybody--what is going
on, as far as the environment goes.
Mr. Cravaack. Yes. You know, that is so true. Because
Minnesota looks a lot different than New Mexico, you know,
different--totally different issues, as well.
Mr. Quinn, if I can ask you one more question, what can
Congress--you know, I am a military guy, so identify the
problem, what is the solution--what can Congress do, in your
opinion, to address the issue of permitting, not just in
Appalachia, but also through all mining operations?
Mr. Quinn. Well, there is a couple things that come to
mind, particularly based on the testimony today.
One, you could clarify what the existing law requires, is
that the States are responsible for establishing the water
quality standards, interpreting them, and applying them; that
EPA's role is one of oversight, not one of taking command of
the process, at either the State level or the Army Corps.
It could also clarify that point with respect to the 404
process, with the Army Corps, and also indicate that its role
is limited to providing comments, but not commandeering the
process, as well.
And it could also, given--in view of the recent activities
where we probably have entered a--some unchartered territories,
in terms of regulatory risk for business in this country, with
the retroactive revocation of a permit to a coal mine in West
Virginia, we could probably use some clarification there, that
that is not what Congress had in mind at all, that if EPA has
concerns they should get those to the Corps contemporaneously
with the process about deciding over the permit, not after the
fact.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you very much, sir. And, Mr. Chairman,
I yield back my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Dr. Peters, just a quick follow-up
from one of Representative Cravaack's questions with Ms. Marks:
your experience in Kentucky running your EPA, and direction you
have gotten from the U.S. EPA, have you had any instances where
you have had a direction from EPA, U.S. EPA, and you have
implemented them, and--how has it worked out?
Mr. Peters. Well, certainly we have relied primarily--as it
was intended--in our interactions with the regional, region 4.
And those interactions--and I think that is true of all States.
Your first point of contact and your most substantive
interaction should be with the regional EPA. They are the ones
that, while they don't know everything that is going on in
Kentucky or Arkansas or Alabama, they have a better sense than
what headquarters does at this point in time.
Our interactions with region 4 have been positive. The
breakdown, as I see it, is the breakdown has been between
headquarters and the regional offices in this regard. If we
could re-establish that connection, and the primacy of that
connection, it would be much, much better used. That is an
important interaction.
We have--we had a set of permits prior to April 1 of 2010
that were acceptable to EPA. Then, when that interim final
guidance came out--within 1 week, OK--that whole picture
changed. And it is that inconsistency that really drives the
regulator and the regulatory community mad, when you have that
inconsistency. Because it is not easy to justify a decision
that you made last week when it is a different decision than
you made the week before.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Mr. Quinn, one final question for you.
Looking at the enhanced coordination process, and they have a--
I have got a document here that says EPA first utilized what
they call the multicriteria integrated resource assessment,
MCIR, to determine that fact. Is that used across the country,
or is that just used in Appalachia?
Mr. Quinn. To the best of your knowledge, Mr. Chairman,
that is a concept for discussing issues, but not a
decisionmaking process. But what they have done is they have
taken this theoretical process, and have applied it in a
decisionmaking mode.
No, to our knowledge it is not used anywhere else for any
type of permitting decision. It may be used for evaluating
policy options for a program, but not for permitting decisions.
And this is the process they use to screen which permits
they want to work with on--with the Army Corps of Engineers on,
which is completely different than things they have done in the
past, which are permits are given to the Corps, the Corps makes
the decision, EPA, like other agencies, is provided an
opportunity to provide some comments.
Mr. Gibbs. And it is my understanding that this enhanced
coordination, what you just referred to, is really specifically
just used in the Appalachian area?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, their memorandum establishes the enhanced
coordinating process as basically a side track for Appalachian
coal permits in about six States, including Ohio.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. And it is also my understanding, under this
process, the section 404 guidelines has never formalized that
process. So there is nothing in the law or in the
administrative code, I guess, that puts a time limit on when
they have to have the process done, when they go through this--
using this new procedure.
Mr. Quinn. Not the new procedure. There is limits in the
Army Corps of Engineers regulations for decision points. But
those, under this policy, are all ignored. They have said in
their policy there is a nominal 60-day period to reach
resolution. But as I indicated in my opening remarks, EPA is--
makes--that 60-day period only starts when EPA says it starts,
which can be months or years later. And they are free to
suspend the 60 days, once it starts, if they decide they need
more time.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. So obviously, it is going to be used as a
delaying tactic.
Mr. Quinn. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Ms. Marks, in your written testimony you
talk about how you don't believe that EPA has ever attempted to
require States to implement interim guidance until recently,
and you have a concern that the interim guidance could put your
State or any State in a position to actually break Federal law
or break State law. So that is a Catch-22.
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. Can you kind of expound on that a little bit?
Ms. Marks. Yes, sir. The problem is that there are a lot of
States--or there are some States--that cannot enact laws any
more stringent than Federal law. That is pursuant to their
State government, they cannot do that. When you have an interim
guidance come down that is being used pursuant to the objection
authority is binding in permits, you put the State in the
position of either I have to go ahead and put these things in
the permit that EPA wants so they won't object to the permit,
and break State law, because this is an interim guidance, it is
not final----
Mr. Gibbs. OK.
Ms. Marks [continuing]. Or, I go ahead and don't put that
in, and then EPA can use their objection authority and my
facility might not get their permit, or their permit may be
delayed for a long time if EPA takes that--uses that objection
authority.
So, you put them in a real Catch-22. They are either going
to violate one Federal law or State law, one or the other.
Mr. Gibbs. Well, I appreciate all you coming into
Washington today. This has been very enlightening for us. We
are having a hearing next week, and the EPA will be represented
in one of the panels.
It is clear to me, from your testimony, that there has been
some questions raised and concerns about the science used to
make some of these determinations, the conductivity tests that
we talked about. Obviously, enhanced coordination that might be
specifically targeted to a region in the country and issues
like that where I think, you know, under the law, due process
and equal process under the law might be one issue. It seems
like there is a whole host of issues here.
And I think we have a--and what also is amazing to me, too,
is the--we have two State EPAs represented here today that have
serious concerns about what is going on at the Federal level,
and making your job tougher. You know, we had regulators here
represented, and plus, the industry represented. So, I just
want to make that clear, that I think this was balanced. And
next week we will have the EPA here to have them respond to
what we learned here today.
So, thank you very much for coming in, and that will
conclude this hearing today.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

