- HOW BEST TO IMPROVE BUS SAFETY ON OUR NATION'S HIGHWAYS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOW BEST TO IMPROVE BUS SAFETY
ON OUR NATION'S HIGHWAYS

=======================================================================

(112-35)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 13, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-928 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
VACANCY

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Ferro, Hon. Anne S., Administrator, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration.................................................     8
Gillan, Jacqueline S., Vice President, Advocates for Highway and
Auto Safety....................................................     8
Palmer, Major David L., Texas Department of Public Safety, and
Vice President, Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance.............     8
Pantuso, Peter, President and CEO, American Bus Association......     8
Parra, Victor S., President and CEO, United Motorcoach
Association....................................................     8

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Ferro, Hon. Anne S...............................................    36
Gillan, Jacqueline S.............................................    57
Palmer, Major David L............................................    94
Pantuso, Peter...................................................   100
Parra, Victor S..................................................   109

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions:

Ferro, Hon. Anne S., Administrator, Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration........................................    49
Palmer, Major David L., Texas Department of Public Safety, and
Vice President, Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance...........    99
Pantuso, Peter, President and CEO, American Bus Association....   105
Parra, Victor S., President and CEO, United Motorcoach
Association..................................................   122

HOW BEST TO IMPROVE BUS SAFETY
ON OUR NATION'S HIGHWAYS

----------

MONDAY, JUNE 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:30 p.m., in Room
2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John L. Mica
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Mr. Mica. Good afternoon. I would like to call this hearing
of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee to
order. Today's hearing is entitled, ``How Best to Improve Bus
Safety on Our Nation's Highways.''
The order of business today will be opening statements by
Members, and then we have a panel of witnesses assembled today
that will testify about the subject at hand. The order of
business to proceed is I will begin with my opening statement,
we will yield to other Members, and then we will try to
expedite hearing from our witnesses of which we will hear from
all of them and then take questions afterwards.
I am pleased to be with you this afternoon. And I will
begin by trying to lay some groundwork with my opening
statement.
I welcome our witnesses and Members today. Thank you for
coming back, too, I know the House isn't in session until a
little bit--well, it is in session but not voting until later
tonight. And the reason for this hearing is actually, I think,
very important. We will, in a few weeks, we hope to roll out
legislation that dramatically reestablishes, sets new policy,
for various modes of transportation.
As some of you may know, we plan to roll out the new
transportation legislation in two phases. Starting on
Wednesday, we will have a rollout of a draft of a passenger
rail reform bill. We are going to introduce a separate piece of
legislation dealing with that particular provision. We do have
some provisions that are rather dramatic and a change in the
way things are currently conducted with our major passenger
rail provider, and that is Amtrak, and we want a full
opportunity for, again, a new direction in passenger rail to be
fully aired and also included in a separate bill which we will
see if we have adequate support in the House and Senate to move
forward as part of the larger measure.
The balance of the multimodal bill will be rolled out a few
weeks afterwards. And we are doing it in a little bit different
fashion. We started, as you know, hearing testimony from around
the United States and started in Mr. Rahall's district in
Beckley, West Virginia. We went as far as the Pacific Ocean and
probably two or three dozen hearings around the country, here
in Washington, to try to craft and assemble the best ideas for
any reforms necessary or that people could provide the
committee with. We ended up actually in this room, we had a
little libation and pizza with Members and discussed some of
the basic parameters for the legislation, and during the past
few weeks, our staff have been working on incorporating
provisions for both the passenger rail segment and also for the
balance of the modes in a legislative vehicle.
We, again, hope to have that rolled out soon. But as they
complete that work, we wanted to make certain that we had the
very best provisions possible for bus safety.
Mr. DeFazio, I want to thank him; I want to thank Mr.
Rahall and others for cooperating and pulling this hearing
together. Before we conclude the provisions of that bill, Mr.
DeFazio had done a hearings previously on passenger bus safety
and I think it is absolutely vitally important that we have the
latest, most up-to-date input from some of those involved with
this matter before us as we conclude and finalize the drafting
of provisions for our larger bill.
This all has been highlighted, unfortunately, by some very
tragic, dramatic accidents that have taken place with some of
our buses, our passenger buses. We had a horrible accident on
March of 2011 on the New Jersey Turnpike, we had another
horrendous accident in New York with 15 fatalities, injuries in
these incidents. We have had, again, unfortunately, in North
Carolina, another horrible accident in the Greensboro, North
Carolina, area where four passengers were killed and 53 others
injured.
So, the purpose of the hearing is to look at our current
laws, our regulations, and the administration, those provisions
that we currently have in statute or in rules, and make certain
that we have the very best measures in the bill that we are
drafting. We have taken ideas from both sides of the aisle in
our preliminary work, and hopefully we will have some
additional input today because, again, one fatality is far too
many.
Now, let me say, too, as I conclude, that the industry
overall does have a very excellent safety record. Bus
operations transport between 750 million and 800 million
passengers a year, and that we have very few fatalities per
mile traveled and we have one of the greatest safety records,
particularly among the well known and legacy bus passenger
companies. Unfortunately, that is not the case with many of the
other operators, and we don't have an exact number, I will ask
for the number of operators, but that troubles me too that we
don't have that data. How can we monitor if we do not have the
exact data, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration we
will hear from representatives at that agency, responsible for
some of the Federal enforcement, administration of the laws,
and also our States are vital players, and we need to make
certain that they also have in place, again, the very best
safety provisions so that any and all accidents can be
prevented. It may be impossible, but it should be our goal.
So, unfortunately, we are brought here by a series of bus
tragedies that have captured the attention not only of Congress
but the Nation, and we want to make certain on the eve of
finalizing legislation that will deal with that subject that we
have the best possible provisions.
I had noticed that even over the weekend, I am told that
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration has closed down a
couple of operators, marginal at best, operators. I am glad to
hear that, but when you have--and I understand that they were
actually transporting people under the bus, I don't know if it
was in the luggage area or what, but that is not an acceptable
means of operation. And if necessary, we will provide in law
or, again, working with our State partners, whatever measures
are necessary to make certain that people are transported on
buses safely throughout the United States.
So that is our goal. That is our reason for this hearing. I
appreciate, again, our witnesses, and hopefully, we will come
out of this hearing a little bit more knowledgeable and a
little bit more prepared to finalize the important legislation
we are about to craft and submit.
I will say, too, as we go forward with this process, in
closing, whether it is the passenger rail segment or the bill,
not only do I want the Democrat minority Members to have a full
opportunity for participation, but also other Members of
Congress and the public and the industry and others who are
affected by the law and any organizations that, again, support
safety and good transportation for the United States of
America.
So we will have a full opportunity to participate on
Wednesday. We will be web casting, I believe, at 11 o'clock and
people can go to our Web site and participate in the rollout of
a first section of the bill, and then in several weeks, the
same procedure will be followed. We will also have a number you
can call. You will have the ability as public or interested
parties to also ask questions as we roll out these new
provisions in law.
So, again, we want full participation. And I am pleased
that Members are able to be with us, again, on short notice and
our witnesses.
With that, I would like to yield to the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Mr. DeFazio. And this is a full committee
hearing. I thought it was important that we bring it to the
full committee level. And I am so pleased that he would come
back and, again, continue his hard work to make certain that
bus passenger safety is a priority. Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
bringing this important issue forward. I think it is
particularly timely before we move forward with authorization
because clearly, some new authority is needed; and perhaps some
mandates--dare I say that word here in a Republican Congress.
But when we deregulated interstate commerce for buses, we had
sort of an absurd level of regulation where they had to declare
every route by section, by highway, by turn-off, they had to
file all of their rates and different rates for different seats
or whatever and different schedules. But the intention of
deregulation was to bring about competition, not to kill
people. And that is where a total deregulatory environment
fails us.
We do have the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration,
and since I last held hearings on this, I am pleased to see
that they have stepped up the number of inspections and
enforcement. But given--what we are told, and we will get into
this in the hearing--the level of new entrants, it seems
impossible to track an ever-changing group of characters.
Only a very, very small percentage are those who would put
people in the baggage compartment, have incompetent or
exhausted drivers, drive buses with bald tires, failed brakes,
causing fires and other problems. It is a very, very small
minority in the industry.
But the industry, those who are legitimate in the industry,
both the associations and others, should draw together to work
with us to figure out a way to get these people out and keep
them out. Because when they kill people, people just associate
it with the entire industry even though the industry itself is
very, very safe. It is a few bad actors.
And that is the key here, and that is what I hope comes out
of this hearing, is we figure out a way to keep these people
out, if they are in, to get them out, and to vigorously
prosecute them when they have committed violations of the law.
I think a number of our State partners have failed us in
this. Some States just allow these gypsies or whatever you want
to call them, Chinatown buses, these fly-by-night folks to
present a certificate saying they have inspected their own
buses and their buses are OK and the State says, oh, if you say
your buses are OK, your buses are OK. Other States are more
rigorous. I think we may need to set a higher bar here in
authorization for the States. And we can have a carrot-stick
approach, too.
Many States have, I understand, and we have limited funds,
have diverted all their money into truck inspection and safety.
That is a problem too. So maybe we need to look at the levels
of funding. And, of course, the proposed levels of funding
under the Ryan budget would be a dramatic reduction in funding
for the Federal Government and Federal pass-throughs to the
States to enforce safety, which would mean more people would
escape scrutiny that they should have so we can find them and
put them out of business.
And then there is this whole thing of morphing, which the
agency seems to be dealing with or trying to deal with, but it
seems like perhaps more authority is needed there where these
people are morphing and, in this case, of this bad actor who
killed people in Virginia, they morphed very quickly into
another company and were continuing to operate. We have got to
figure out a way to get at that so they can't morph, they can't
continue to operate under any guise, the people who are
responsible for these substandard operations and for killing
people. That is the bottom line here.
And I think it is something we would all have in common,
and I would welcome the industry representatives as well as the
safety representatives as well as the regulators to give us a
vision on how we are going to get there.
We are not going back to the ICC, we are not going to
regulate every route, every fare, every thing, no one is
proposing that. But how is it in a deregulated environment we
do get the level of safety and security we want, and legitimate
operators? So I welcome the testimony from the panel. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you for your excellent comments and again
for your strong advocacy on behalf of bus safety, Mr. DeFazio.
Let me yield to one of my senior Members, the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Coble first.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be very brief. I
know of no issue that is more significantly important than
promoting safety on our Nation's highways, and that is the
purpose of this hearing. I thank you all for being here. Mr.
Chairman, I thank you and the ranking members for having
scheduled it and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And it is good to see you back. And
you are looking pretty good. You have been fighting a little
bit of that skin cancer and we are very pleased to see you. You
looking fantastic this week.
Mr. Coble. I have not yet reached the threshold of
Hollywood handsome, but I am working on it.
Mr. Mica. Ready to go star in any show.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Shuster, you are
recognized.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you for
holding this important hearing today.
In this committee and for me, safety is a top priority,
across all the modes of transportation we have to strive to
make them safer because that is absolutely critical.
First, I just want to say to those folks who have lost
their loved ones and their families of those that have been
injured, you have our deepest sympathy. But it is important to
note that intercity motorcoach industry including schedule
service and charter tour operations is an extremely safe mode
of transportation. In total, our Nation has approximately
35,000 motorcoaches that provide over 750 million passenger
trips annually with a safety record of .03 fatalities per 100
million miles traveled. That is according to the National
Safety Council. It is the safest way for passengers to move
around this country. So they have had a record that has been
safe, we have certainly had some fatalities here recently. And
we have got to make sure, as the ranking member said, to get
those bad actors off the road. So there is room for us to
improve.
As I said, the recent accidents have highlighted the issues
regarding enforcement. We have to make sure that the best
trained drivers are out there transporting our citizens safely
around the country.
I am particularly interested in hearing from our witnesses
regarding how we can keep unsafe or rogue bus operators off the
Nation's highways. May 31, 2011, a bus crashed near
Fredericksburg, Virginia, killed 4 passengers and injured 53
others. Sky Express, the company that has been operating that
bus, has had numerous safety violations. And, in fact, they
were under an extension when--of their violations to conform to
what the FMCSA had laid down for them.
Again, they had that accident, that 10-day extension. But
today they are operating under a different name. We have got to
figure out a way to, as I said, keep those rogue operators,
those people that continually violate or consistently violate
safety standards, to make sure that they are off the highways.
I appreciate the steps that Secretary LaHood and the
Department of Transportation started in 2009 and in recent
weeks have built upon that to ensure that bus travel is as safe
as possible, and we must evaluate the effectiveness of these
steps as we go forward. We want to ensure that the U.S. DOT and
FMCSA have the appropriate necessary authorities to ensure
safety and look forward to the testimony from the FMCSA today.
I also want to point out that our Nation's motorcoach
industry is largely a small business, family-owned industry, 95
percent of motorcoach companies operate fewer than 25
motorcoaches. And we must ensure that we take a balanced
approach to this. We want to make sure the highest level of
safety, we want to protect those people that are using the
services by rooting out bad actors. But this is a small
business, family-owned industry that we can't take a broad
brush and paint them all because they are committed to making--
95 percent of them or more, committed to making sure that they
are transporting passengers in a safe manner. So we have to
focus on that and make sure that we do it in a way that is not
going to hurt them in this already weak economy.
I want to briefly mention the legislation that I proposed,
H.R. 1390, the Bus Uniform Standards and Enhanced Safety Act.
The legislation focuses on increasing oversight and
enforcement, ensuring one of the best, most well-trained able
drivers transport passengers and improving motorcoach safety
standards based on sound scientific research, testing and
analysis, not on emotion. We have got to make sure when we are
doing these things that it makes sense scientifically. The
bottom line is that we must get the bad actors off the road. So
I am looking forward to hearing testimony today for your ideas,
and again, appreciate the chairman holding this extremely
important hearing today.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I am pleased to yield to the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Bucshon.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this very important hearing today and I thank the
ranking member. I took advantage of the motorcoach system when
I was in college riding it too and from my college town to my
small town in Illinois. And I know how important it is to the
people in Indiana, since I am in a fairly rural State and the
people do take advantage of the motorcoach system.
It is, however, also very important to continue to look at
the safety, realizing that we do have some bad actors out there
that do compromise a system which, for the most part, is an
extremely safe way for people to travel, even in light of the
recent tragic crashes that have resulted in loss of life.
So thank you for holding this hearing. I am looking forward
to hearing the testimony so that we can continue to make this
mode of travel very safe for our citizens. And with that, I
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Harris, the gentleman from Maryland is recognized.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I want
to echo my colleague from North Carolina who clearly one of the
greatest functions we could have is to keep our highways safe,
and that includes keeping our bus transportation safe.
Representing a rural district, pretty clearly, my district will
depend upon bus transportation. We do want to keep it safe.
I would just ask that we don't do what has been so trendy
in the past, which is that when something like this happens, we
come up with a whole new series of regulations that punish the
good actors almost more than the bad actors. We can't afford,
my colleague from Pennsylvania points out correctly that a lot
of the bus companies are, in fact, small bus companies. They
are the small businesses that can thrive. Two of my daughters
took interstate bus trips within the past month. The one that
took one over the weekend, the air conditioning ran out, which
although it is not a safety issue, it certainly is not
comfortable, but it was a safe bus trip. They both felt safe
taking that mode of transportation. They trusted the carriers.
And we need to continue helping the good actors and certainly
regulating against the bad actors, but again avoiding the
temptation of creating a set of regulations that paints with a
very broad brush an industry that really has a very admirable
safety record overall.
And, again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for holding
the hearing. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Mica. If all Members have gained recognition, we will
proceed with our panel of witnesses. And again, I thank them
for coming in on somewhat short notice, but I believe this will
be a very important hearing, again, as we try to craft and
finalize provisions in a new 6-year authorization.
Our witnesses today start out with Anne Ferro, who is the
administrator of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration; Major David Palmer, Texas Department of Public
Safety, on behalf of the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance,
thank you for being with us; Mr. Peter Pantuso, president and
CEO of American Bus Association; Mr. Victor Parra, president
and CEO of United Motorcoach Association; and Ms. Jacqueline
Gillan, and she is vice president of Advocates for Highway and
Auto Safety.
I thank all of the witnesses for being with us.
Normally, what we like you to do is try to limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. You could submit, just request through
the chair, additional information, documentation or information
that you would like to be made part of the record, and we will
do that. And we will also withhold questions until we have
heard from all of the witnesses, and then we will go through
and provide the panel with the questions from Members.
So with those ground rules, again, I welcome you. And let's
start off and hear from our Federal administrator, the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
Welcome, and you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF HON. ANNE S. FERRO, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL MOTOR
CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION; MAJOR DAVID L. PALMER, TEXAS
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY, AND VICE PRESIDENT, COMMERCIAL
VEHICLE SAFETY ALLIANCE; PETER PANTUSO, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
AMERICAN BUS ASSOCIATION; VICTOR S. PARRA, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
UNITED MOTORCOACH ASSOCIATION; AND JACQUELINE S. GILLAN, VICE
PRESIDENT, ADVOCATES FOR HIGHWAY AND AUTO SAFETY

Ms. Ferro. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member DeFazio, thank you
for the opportunity to speak today. This year has been the
worst period in recent history for motorcoach safety, with 6
crashes resulting in 25 deaths and numerous injuries just since
January.
My deepest condolences go to the families who have lost
loved ones in these crashes. And I join the employees of FMCSA
and our State enforcement partners in taking these losses to
heart. It is exceedingly frustrating that despite tighter
safety standards and dramatic increases in the number of
inspections and enforcement actions that we are taking that the
risks to passengers continues from a few bad actors.
FMCSA's safety mission is our number one priority, and we
are fully engaged in an all-out crackdown investigation into
illegal passenger carriers. We have a comprehensive
investigation underway specifically in the case of the tragic
Sky Express crash which occurred May 31st in which four women
were killed.
When we found out that Sky Express was attempting to
operate and sell tickets even after we had shut them down, we
issued a cease and desist order. On the same day, we subpoenaed
the records of three Internet Web sites that sell tickets for
Sky Express and other bus companies. The informal leasing
practices of some motorcoach companies allows them to skirt
safety rules moving equipment and drivers among companies with
valid DOT numbers. And unregulated Web sites broker and sell
tickets with no transparency to the public.
We are shutting down unsafe carriers as quickly as our
authority permits. Just since January, we have declared 18 bus
companies unsatisfactory, that is, issued an out-of-service
order for those 18. We have another 15 pending that are in
their appeal period, and that means they must stop operating.
And if a carrier or its drivers and vehicles present a severe
risk, we don't wait for the 45-day appeal period that is
allowed for motorcoach carriers. We declare them an imminent
hazard, and we shut them down immediately.
This past week we used our imminent hazard authority to
shut down three companies, including one in Michigan that has
already been mentioned, that had put passengers in the cargo
hold. The behavior by these few is absolutely outrageous, and
we have got to stop it.
Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood has had his eye on
motorcoach safety since 2009, when he charged FMCSA and NHTSA
to develop and implement comprehensive motorcoach safety action
plan. The actions within this plan address many NTSB
recommendations, including electronic on-board recorders,
better use of inspection violation data, a ban on texting and
cell phone use, and stronger oversight of drivers' medical
qualifications and drug and alcohol test results.
FMCSA has proposed, or is close to final rule or programs
in all of those areas. But we do need additional authority as
some have already mentioned. Thus, we have provided technical
assistance to the committee with regard to several
recommendations that would strengthen our authority over these
bad actors. First, is to allow us to conduct en route
inspections and our law enforcement partners at the State
level, not just restrict us to inspections on motorcoach
companies at points of origin and destination. Second is to
establish a Federal successor liability standard to enable us
to more quickly and surely shut down reincarnated carriers.
Third is to require full safety audits before a company can
receive its passenger carrier authority.
The fourth is to raise the penalty for violations by bus
companies that attempt to operate illegally to $25,000 per
violation. It is currently $2,000 with a cap at 11. And lastly,
allow us to regulate passenger ticket sellers. We refer to them
as brokers. We currently regulate freight brokers. We regulate
household goods brokers. We have no authority over passenger
carrier brokers.
Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for holding this hearing
today. We greatly appreciate the spotlight on bus safety. Our
commitment at FMCSA has never been higher. And I look forward
to answering any questions you may have.
Mr. Mica. Thank you for your testimony.
And we will hear now from Major David Palmer, and he is
with the Texas Department of Public Safety and testifying today
on behalf of Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance.
Welcome, and you are recognized.
Mr. Palmer. Chairman Mica, Ranking Member Rahall, members
of the committee, thank you for holding this hearing. Let me
say at the outset that on behalf of CVSA and its members, we
have pledged a renewed emphasis on bus safety. A step that we
can immediately take at no additional cost is to lift the
current restriction in the law that prohibits en route roadside
bus inspections. SAFETEA-LU enacted this restriction which has
removed a critical tool designed to immediately identify driver
and mechanical issues, safety issues, hampering enforcement's
efforts.
We commit to you if this restriction is lifted, we will
immediately encourage all of our State members to put resources
towards en route bus inspections and to take aggressive
enforcement action when warranted. This step will provide an
immediate infusion of enforcement activity to enhance bus and
highway safety.
The results of a recent bus safety strike force is ordered
by a number of State Governors with encouragement assistance
from FMCSA has resulted in a significant number of buses and
drivers being placed out of service for mechanical or driver
violations. These strike forces generally included safety
inspections at origins or destinations.
We are firm believers that many more lives could be saved
and injuries avoided if en route inspections were, once again,
permitted to allow States to conduct these inspections when and
where necessary. Since the so-called curbside operators such as
Sky Express do not typically operate out of a fixed place of
business or terminal, the most effective way to inspect them is
through random en route inspection program. Just this past
Friday, the Maryland State Police stopped four Sky Express
buses operating on the Capital Beltway. Although at the time
they were being moved because of repossession by the bank and
not under Sky Express' authority, since they had been placed
out of service, it so happened that two of the drivers did not
have commercial drivers licenses, two did not have medical
certificates, and all four did not have logbooks, all of which
are out of service conditions.
This is just one of many examples of why en route
inspections are necessary.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask how many more are out there?
Enforcement is a major component of bus safety, but not the
only one. When it is necessary to close down a passenger
carrier operating illegally, the full force and authority of
FMCSA in conjunction with State enforcement is necessary. When
unscrupulous activities are discovered, criminal prosecution
must be considered and pursued.
Additionally, State enforcement and oversight is necessary
through the inspection and audit processes to uncover potential
passenger carrier drivers and equipment problems.
Finally, when it comes to specific safety standards such as
crash worthiness, NHTSA must aggressively implement safety belt
and other safety systems requirements.
Chameleon carriers are a significant problem that must be
dealt with more aggressively. FMCSA's vetting process has been
an important tool in helping to identify and take action on
carriers who are ``changing their stripes.'' FMCSA, working
cooperatively with the States, must be given authority to
transfer past safety performance activity from one carrier to
another when it is discovered they are substantially the same
operation.
FMCSA must also be given more authority over brokers.
Companies that purchase transportation for customers need to be
held accountable for not conducting the proper due diligence
for safety. Brokers discovered not doing so and hiring unsafe
operators need to be shut down.
Another significant issue is bus fires. A Volpe
transportation study completed in 2009 showed that a bus or
motorcoach is lost to a fire every 2 days in the United States.
Enforcement can help mitigate this problem by conducting more
roadside inspections where we can inspect brakes, tires and
wheels, which are the origin of many of these fires.
We support the provisions in both the House and Senate bus
safety bills that require a safety audit and compliance review
of all interstate passenger carriers and State-based safety
inspections for all commercial passenger carrying vehicles.
Each State must also have a bus safety and enforcement program
that is appropriate for the needs of that State.
As you might expect, by directing more of their efforts
towards bus safety, States face the potential need for
additional resources and funding. What we don't want to happen
is by focusing more on bus safety and enforcement, it comes at
the expense of other critical commercial vehicle safety and
enforcement programs.
Unlike trucking companies, intercity passenger carriers
have been exempt from any hours of service changes in recent
years. Since driver fatigue seems to have been a contributing
factor in a number of recent bus crashes, we recommend FMCSA
study whether the current hours of service rules for bus
drivers are adequate and if warranted based on data and
analysis, propose necessary changes.
In closing, and to reiterate a previous statement, if
Congress chooses to, once again, enable en route bus
inspections, the CVSA will commit to assisting the States and
FMCSA by immediately conducting en route inspections as well as
continuing strike forces and other enforcement activities
throughout the country. We believe this is the most appropriate
and effective response to immediately impact bus safety.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks, and I will be
happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And we will hear next from Peter Pantuso, president and CEO
of the American Bus Association. Welcome, and you are
recognized.
Mr. Pantuso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. ABA is the trade
association for the over-the-road bus industry and for the tour
and travel industry, all of whom have a deep interest in
safety. Our motorcoach members operate nearly 60 percent of all
the coaches on the road today. ABA shares this committee's
concern and their frustrations over unsafe motorcoach
companies. And, Mr. Chairman, I cannot overemphasize the
concern or the disgust that ABA has over the manner in illegal
companies continue to operate.
These companies are not part of the American Bus
Association. More importantly, we are also encouraged by the
work of Administrator Ferro and her team that they have done to
seek out unsafe companies and put them out of service.
Making bus travel safer is at the top of our agenda. The
bus industry continues to be one of the safest modes. However,
as was pointed out, even one fatality is too many. Today we ask
for more effective regulations and for more enforcement.
ABA was an early and enthusiastic supporter of Secretary
LaHood's motorcoach safety action plan. We believe in
strengthening State bus inspection programs, enforcing medical
qualifications for drivers and using technology to enhance
motorcoach safety.
The lack of dedicated Federal and State funding for bus
inspections leads to inconsistent enforcement, making it too
easy for carriers to reopen after they have been put out of
business, too easy for financially marginal companies to obtain
authority, and still too easy for individuals to obtain a
commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement.
The lack of consistent and adequate enforcement of current
Federal regulations must be addressed today.
When Secretary LaHood issued the action plan, he declared,
and I quote, ``a robust compliance and enforcement program is
critical to ensuring motorcoach carriers operate safely.''
We certainly applaud the stepped-up enforcement over the
last couple of months and a near record number of motorcoach
companies being put out of business putting unqualified drivers
and their equipment out of service and declaring some an
imminent hazard. Certainly, FMCSA has done an excellent job of
vetting new entrants into the system.
We welcome the New York Police Department's effort to
inspect, to ticket and to tow unsafe buses in the recent tragic
accidents. But one-time programs are too rare and they are
certainly too spotty. It is consistent, effective enforcement
that is the most vital factor in motorcoach safety.
The data shows that 54 percent of motorcoach fatalities
from 1999 to 2009 were accidents caused by either unsafe or by
illegal companies.
FMCSA needs additional staffing and money to inspect bus
operations. Funding for commercial motor vehicle inspections is
largely via the Federal Government's MCSAP program. And we
think a certain percentage of MCSAP funds should be
specifically allocated for bus inspections.
If States are unwilling or they are incapable of managing
vigorous bus inspection programs that meet the Federal
standards, then we believe a portion of those MCSAP money
should be used to hire third-party inspectors. As it stands
now, perhaps 8 or 10 States have very good effective inspection
programs. This inequity must end. The bus inspection programs
must be uniform so as not to create safe havens for illegal
operators.
We must raise the safety bar for passenger carriers. While
FMCSA has made gains in vetting and visiting new carriers
sooner, we would certainly like to see a query into the fitness
of an operator before the first passenger ever boards the bus.
We believe that Congress should require an applicant background
check for drivers, especially those with a passenger
endorsement on their CDL. And when FMCSA has determined that a
carrier presents an imminent safety hazard and issues an out-
of-service order, they also need congressional authority to not
only close the operation, but make sure the facilities are
locked up and make sure the vehicles are impounded.
ABA recommends that FMCSA undertake more consumer awareness
as was begun on May 5th with the Secretary's consumer
checklist. And we also believe a more friendly database, the
safer system and the SMS system is appropriate for consumers.
And, finally, regarding seatbelts in coaches, Mr. Chairman,
ABA and its members support seatbelts in new buses following
the testing that was done by the Department of Transportation
that they already undertook to determine what type of belt the
seat design and the anchorage that would be appropriate to save
lives.
We are also enthusiastic supporters of H.R. 1390, and we
thank the members of this committee who have cosponsored that
bill.
Our industry continues to grow. We will provide the safest,
the most cost effective and environmentally efficient mode of
transportation, but we can only do it if current regulations
are enforced equally and all carriers.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will answer any questions
you and the committee might have.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, and we will get back to you on that.
Now we will hear from Mr. Victor Parra, president and CEO
of United Motorcoach Association. Welcome. You are recognized,
sir.
Mr. Parra. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member DeFazio
and members of the committee, I appreciate you calling this
hearing today and the opportunity to appear before you. The
committee has a long and distinguished record of promoting
safety on our roadways. On behalf of the United Motorcoach
Association, it is my goal to provide the committee with our
perspective on the factors that contribute to our industry's
notable safety record, but also our goal of improving on that
record.
Founded in 1971, the United Motorcoach Association
represents the full spectrum of bus and motorcoach operations,
from small family charter and tour to nationwide scheduled and
commuter service operations. The United States Small Business
Administration, as Mr. Shuster pointed out, estimates that over
90 percent of the motorcoach operators are, in fact, small
businesses.
UMA is deeply saddened by the recent motorcoach accidents,
and we extend our deepest sympathies to the victims, their
families and all those who are affected. And while it is a
fact, as Mr. Mica pointed out, that our industry has the safest
record, one fatality is one fatality too many. That is why one
of our primary objectives is to promote safety and compliance
in this industry. We do this through several initiatives.
First, we have our Bus and Motorcoach Academy, which is
accredited through the College of Southern Maryland. We do
training for drivers as well as motorcoach companies to instill
a safety culture in their organization. We have safety
management seminars that we hold at the NTSB, National
Transportation Safety Board's, training center. Of course our
annual conference and regional and State meetings are also
heavily ladened with safety training programs. UMA is a member
and sponsor of the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance, an
active member in their passenger carrier committee and we
routinely volunteer to assist the National Transportation
Safety Board in any of their investigations as we did following
the accident involving Worldwide Tours.
UMA has long advocated for strong and improved enforcement
of existing Federal and State motor carrier safety regulations
for our vehicles and drivers. Additionally, UMA has long
supported initiatives based on sound science and research that
truly improves safety, many of which are included in Mr.
Shuster's bill, which is cosponsored by members of this
committee, Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson, Congressman Tim
Holden and Congresswoman Jean Schmidt, as well as other Members
of Congress.
The bill contains reasonable and attainable guidelines that
enhance the National Transportation Safety Administration's
efforts to promulgate new rules that will improve motorcoach
occupant protection.
In addition to Mr. Shuster's bill, in August 2007, NHTSA
announced NHTSA's approach to motorcoach safety in a series of
evaluations including occupant retention, window glazing,
emergency egress, stability control, roof strength and
flammability. In December 2007, NHTSA conducted a first-ever
motorcoach crash test, and subsequent to that promulgated
regulations for three-point seatbelts on all new coaches. And
in fact, UMA supports that initiative.
In December 2010, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, FMCSA, launched its long awaited comprehensive
safety analysis 2010. FMCSA and their State partners now have
the capability to more readily identify noncompliant carriers
and target problematic carriers with the goal of preventing
accidents before they occur.
Just months into implementation, UMA concludes CSA is
already altering behaviors and producing results. We are most
satisfied that this program will serve the long-term needs of
the enforcement community.
UMA has deep reservations regarding legislative efforts
that could intentionally harm small entrepreneurs' entry as new
carriers. While some often use the term ``illegal'' and ``rogue
carriers'' and ``new entrants'' in the same reference, there
are no direct parallels UMA is aware that would signify new
entrants afford a disproportionate risk to the traveling
public, and indeed, anecdotal evidence suggests otherwise.
Having said that, UMA enthusiastically supports the
Secretary's efforts to establish minimum knowledge requirements
for companies who seeks to transport passengers and have
steadfastly recommended classroom and exam requirements
followed by compliance audits within 45 days after conditional
operating authority is granted.
While UMA continues to support limited driver and vehicle
inspections to terminal and destination locations that do not
interfere with passenger safety or schedules, we do not and
have never supported allowing drivers or vehicles to continue
operating unsafely. However, we remain concerned about any
random inspections, roadside inspections. Just this past week a
76-year-old woman from Minnesota died when her car in which she
was driving hit the backend of a motorcoach that was stopped
alongside an I-95 State trooper. The trooper narrowly escaped
injuries. Fortunately, no passengers on the coach were
seriously injured.
Congress has wisely protected motorcoach passengers from
roadside accidents, and those protections should remain.
In conclusion, we appreciate this opportunity to submit
testimony regarding these matters and stand ready to contribute
to ongoing efforts to enhance safety of bus and motorcoach
operations. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And now we will hear from Jackie Gillan. And she is the
vice president of the Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety.
Welcome, and you are recognized.
Ms. Gillan. Thank you and good afternoon. Thank you very
much for the opportunity to testify. I first testified before
the Subcommittee on Highways and Transit in 2006 about
motorcoach safety problems. Again, in 2007, I testified after
the Bluffton University baseball team crash in Georgia. Both
hearings highlighted the need for Congress to take action to
improve Federal oversight of the industry as well as direct DOT
to issue overdue safety standards for occupant protection. Five
years later, after those hearings, there have been more than
108 crashes resulting in at least 136 deaths and thousands of
injuries. It is time for Congress to act and pass the
Motorcoach Enhanced Safety Act, H.R. 873, sponsored by
Representative John Lewis and others. This overdue legislation
will direct the DOT to implement lifesaving recommendations of
the NTSB that have languished for over 40 years.
Those who travel by motorcoach rather than air do not
expect to be treated as second class citizens when it comes to
safety and they do not expect the motorcoach to be a death trap
in the event of a crash. H.R. 873 is supported by Advocates,
consumer health and safety groups and the families of those
killed and injured in motorcoach crashes.
Why is this legislation needed? Further delays and excuses
can no longer be tolerated and have contributed to needless
deaths and injuries. This is not just Advocates' opinion, but
the opinion of NTSB as well.
Congress must step in now and ensure the safety
improvements that NTSB has recommended are implemented.
H.R. 873 will protect consumers before they buy a ticket
and board the bus and after they take their seat and the trip
begins. For example, there are no substantive training
requirements in Federal regulations for entry-level commercial
drivers, including motorcoach drivers. Compare that to a recent
proposed FAA rule issued at the direction of Congress that
requires at least 1,500 hours of flight time before a pilot can
operate a commercial flight.
Also, safety ratings for motorcoach companies are
incomplete, out of date or simply not available. In my
testimony, I reference efforts by Advocates' staff to find out
about the safety of Florida motorcoach companies. There are 143
companies headquartered in Florida, 36 companies have no safety
ratings at all, 5 companies are operating with conditional
ratings indicating there are safety deficiencies. And among the
102 companies with satisfactory safety ratings, only 2 have
ratings in all of the categories.
H.R. 873 will require that every motorcoach carrier
receives a safety rating within 3 years.
Recent crashes also indicate that driver fatigue and
violation of Federal hours of service rules are common. It is
time that FMCSA revise the hours of service rule for motorcoach
drivers and gets tough on companies that push drivers to exceed
driving limits and falsify their logbooks.
The Virginia crash that occurred last week has also
revealed a dirty little secret that safety advocates have
warned about for years. Giving motorcoach companies with an
unsatisfactory safety rating 45 days or longer to continue
operating and carrying passengers is simply unacceptable.
Passengers boarding Sky Express had absolutely no idea the
dangerous risks they faced choosing that carrier. In the 48
days during which Sky Express operated with an unsatisfactory
rating, the company may have exposed as many as 100,000
passengers to dangerous and deadly operating conditions.
The NTSB has been loud and clear in the agency's ``Most
Wanted Recommendations'' that motorcoach occupants need better
protection in a crash. Motorcoach crashes are violent and cause
passengers to be thrown around and frequently ejected. This is
why the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration needs to
be directed to issue basic safety standards in the next 2 years
that will result in occupants having the safety protections
that we now have in cars. And I am talking about basic systems
like seatbelts, roof crush protection, anti-ejection window
glazing and rollover prevention technology.
The motorcoach industry's gold-plated cost figures
circulating around Capitol Hill for safety improvements
required in H.R. 873 are wildly inflated, unreliable and
undocumented. Actually, the cost of equipping new motorcoaches
with the safety improvements required in the Motorcoach
Enhanced Safety Act will cost less than a dime per passenger.
Who in this hearing room today would not pay an extra dime to
protect their child or parent or spouse in a crash?
In closing, I urge you to pass the Motorcoach Enhanced
Safety Act, and thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, and I want to thank all of our
witnesses for their testimony and recommendations. And we will
start questioning. I will begin with a few questions of my own
and then we will yield to other Members.
Well, again, I think what we are trying to do here is see
what the missing pieces are to making certain that we have the
very best legislation in place, best regulation, where we are
going to regulate, best cooperation from the States and private
industry.
I heard first from our Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administrator a list of recommendations that have been
suggested, and we heard other recommendations from other
panelists. There are issues with just about all of these and,
for example, if we start with the en route inspections, and I
think there were restrictions put under the last 6-year
authorization that do inhibit some of the en route inspections
and I think the thought there was you inspect the bus either
before people get on it or at the end and maybe not unless
there was a serious indication that there was some problem en
route you wouldn't shut down the service.
We probably could tighten that up some.
I think part of the problem starts even before that, Mr.
DeFazio spoke about it, others have spoken about it, is getting
a hand on these rogue operators, people who don't comply, the
changing the name of the operation over the Internet. We have
seen that in other industries too, where bad players, you try
to build a mousetrap to catch the rats and they find some other
way to get to the cheese whether it is in the passenger bus
operations or in other endeavors.
I guess I go back to the very basic involvement of Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration in reviewing these folks in
the time also that we have. Now, I guess what is it, 18 months
they can actually start operations before they get some of that
inspection? Is that correct?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct. It is 18 months for new
entrants before they receive their authority, but for
motorcoach passengers, we set a standard of an inspection or of
a safety review of that carrier within 9 months of their first
receiving their authority for motorcoach operators.
Mr. Mica. So your recommendation is that before they start
service, they should have that certification?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. Mica. Now, someone else is talking about a review of
their capability, if it could be done by, you know, you have
what, 1,080 employees with FTEs full-time equivalent employees,
and I believe that the division is about 800 in the field, and
maybe 200-some in Washington.
That is approximate.
But many of the inspections are done or enforcement is done
at the State level, is that also not correct?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Mica. So, and I know the Administration has recommended
additional positions in Washington. Sometimes, though, from a
practical standpoint, it is better to empower State folks who
are closer, as far as enforcement and regulation. What would
you think of--well, obviously you are recommending more Federal
employees. Is there any mix or pre-review or audit that could
be done do you think that would enhance, again, the
performance?
The other thing, too, is the bad actors, I have heard of
games and other industries, they go through an inspection and
then the good tires come off and they put them on another
vehicle, or the drivers that they list aren't the drivers that
drive and keeping up with that. How do we get did the best
enforcement other than--this is a tough question for you, maybe
I should ask others--other than just with the Feds. Are there
other things that we can require sort of on the spot that would
do a good job, too?
Ms. Ferro. Yes, if I might jump in, I think you have framed
the question very well in the context of rogue operators and en
route inspections. A very significant challenge in the
destination-origination inspection model is that rogue
operators don't necessarily have prescheduled sites where we
would know where their destination is or where they are
originating the trip. So it is very valuable to have the
concept of en route inspections.
Most of those carriers will operate on main corridors. Law
enforcement would have very clear guidelines on to when and
where it is safe to pull a motorcoach carrier aside in an area
where passengers have safe disembarkment and an opportunity for
another bus to come pick them up.
In other words, multifold, number one, additional
inspection activity, as Advocates indicated, creates additional
data in our measurement system and identifies the behavior of
carriers. Rogue carriers aren't necessarily going to comply
with the standard of an origin and a destination that is fixed.
Mr. Mica. Well, again, where you are carrying passengers,
though, it is a little bit unique. I mean, we don't inspect the
planes en route and pull them over to the side or parachute the
passengers out while we do an inspection, FAA inspection. The
presumption is that that plane should be inspected before it
ever takes off and carries a passenger, same thing with Amtrak
and others that don't meet safety standards.
We are not pulling the train over, everybody disembark on
the side, the track, and we will do a quick FRA inspection or
FTA inspection. Again, you want a practical solution.
Ms. Ferro. That is right.
Mr. Mica. Well, I am trying to stop them, I think with Mr.
DeFazio, from getting in business in the first place and
staying. When I ask the staff how many operators do we have and
they say Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration can't tell
us, because it is a revolving and evolving number the way
things are set up now and people get into business by various
means, again, they are circumventing the provisions that we
have.
How do we get a handle on that from the very beginning?
Ms. Ferro. Well, again, perhaps the most efficient model is
to combine the roadside inspection activity that is already
under way where we have 12,000 strong State law enforcement
across the country who are trained commercial vehicle,
complemented by the new entrant grant program that is in
existence today in the context of a pre-authority safety audit
by a cadre both of State and Federal inspectors.
And then, lastly, I will say with our fiscal year 2012
budget request, we include an additional $20 million in State
grants, again in the context of strengthening the compliance
safety accountability component of these programs. So, in terms
of what is the most efficient model, really it is taking part
of all three of those components, utilizing what we already
have and boots on the ground, but utilizing it more
effectively.
Mr. Mica. Well, another thing that I usually favor is tough
enforcement. The $25,000 fine is a stiff fine compared to
$2,000. What does the bus association, American Bus Association
feel about that?
Mr. Pantuso. When it comes to more enforcement, Mr.
Chairman, I don't think anything can be second. We are
certainly in favor of anything that gets these bad operators
off the road. We are also in favor of more inspections. You
know, one of the ways to do that, that we have discussed in the
past, is giving more resources to FMCSA. Not only increasing
their budget, but also taking those companies that are already
undergoing Department of Defense inspections, about 400 or 500
of them, and put them off to the side. They are already being
inspected. Inspections by DOD almost the same as FMCSA's, some
would even say it is more rigorous. But why have them re-
inspected again, a month later or a year later by the same
State or Federal inspection system when they have already been
looked at very, very rigorously?
Mr. Mica. Well, I think I will never forget the testimony
we had in one of our field hearings where a small family
operator, a husband and wife of, actually, a trucking firm, I
think, in this case, and the wife gave testimony--was that in
Arkansas--it might have been, we did a number of hearings. But
the wife had compiled a list of all the agencies that their
little two-person firm, husband and wife, had to comply with.
And she read that thing, it must have taken her 5 minutes to
read all the agencies and regs she had to deal with. And then
after she got through with that, then they cited all the taxes
and all the fees that they had to pay. It was quite an eye
opener.
And the problem we have in dividing the economic pie in
Congress or in any legislative body is how much regulation,
taxation, law, impositions do you put on businesses? I know it
is easier for a big player maybe that is on the stock exchange
to stay in business, and we want everyone to comply as far as
safety. But we also have to balance a small operator and give
them some shot. And sometimes folks are trying to eliminate
some of the competition, again, through over regulation of an
industry. So we do have that balance to keep in mind.
Thank you, again, Jackie Gillan, for your testimony. A
number of your recommendations we are considering, and I hope
that through better inspections and better defined authority
requirements on safety equipment, things of that sort, that we
can have safer buses and better passenger bus safety. So, thank
you. You don't have to comment. We just appreciate your
advocacy.
Let me yield now, if I may, to the ranking member, Mr.
DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both to Ms. Ferro and
Major Palmer. You were both pretty emphatic about en route
inspections. How would you solve this problem that people are
putting up--danger, safety, inconvenience? How could we solve
the en route problem, because it seems to me that is critical
for these gypsy operators? I mean, they have no fixed place of
business, they have a post office box somewhere, you know. So
how would you do it?
Ms. Ferro. Well, I think Major Palmer will provide better
detail, but clearly we set guidelines in terms of where and
when and what conditions need to exist in order for that bus to
be pulled over in a safe place. There is a suggestion to
consider something like business continuity insurance
requirement for motorcoach operators so they would be required
to provide another bus to come to the location in order to move
passengers safely away if, in fact, that bus is put out of
service.
So there are provisions like that to ensure the safety and
safe passage of the passengers. But in terms of process I would
defer to Major Palmer.
Mr. DeFazio. Major.
Mr. Palmer. Yes, sir, Mr. Ranking Member, that is
absolutely correct. I really don't know the numbers but I can
tell you in Texas, for example, we have policies and procedures
in place already. So even under current regulation, if you stop
an en route bus for, you know, a serious safety violation, we
have procedures in place that--the utmost importance, when we
stop a bus, wherever it is at, is the safety of the passengers
and the driver and also our enforcement officer. We don't want
to put them in any harm's way any more than we would want to
put passengers.
So, for example, depending on where it was and for whatever
reason that bus was stopped, if it was deemed, you know,
unsafe, then we would escort that bus to a safe location and
inspect it there to ensure that the passengers are well taken
care of. Typically a very quick screening or even a driver
inspection, you know, you are talking maybe 10 or 15 minutes to
be able to do that typically, and we would focus on those
efforts.
You know, it has been the late nineties since I inspected a
bus, but I know that when I would stop a bus roadside back then
one of the first things I would do after I made the initial
contact with that driver is I would address the passengers,
because the passengers are, like, what's going on?
And what I found historically is that the passengers were
very appreciative when we did take that time, when you tell
them what you are looking for and about the safety aspects,
they encourage that.
So we would have specific procedures in place, and that is
something that FMCSA could provide leadership on and CVSA
specifically would be able to provide that, you know, we have
operational policies that all the States agree to through our
MOUs and we could also enhance that enforcement that way.
Mr. DeFazio. Sure. I mean, if a bus were speeding you can
stop them, right?
Mr. Palmer. Yes.
Mr. DeFazio. If a truck is speeding, you can stop it. I
mean, we did have this elderly person who drove into the back
of the bus, clearly not good driving on that person's part. So
to say, gee, we shouldn't have any capability of pulling people
over because every once in a while someone who is asleep, on
their cell phone, or incompetent is going to drive into it, I
mean, this is a problem. And in my State, if your patrol car is
here and the bus is there, and it is a two-lane or a three-lane
highway, you are required to leave the lane empty and move to
the left.
Mr. Palmer. Same here.
Mr. DeFazio. There are ways to protect the safety of those
people for a short stop and then if there is a problem get them
off the highway.
But I think having an absolute prohibition only favors the
people who do not have a fixed base of operation. There is no
way to get them. Where are you going to get them when they stop
somewhere in downtown New York, which changes every day
wherever they are going to drop people off or wherever they are
going. So I think opposing this entirely is not reasonable and
would urge the association in saying that there should be no
capability, think about how we can get at it again.
How do we get at the bad actors who aren't in your
association that we want to get at, and this, I think, is the
key. It was from both law enforcement and from the
Administrator, it was key. And I think we need to modify that
provision of the law.
The other thing would be State inspections. I see here in
the ABA testimony that you say State inspection programs must
be strengthened. Fewer than a dozen States have effective bus
inspection programs and less than half have any program at all.
Mr. Pantuso. That is correct. Mr. DeFazio, we just don't
think there are enough States focusing on bus inspections. They
are focusing on trucks, they are doing commercial vehicle
inspections, they are doing an admirable job with the resources
they have, but there aren't enough that are focused on bus
operators.
You know, we saw the accident that happened in New Jersey
about 2 months ago. That company was supposedly based in
Pennsylvania, but nobody ever saw them in Pennsylvania. The
company that had the accident in Virginia was based in North
Carolina, but they were based in a housing development. There
was no sign of that bus or buses at that facility or at that
house whatsoever. So we are concerned, we are concerned about
the way some of these companies operate, as you are.
We are also concerned, as you mentioned earlier about en
route inspections, about the safety of the passengers. Most of
our passengers are seniors or they are children. We also have
passengers with disabilities who are on the coach. We just need
to make sure whatever change there is allows for the
accommodation of those passengers.
Mr. DeFazio. And for those, basically, operating out of a
housing development or a post office box, it seems to me that
requiring an annual inspection by each State of these, of each
vehicle every year, would that be an unreasonable burden?
Mr. Pantuso. It would not be unreasonable. I think
inspectors need to go into those facilities and look at not
only the facilities, but those vehicles as well.
Mr. Parra. I agree.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. And that would also get at some of these
people. It could be kind of like, you know, this is a little
different, but with the Coast Guard--I live on a boat here. And
you can get the Coast Guard Auxiliary to certify your boat on
an annual basis. And it is very improbable that they will do a
random boarding to do a safety inspection if you have a current
sticker showing that you were inspected.
So if we did do annual inspections and people had some sort
of a decal--although obviously those things can be
counterfeited, then that would potentially, I mean that would
be someone that the police would be much less likely to look at
as someone who needs an en route inspection, it seems to me.
So, I mean, it seems to me some way of getting the States
to do this, incenting them to do it and requiring them to do
it, and some sort of a process. And then perhaps, and I will
take it one step further. What if you had to annually show it.
Now you go one time to FMCSA, pay $300, and it is good forever.
Why wouldn't you say, OK, on an annual basis you have to
show that your vehicle has been inspected or we will suspend
that authority? Mr. Pantuso.
Mr. Pantuso. Mr. DeFazio, I would just say as we look at
the new entrant program, we think that $300 is not enough. It
costs $350 to get a hot dog vendor's license on the streets of
Washington, DC. Yet we are allowing people to come into the
business who are going to be carrying upwards of 50-plus people
at a time for only $300.
Mr. Mica. Right.
Mr. Pantuso. We certainly think there should be a higher
bar of entry. And if it is a higher amount, those funds can be
used to fund these pre-inspections that we are talking about.
Mr. DeFazio. Got a number in mind?
Mr. Pantuso. It could be a $1,000, it could be $2,000. It
has got to be a reasonable number so that it can't create a
barrier to entry. It is, as was described earlier, a mom and
pop small business.
We want to encourage that, but at the same time we want to
make sure people coming in have got the wherewithal to maintain
their equipment. And if they don't have more than $300, I
question how they can do that down the road.
Mr. DeFazio. Mr. Parra, what do you think of that?
Mr. Parra. We don't have any objection to raising the bar.
We just want to make sure that the bar is reasonable. You know,
if it is $500 to $1,000, that is reasonable. But we want to
make sure, however, that it isn't a barrier because these
companies create jobs, they are good for the economic base of
wherever they are.
Mr. DeFazio. I got that, but I am glad you agree. To the
Administrator, then, do you have the authority to do that or is
that statutory?
Ms. Ferro. Currently it is statutory, and we would propose,
again, in our technical assistance increasing the limit and
keep in mind also it is a one-time fee.
Mr. DeFazio. Right, OK. So that seems like we have some
consensus on that and it is hopefully something we could put in
the bill. So a requirement on States for inspections, a higher
one-time fee for registration which could help fund some of the
safety and doing the pre-inspections.
And then I will see if I can get one step further, you
know, the chairman referenced airlines. Well, when we do
airlines, we require that the operator actually be certified,
and I have been here long enough that I remember when we threw
Frank Lorenzo out of the industry. So, the question would be
could we require--we talk about background checks and medical
certificates and all of that--could we have background checks
for operators because that way we could get at this phantom
problem because we know this person, they had a company that
violated the law, they are not a qualified operator to start
another company with a different name and run those buses.
Could we have something like that? Yes?
Ms. Ferro. Yes, indeed, we could, in terms of liability and
responsibility for principals who have already been identified
as unsafe, as reincarnated that they could be barred in some
regard from operating or----
Mr. DeFazio. Can you do that administratively or do you
need statutory authority?
Ms. Ferro. We cannot do that. We would need statutory.
Mr. DeFazio. You need statutory authority. Well, I would
hope we could provide that too and obviously it would be used
only in extreme cases, but some of these people are bad, repeat
offenders and we want to stamp them out here. I mean, what we
are going to do is provide more business for the good
operators.
With that, thank you, Mr. Chairman, I think there are quite
a few things we could do statutorily to help here.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. Mr. Coble.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for your
testimony. Ms. Ferro, the private over-the-road bus industry
provides approximately 750 million passenger trips annually.
How safe is the motorcoach industry compared to other modes of
transportation?
Ms. Ferro. Sir, is that question for me?
Mr. Coble. Yes.
Ms. Ferro. Again, I think we have agreed--we agree with
many of the other speakers that it is among the safest. We are
somewhat limited in our inspection data on the industry writ
large by virtue of this inspection restriction that the
enforcement is currently under. But, yes, generally in terms of
the number of crashes they are very low.
Mr. Coble. And I realize accidents are inevitable, they are
going to occur. But do you attribute anything specifically, any
shortcoming to the recent motorcoach accidents, Ms. Ferro?
Ms. Ferro. Let me just clarify, again, the vast majority of
the industry is operating very effectively and these are small
operators who have found a way to make safety and profitability
go hand in hand and be highly complementary, those individual
owner operators, small business owners.
In regard to the recent crash, again, we are in the midst
of the investigation, but at the outset we can see that the
facility with which some of the bad actors move equipment and
drivers among companies with valid DOT numbers is one of the
loopholes, in our perspective. We need stronger leasing
regulation, which is something that is within FMCSA's authority
that we need to proceed with, as well as stronger tools to
prohibit reincarnation on a more effective level than we can
today.
Mr. Coble. I thank you for that.
Ms. Gillan. Mr. Coble, could I just add to that? I just
wanted to say that motorcoach crashes have increased
dramatically and we have many, many more people taking them.
And, unfortunately, our safety systems are not adequate.
So, while, yes, it is a relatively safe mode of
transportation, we have this double standard where we have zero
tolerance for aviation crashes even though we now have as many
people using motorcoaches and we have hundreds of people dying.
Already this year, 27 people have been killed and hundreds have
been injured in 11 motorcoach crashes.
Mr. Coble. I thank you for that.
Major Palmer, distinguish for me, if you will, the
difference between en route bus inspections and strike force
operations. And in terms of time and money, which of the two
serve us better?
Mr. Palmer. Well, they are both unique in their own right.
They both accomplish, they ultimately accomplish inspections,
but they do it in a different way. The en route inspection is
something that, it is a surprise. I mean, it is not something
that you can prepare for.
I mean, the good carriers out there don't have an issue.
The ones that don't, they don't have time to prepare or change
out some equipment or make some quick fixes to get by for a
day.
The distant--most of the strike forces that are done now
are related to they are either going to be some type of
imminent hazard violation involved before they are stopped, but
mostly they are actually destination inspections, either origin
or where they are going to end up.
Mr. Coble. Well, are strike force inspections given an
advance notice; are they surprised?
Mr. Palmer. They can be both. There is surprise at the
beginning, but once the first group of buses get there to the
location and we start inspecting them, then the surprise is
gone. So then, then other folks can find out that, hey, that's
where we are at.
But they both have, they both truly have their benefit. It
is just that you are isolated to a particular location. You are
also at the mercy, so to say, of either a business, whether it
be somebody like SeaWorld or Fiesta, Texas, or some other venue
or the actual passenger carrier company, whether they would let
us come to their facility and do inspections. So that is one of
the downsides to the origin and destination.
Mr. Coble. I got you. Thank you, sir. Thank you all for
your testimony.
Mr. Mica. Would the gentleman yield? I just have one quick
question for the Administrator.
Mr. Coble. I yield to the chairman.
Mr. Mica. Now, it is my understanding that you grant the
operating authority for all of these buses, and it is my
understanding that the DOT gave operating authority to Sky
Express, WorldWide Travel and Super Luxury Tours operating
authority of DOT, and you get that little number that they put
on the side, you gave all of those, right? Those were the ones
involved in--but then after the incidents you withdrew that
authority.
Ms. Ferro. That is correct. Both, all three of those
carriers had passenger carrier authority prior to our vetting
program, and all three have been shut down, that is correct.
Mr. Mica. Well, again, that answers my question, but I am
concerned that it didn't happen in reverse order.
Mr. Coble. I reclaim and yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Thank you . Let me yield to Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Ferro, first of all, in your testimony on page 3, you
reference a new program Think Safety, Every Trip, Every Time.
And you talk about the fact that this is available online. What
other process do you have in place for consumers to know about
this, because, to be frank with you, this seems a little
unrealistic.
I was recently in New York. I bought a ticket for the Loop
trip, and I mean, I didn't go online and I am a fairly
informed, I think, consumer. So what else are you doing besides
this to communicate with people?
Ms. Ferro. We have several strategies. One is to just make
sure people know that there is safety information available on
our Web site about carriers and some of the trade associations
also provide links to individual carriers' safety data so that
customers themselves can link in and understand that they can
think safety every trip every time.
Ms. Richardson. OK, but other than Web sites, what process
do you have for the average consumer? In the testimony today it
was spoken about that you are talking about seniors and people
who are riding who are not going on the Web site. Do you have
any plan, any process, people call a number, is there something
available in bus areas that they have to post? What other
aggressive things have you done and, if not, it is OK, we just
need to know where we are.
Ms. Ferro. Two areas in particular. There are van operators
and the whole population of the faith-based community and
others who utilize the 16 passenger vans are a core
constituency to whom we have actively reached out in the past.
With regard to motorcoach operations, again, it is through our
Web site, it is through this particular campaign that the
Secretary just launched recently.
But I would add, very importantly, it is the proposal
through our technical assistance to allow us to regulate
brokers of passenger tickets; that is, those who sell tickets
online, those who tell tickets through brokerage and travel
services.
Ms. Richardson. I don't think you are understanding my
question. Maybe it is my fault, maybe I am not clearly stating
it. The question I am asking you, if I am an average consumer,
I go to buy a ticket for a motorcoach and I walk up to
Greyhound Lines or New York Loop trips.
How do I know what to look for in this particular
motorcoach to know that it is safe, or you know, that they
pass, that they have a decal or, you know, that they are
approved by the Department of Transportation? Is there any
system that you have in place to communicate to the average
consumer who walks up--I am not talking about someone who is
using a Web site--who walks up. Do we have any communication in
place?
Ms. Ferro. We do not today.
Ms. Richardson. OK, thanks. I have got to keep going, I am
sorry. I have only got 2\1/2\ minutes.
Mr. Pantuso, you mention in your testimony that you think
that there should be some sort of inquiry into the fitness of
an operator prior to that individual being able to begin
operations. Can you describe more of what you meant by that?
Mr. Pantuso. Absolutely. Right now, as was pointed out,
there is an 18-month window and FMCSA, we agree, has done a
great job of shortening that window, I think Administrator
Ferro said to 9 months.
But we believe before the first passenger gets on board
that somebody needs to go and look at that carrier and ask them
where they will be getting the maintenance done when they begin
operating, what kind of equipment are they going to operate,
what kind of training do they have for their driver. How
knowledgeable is the operator? Those kinds of questions that
should be asked before the trip ever takes place and before
somebody ever gets on board.
Ms. Richardson. If there is no objection, would you mind
submitting some of those helpful questions that you think
should be considered for the record?
Mr. Pantuso. I will, absolutely.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you. I am not done yet. I am not done
yet.
Mr. Mica. OK.
Ms. Richardson. A couple of other things I wanted to ask a
few questions on.
Ms. Administrator, there was talk that States use the same
pool of funding for truck inspections as they do for bus
inspections. And coming from a port community, I would find
that to be very problematic.
Are you opposed to identifying a specific percentage
through legislation that was directed, or do you have a
suggestion to of when to ensure that more motorcoaches are
getting some of these funds to be inspected?
Ms. Ferro. We are pleased to work with the committee on
that recommendation. I will tell you today, through the annual
commercial safety plan process, we require States to develop
and include in their commercial vehicle safety plans, which is
part of their annual grant application process, the
identification of a region or State appropriate bus safety plan
driven by what their bus safety data is saying, by their bus
population.
So it is incorporated into every State safety plan. It is
less formal in some States, but it is very much a part of their
activity. But, again, with regard to your proposal I will be
happy to work with you on that.
Ms. Richardson. OK, and my last question and the remainder
that I will submit for the record is Mr. Pantuso said in his
statement that dozens of States actually don't even have
programs at all. How is it, is it your understanding, do you
concur with that or did I accurately describe your statement?
Mr. Pantuso. To clarify it, we don't see good bus
inspection programs in a lot of States. We see some States that
are very vigorous, Minnesota, Michigan does a great, great job.
California does a great job, Massachusetts does a great job,
New Jersey, Connecticut do great jobs. There are others that do
very, very good jobs that are very, very rigorous. Yet at the
same time we see a lot of States that just don't put enough
emphasis on bus inspections.
Ms. Richardson. So Ms. Ferro, are you working with the ABA?
Ms. Ferro. We work closely with all of our stakeholders in
this regard to identify the best strategies to root out the
worst offenders.
Ms. Richardson. So you are familiar with the ones that they
feel are not appropriate?
Ms. Ferro. Yes. We are familiar with that concern and it
has been part and parcel over the past 4 years why the agency
has incorporated an expectation of a bus safety action plan
within each commercial safety plan submitted by the States. It
is truly an evolving process, but it is part of our expectation
for each State, and we work closely with those States on strike
forces.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentlelady and I ask to grant
unanimous consent that the recommendation made by the
gentlelady of California be made part of the record.
Mr. DeFazio asks unanimous consent that the record of
today's hearing remain open for a period of 2 weeks for
submission of information or response to questions by the
committee.
Without objection, so ordered.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania. I
apologize for the delay. I know you wanted to get out by 4
o'clock.
Mr. Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am a
little confused on the roadside inspection, so I will direct
the question to Ms. Ferro and Mr. Pantuso and see what your
answers are, maybe you will clarify for me. Are we allowed to
do, still allowed, or it is not prohibited to do roadside
inspections?
Ms. Ferro. Roadside inspections are authorized for high-
risk operator behavior. So if that driver is showing extreme
rates of speed, unsafe operating behavior, if the bus is
smoking, a wheel rim is on fire, something to that effect, they
can certainly take action.
Mr. Shuster. What about targeting a bus company that has
shown that it has violated operations, safety rules, that
wouldn't be imminent or a reason to target them?
Ms. Ferro. That is not currently authored through the
current statute, no.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Pantuso, your view on that?
Mr. Pantuso. Congressman, I think, again, our concern goes
back to the safety of the passengers. And if there is a change
in the law, as long as the passengers are in some fashion
protected, as long as the seniors, the students, those
passengers with disabilities are taken care of and are not left
on a hot bus or along the side of the road, there are adequate
facilities, we are certainly fine with some modification to the
existing law.
Mr. Shuster. So if in the bill that I propose, if we put in
there, allowing those bus operations that don't have a home
base, is that something your industry or Mr. Parra would
support, being able to inspect them on the road? Because
obviously you, most of your operators, not all of your
operators, that I know, have a home base and it is easy to get
in there and--go ahead.
Mr. Pantuso. That is a good question. Companies that
operate from the curb, if you will, like some of the ones we
have seen operating point to point service, or even charter
buses, may not have a terminal where people go to get the bus
but ultimately they have a home base and pickup points. There
is an owner of that company and hopefully they have a garage,
they have maintenance facilities or places where they take
buses to be maintained, and they have training. So someplace
there is a place to examine the paperwork and the buses.
The other thing is that they all take passengers to the
same place. They all, good and bad companies, go to the same
destinations. If it is a charter or a tour, their passengers
are going to the same place that good bus company passengers
are traveling to. If it is a scheduled service operation, they
are coming to Washington, going to New York, they are doing
other point-to-point destinations.
So there is a destination, there is an origin, certainly if
there is an opportunity to do inspections en route if the bus
or the company is identified as unsafe and take care of the
passengers. The passengers are the first and foremost concern.
Mr. Shuster. Mr. Parra.
Mr. Parra.  Yes. I would just add to that, and I would hope
that if a company does have a marginal safety record that they
would be stopped before they even got on the road, whether it
would be closing them down. The CSA program, for example, right
now, red flags those companies that may not have had an
accident but, in fact, because of one of the five categories
they are considered a risk. They have an alert listing next to
their name.
FMCSA will intercede at that point and hopefully when the
carrier, in fact, has enough alerts on their listing that they
would be stopped, prevented from operating. That is, to me, the
best way to catch them, as opposed to trying to get them on the
road.
Mr. Shuster. Ms. Ferro.
Ms. Ferro. Yes, I appreciate Mr. Parra's point. The
challenge is that these rogue operators are the very ones that
never would have been inspected because we don't always know
where their origin or destination is. They are stopping at
empty strip shopping sort of abandoned sites, large parking
lots, areas that may be Map Quested, but are no fixed termini
in terms of a tourist destination or a casino of some sort. So,
again, it is this very sort of population that we don't have
inspection data on so we wouldn't see them as a flag in the
SMS.
Mr. Shuster. But as Mr. Pantuso said, they start somewhere.
I mean, they have got some sort of home base, even if very
small. Major, you look like you are ready.
Mr. Palmer. Yes, if I may add, I can give you an example in
Texas. In the Houston area, we have some of these operators
that literally the only way we can sometimes figure out where
they are at or where they are going to pick up or come out of
is we go to certain areas and we look for fliers. And the
fliers tell them where to pick them up at, and that is what is
one of the major challenges, and that is happening in Houston,
Texas.
And the other thing is that in relationship to specific
legal language about, you know, who the en route inspection
would be applied to, it would be very difficult. And to us,
from a State perspective, that is more of a policy issue and
that could be a policy at the FMCSA level. At the very least
you would see the States would implement certain policies to
ensure the safety of the passengers, because that is the bottom
line. We want them to be safe.
Mr. Shuster. Just so I understand, Ms. Ferro. If you can't
get them en route but can you at the beginning and at their
destination, you can inspect them at both places?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct, that is correct.
Mr. Shuster. OK, all right. Thank you very much. I yield
back.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Bucshon.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Ferro, I have a
couple of questions related to budgetary process.
Do you know what your budget was in 2008?
Ms. Ferro. I do.
Dr. Bucshon. Can you tell me?
Ms. Ferro. Yes, sir. We had $300 million in grant
authority, State grant authority, and I believe it was $220 or
$230 million in operating revenue.
Dr. Bucshon. So ballpark, $530 million.
Ms. Ferro. $530 million.
Dr. Bucshon. $530 million. And how about 2010?
Ms. Ferro. 2010 we were at $320 million in grants and $250
million in our--$246 million in our actual, so that is about
$556 million.
Dr. Bucshon. Yes. You can add faster than me.
OK. And then the request for this year, the 2012 budget is,
for the total?
Ms. Ferro. Yes, the request for our 2012 budget is $50
million more, $20 million of that for State grants and $30
million for operations, predominantly additional folks in the
field and systems investment. So it is about 100 positions and
an additional $50 million.
Dr. Bucshon. Well, my concern is in a time when, you know,
we are expanding spending at the Federal level almost
exponentially, compared to 2008, you know, and this year, you
know, the 2012 budget, I am trying to figure out in my own mind
exactly why, if in 2008, you know, it seemed like what you were
doing was adequate, but every year it seems like every agency
in the Federal Government, not just yours, continues to ask for
more money. And we haverecently, I had bus crashes in 2011
which it didn't seem like the increased amount of money that
you had from 2008 to 2010 really made any difference.
So in my own mind I am trying to justify exactly why that
would be. And it seems to me that it might be more or a better
thing to do to maybe transfer more of the money that you have
allocated from the Federal rollover to the States so that we
can have a more pointed inspection programming at the States
rather than continuing to increase our budget at the Federal
level.
Now what do you think about that idea?
Ms. Ferro. Well, sir, I certainly defer to the wisdom of
the committee. I will say that the investment in FMCSA, which
is a relatively new agency, and the shape of what it means to
have the proper regulatory and enforcement structure over the
motor carrier industry is, frankly, still being formed. It is
an agency that was spun off of Federal Highways a little over
10 years ago.
With regard to the investment that is proposed, again, it
is specific to boots on the ground, either through the State
grants or our own field system. And one of the challenges that
has been identified with the last crash has to do with are we
getting to our thorough inspections that we call compliance
reviews of the high-risk carriers quickly enough? And that is
always a resource issue.
Dr. Bucshon. Yes, I am just responding somewhat to the
unfair characterization of, you know, trying to control the
budget and the Ryan budget, and it seems that a lot of folks
want to say that if we go back to a spending level that we had
just a few years ago that that is--these are draconian,
dramatic cuts that are going to significantly impinge on our
ability to run your organization and others, and I would argue
that that is not true. So I wanted to just clarify exactly what
you are planning to do.
How many people do you have working for you, do you know?
Ms. Ferro. We currently have 1,090.
Dr. Bucshon. And what are all those, what is the breakdown
on what those folks do? Are they all here in Washington? What
do they do.
Ms. Ferro. No, no, no. 800 of them are in the field. We
have division offices in every State. We have both a division
administrator, as well as is safety investigators, as well as--
--
Dr. Bucshon. Let's break down how many administrators
versus investigators?
Ms. Ferro. Well, there is one division administrator for
each State. And investigators are driven by the size of the
motor carrier population in that State, as well as the
magnitude of the crash history and elsewhere. Again, out of
that 800, roughly 500 are dedicated to investigation and
inspection activity.
We also have four regional service centers which process.
Each investigation has the risk of prompting a legal action by
a carrier, which may be an appeal, which may be related to the
result of the inspection or investigation itself. So there is
the, what we call mission critical support associated with our
work, which has to do with lawyers as well as, pardon me, you
know in some cases attorneys, litigation attorneys as well as
our system support.
Let me clarify, I apologize. We have, out of the numbers I
cited, 400 investigators and 250 inspectors along our southern
border out of that 800, and then there are additional, again,
support personnel and auditors.
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Duncan, welcome, and you are recognized.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
don't intend to ask any questions, because I just was able to
get here a few minutes ago. I have read key portions of the
testimony, though, but I just want to say this, I know that Mr.
Pantuso's organization has, I think, 800 members and Mr.
Parra's organization 1,200 members. And I think what that says
to us is that this, fortunately, is an industry still with
mostly very small and medium-sized businesses.
I have noticed in almost every industry that becomes very
highly regulated or overly regulated it ends up in the hands of
a few big giants. And I hope that we don't go overboard in
reaction to a couple of bad operators. I don't have any
problems with coming down very hard on the rogue or the very
bad operators.
But when I was in law practice, I represented a small, one
of my clients was a small bus company that had three drivers.
The owner of the company had driven, I think, it was over 2
million miles at the time I represented him without an accident
and his other two drivers had driven well over a million miles
without an accident. As far as I know, they never had any kind
of accident that was their fault at all. And that was a good
company, and it was a very, as you could tell, a very small
business.
So I appreciate the work that these companies do. They
provide a very, very important service to the people of this
Nation and especially to lower and middle-income people.
So let's be very careful in what we do and let's work to do
what we need to do, but be very careful that we don't run out
the little guys or make it very hard for new people to come
into the business because of two or three companies that have
messed up.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Mica. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee. Let's go
back now. We have gone through all of the members on the panel,
and we will now yield back to Mr. DeFazio for additional
questions, our ranking member.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased that
Chairman Duncan was able to have an opportunity to review some
of the testimony, and I would agree with his sentiments, which
is we do not want, we are not proposing to regulate those who
are doing a good job in unreasonable ways.
We have had some consensus on the fees that are charged for
entry from both the associations, the possibility of raising
those fees to a reasonable level, but wouldn't bar entry but
would also help better fund the inspection certification
program. We had discussion of certifying operators so we can
basically, when you get a bad operator, it sticks with them,
even though they might come up with a new corporate entity or a
new spiffy name on a Web site for their curb-to-curb service.
And, you know, that, I think, could be helpful. We had some
discussion, although there isn't agreement, but there is some
opening, I think with Mr. Shuster's comments on what you do en
route versus how you could get at carriers who don't have
really a fixed place of operations, and then the State
inspection problem, which again, we had some consensus on where
the States aren't doing their job to certify the buses.
Just one or two other quick questions. I don't understand
in Administrator Ferro's testimony, it says, ``revise current
law to ensure driver's CDL can be suspended or revoked for drug
and alcohol-related offenses committed in noncommercial
vehicles.''
I thought that already was allowed. We were looking at the
statute here.
Ms. Ferro. Right now most of those offenses--it is funny,
actually I saw that same point I think that is actually a
misprint because I agree currently for serious offenses we have
the authority to require States to disqualify.
To clarify the particular provision we are looking for,
when we issue an out-of-service order on a driver, there is no
connection between our action and the State CDL, and we feel
there needs to be an action. Otherwise, really, the driver has
no, there is no harm, no foul. And the driver may not pay the
fine. If there is a fine, another employer might hire that
driver because there is no think between that driver and their
authority to operate a commercial vehicle.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. So right now even though you may suspend
or bar them, the States are not required to follow suit?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. I think we had talked about this with
trucking, where we have people who sort of hop States----
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. When they have had serious problems and we
have talked about having a unified database so we can keep
track of people, and is there a requirement on the trucking
side that States revoke a CDL?
Ms. Ferro. In terms of--only for State convictions and
for--on a commercial operator--let me clarify--for sufficient
serious violations a State is required to disqualify that
driver from holding their CDL, but a direct link for certain
violations or an out-of-service order is not necessarily in
that list of serious violations.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, I would appreciate seeing some language on
that so we can better----
Ms. Ferro. We will. If I can just clarify the drug and
alcohol piece, for positive tests on a drug or alcohol test,
there is no link to the individual CDL. So that randomized
process of drug and alcohol testing for which we are currently
advancing a clearinghouse, should a driver test positive today
or in the future, there is no link between that and the
driver's CDL status.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. That is certainly something to think about
how you would deal with that.
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, we don't want people--and that would be
for someone who is actually operating and failed a test while
operating?
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. And there is no way to say isn't that person
put out of service at that point if they test positive for
alcohol?
Ms. Ferro. The driver may be put out of service but, again,
if it is a positive test after a crash, and it is not related
directly to the CDL--if I may, let me go ahead and provide
language before I dig myself a hole on that one.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, that would be OK. And the one other thing
on your penalty that again is statutory for passenger carriers
that attempt to operate without U.S. DOT authority. So these
are people who didn't even pay the $300 and initially qualify?
These are just total rogues? I mean, they are just out there
driving around?
Ms. Ferro. It is that population as well as those we might
have shut down and resumed operations.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes.
Ms. Ferro. In other words, those who we have removed their
authority to operate, and they have resumed operations
regardless. So it is both populations.
Mr. DeFazio. Right, OK. And again I think we had some
consensus that perhaps that fine for those kinds of people
could be raised from both associations and discussed what would
be a reasonable level of fine. But we certainly want to
discourage those kinds of people. Again, we want to focus on
the people that are good and encourage them to do better, and
we want to get these other people out.
Ms. Gillan. Congressman DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes.
Ms. Gillan. Advocates would also recommend that you look at
criminal penalties for reincarnated carriers and people that
are operating without sufficient operating authority, because
clearly the financial penalties are not enough, you know, to
persuade these people that, you know, they shouldn't be going
back into business. So if you had criminal penalties, I think
that really increases the stakes and I think that may get their
attention if they thought they might be going to jail by doing
something like this, putting so many people at risk.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, I would have to think about that. The key
thing about it is if you go criminal, then we get a referral to
the Judiciary Committee, and that is kind of bureaucratic. And
beyond that the U.S. Attorneys generally, they don't want--I
mean, if it involves someone who has actually had serious
infractions that led to injury or death or something, then
perhaps they would pursue it. But normally they wouldn't be
very interested in pursuing it, so we would have to kind of
qualify it maybe and think about how we might do that, and then
I would be open to suggestions.
Administrator.
Ms. Ferro. If I might mention two other strategies that are
core to this and, again, they recognize that small operators,
independent business owners who are doing it right have every
reason to continue operating correctly. And one is this
authority to regulate brokers. As long as passengers who are
buying tickets, whether it is through the web or through a site
at a curbside, if there is no requirement on those brokers to
disclose who they are selling tickets for and conceivably
provide some sort of a link to the safety information on that
carrier, then passengers can continue to really buy tickets
blindly.
Furthermore, they buy tickets thinking that the seller has
a connection and some responsibility for the quality of the
operations. The passengers we are seeing today who have lost
their tickets, by virtue of the companies we shut down, have no
recourse other than going through some State consumer
protection agency.
So we would recommend, we have authority over the brokers
of every other kind of commercial movement, the sale of that.
We would encourage the authority to have some level of
requirements on brokers of passenger tickets.
Mr. DeFazio. So you have, like you have a requirement over
freight brokers, for instance.
Ms. Ferro. Yes, household goods brokers.
Mr. DeFazio. Moving, storage, those things?
Ms. Ferro. Yes, correct.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, so this is the only area where you don't
have that authority?
Ms. Ferro. Correct. And we are just asking for full
disclosure.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, again, I would like to see a suggestion
there on how that--and do either of the associations have any
insight on that?
Mr. Parra.  Mr. DeFazio, we have had a concern about
brokers for a long time. They have no skin in the game and we
have fought very hard to ensure that consumers work directly
with motorcoach operators and bypass the middlemen, as we call
them.
Our concern with any kind of registration would, in effect,
give them some level of legitimacy, which we don't believe they
should have.
So we are sort of torn. We understand the concern with
brokers and share that concern, but we don't want to give them
a level of legitimacy that would make someone feel comfortable
that they are dealing with somebody that is reputable because
they are, quote, unquote, registered by the FMCSA.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Mr. Pantuso.
Mr. Pantuso. You know, the devil is always in the details,
Mr. DeFazio. And certainly as you are talking about brokers, as
we sit here, the kind of broker that was selling tickets for
the company that had the accident in Virginia, those are the
kinds of brokers I think we are talking about.
By the same token, a lot of the industry buy and sell bus
services from one another. Companies are leasing buses from
each other if their capacity is full and they need to get a bus
from someone else. Tour operators hire buses. So how that
broker is defined is a key question. But certainly the brokers
we are talking about here today, we would certainly be in favor
of regulating those brokers.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, if we are talking about freight
brokerage they are required to have bonding.
Ms. Ferro. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. I mean, maybe that is something--at least then
in this case, there would be some potential recourse for people
who bought tickets through a broker, then they would have
someplace to go and file a claim against the bond or whatever.
Maybe something along those lines would help to some degree.
Any suggestions you have regarding that would be welcome.
So thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this has been
very helpful. I think I find substantial grounds for some
modest improvements in law here that will get at the bad
actors, and I would welcome those actions by the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. I thank the ranking member. He has my assurance,
and we have been talking in between the testimony here in
looking at the provisions that we intend to put in the next 6-
year authorization that will strengthen our ability to deal
with the problems that we have heard. One fatality is too many,
which I said at the beginning.
I have learned some things here, too, and let me clarify as
we close, the Federal Government now gives, as far as motor
vehicle safety operations grants, all but two States are
recipients of those funds; is that correct?
Ms. Ferro. All States receive motor carrier assistance.
Mr. Mica. They are all now receiving.
Ms. Ferro. All. Two are at--receive half of the full
amount.
Mr. Mica. Because they do not meet the Federal standard?
Ms. Ferro. Precisely.
Mr. Mica. I discussed with Mr. DeFazio, Florida some time
ago had a limited enforcement operation and we found that,
actually, their State law was not compliant with the Federal
regs and we were having a rash of truck accidents. So we went
back to the State legislators, and they cooperated and
upgraded. Now they get the full amount.
But my point here though is we are providing funding, but--
and talking about the ticket brokering, by the time somebody is
buying a ticket, that is way down the pike from where all this
problem and responsibility starts. I mean, if you are arriving,
getting on a bus and it has a DOT license number such and such
or operator, carrier, whatever number and DOT has initially
certified that in some way, the public doesn't know, Members of
Congress don't know what that entails. But there should be some
responsibility to make certain that you have the very best
operators possible, not pulling the certificate after they have
killed a host of people.
And even, I mean, even if you control--the American Bus
Association may control 60 percent of the buses, but I ask this
question, one of the worst accidents occurred with one of your
members who was debarred from your membership after the
accident, so that is late in the game.
But if we are putting Federal money into State enforcement,
the other thing is most of the activities are now around truck
and highway safety issues. And we had testimony here today that
only 12 States actually are taking active interest, we heard
some anecdotal information about the poor level of operations
as far as bus passenger safety enforcement. So that has got to
change. We are going to have to make a change there. I think
Mr. DeFazio and I agree on that. We have to have some better
assurances, both from DOT in that initial issuance of a license
or operating certification.
And then further down the pike and at each level.
Enforcement is so important, I don't think even if I had
gotten 1,080 Federal officials, I am never going to be able to
handle what needs to be done in the States and localities on
the road. So we have to empower them to do this.
The other thing, too, is stopping the bus on the highway. I
just have great concern, maybe some of the provisions we put in
law were good, but, we may need a different approach, again, as
far as some of these random inspections. But the last thing I
want to see is on the interstate, a major highway, is bus
passengers unloaded or some kind of inspection.
I believe before a passenger gets on that bus that there
has to be some assurance that that is safe. And for heaven's
sakes, we know that most of these operators are small
operators, many are in the gaming industry, what type of
enforcement rocket science is it to inspect the bus before this
ever leaves the station, people know where they are leaving
from or their departure site or as it arrives.
So I have concerns about how we do this from a practical
standpoint, and I don't want to put more people at risk in the
process.
Competition is important, and we want to make certain a
little carrier has a shot at this too.
This isn't just about preserving the bottom line for major
carriers in this, and we will have to look at some innovative
ways maybe the proposal with third-party inspections, some way
of getting more inspection for less dollars and less
bureaucracy. That might be an innovative approach from
Washington. But maybe we can do that too.
And then I want to go back and look at NTSB recommendations
we really didn't get into in detail. We want to make certain
that we don't leave those recommendations on the shelf.
I know in other industries and modes of transportation, we
have done that in the past to make certain that there is some
follow through and compliance when we have seen a mistake it
shouldn't, or a gross error, it shouldn't happen again. So,
again, I appreciate your testimony today, your participation.
This is a quickly held hearing, but we are looking at all of
the provisions that we are trying to incorporate into a 6-year
major piece of legislation. We thought it would be fitting that
we review this in a bipartisan manner and try to come up with,
again, the best possible provisions to ensure that the
traveling public, particularly bus passengers, have every
element of safety in place and that we responsibly provide for
that and by our legislation or by the regulation allow the
agency to help do its job better, and also for the States that
end up with a lot of the responsibility in this process.
So, again, I thank the witnesses.
We will leave the record open for 2 weeks as the unanimous
request by Mr. DeFazio has been passed, and we may be
submitting additional questions to the witnesses for response
for and to be made part of the official record of proceedings
today.
There being no further business to come before the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee of the U.S. House,
this meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:31 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

