- REVIEW OF THE FY 2012 BUDGET AND PRIORITIES OF THE ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS, TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY, AND THE NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE: FINDING WAYS TO DO MORE WITH LESS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF THE FY 2012 BUDGET AND
PRIORITIES OF THE ARMY CORPS OF
ENGINEERS, TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY,
AND THE NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION
SERVICE: FINDING WAYS TO DO
MORE WITH LESS

=======================================================================

(112-13)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.fdsys.gov/

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-065 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
TOM REED, New York                   MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      LAURA RICHARDSON, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         Columbia
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            BOB FILNER, California
TOM REED, New York                   EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington,   JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
Vice Chair                           STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             LAURA RICHARDSON, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JEFF DENHAM, California                (Ex Officio)
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Christensen, Thomas, Regional Conservationist, Central Region,
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service...........................................     9
Darcy, Jo-Ellen, Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works,
United States Army.............................................     9
Thomas, John M., III, Chief Financial Officer, Tennessee Valley
Authority......................................................     9
Van Antwerp, Lieutenant General Robert, Chief of Engineers,
United States Army Corps of Engineers..........................     9

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Johnson, Hon. Eddie Bernice, of Texas............................    71
Reed, Hon. Tom, of New York......................................    76

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Christensen, Thomas..............................................    77
Darcy, Jo-Ellen..................................................    87
Thomas, John M., III.............................................    97
Van Antwerp, Lieutenant General Robert...........................   106

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Landry, Hon. Jeffrey M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana, letter and exhibits to Lieutenant General
Robert Van Antwerp stating that the sunken vessel, Rig HERCULES
61, poses a hazard to navigation of the Charenton Canal........    41
Thomas, John M., III, Chief Financial Officer, Tennessee Valley
Authority, responses to questions..............................   113

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

American Society of Civil Engineers, statement...................   123
Association of State Dam Safety Officials, statement.............   129

REVIEW OF THE FY 2012 BUDGET
AND PRIORITIES OF THE ARMY
CORPS OF ENGINEERS, TENNESSEE
VALLEY AUTHORITY, AND THE
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION
SERVICE: FINDING WAYS TO DO MORE
WITH LESS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 8, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources
and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The Subcommittee of Water Resources and the
Environment will come to order. Good afternoon. Good to see
everybody here. I will start with an opening statement.
This is a hearing today to ``Review the FY 2012 Budget and
Priorities of the Army Corps of Engineers, the Tennessee Valley
Authority, and the Natural Resources Conservation Service:
Finding Ways to do More with Less.''
I am a strong supporter of efforts by Congress and the
President to control Federal spending. Many of these agency
programs that we are examining today are true investments in
America. While I believe we must be diligent in our oversight
of these agencies to be sure that programs run effectively, I
believe we must also be supportive of programs that have a
proven record of providing economic benefits.
For nearly two centuries, the civil works missions of the
Corps have contributed to the economic vitality of the Nation,
and have improved our quality of life. At the same time, the
civil works side of the Corps represents an experienced
engineering workforce that can be quickly mobilized to address
a national defense threat or a natural disaster.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request by the administration
for the Corps of Engineers is $4.6 billion. This request is six
percent less than what Congress enacted in fiscal year 2011,
and is the lowest request since fiscal year 2006. Given the
fact that the navigation projects and the flood damage
reduction projects provided economic benefits to the Nation, I
would like to see the administration place a higher priority in
water resources investment.
All of the Corps' projects put people to work, which is
another reason to put these investments high on the priority
list.
In May 2010, the President proposed an export initiative
that aims to double the Nation's exports over the next 5 years.
However, with the Corps of Engineers navigation budget slashed
by 22 percent over the previous 5 years, and the President only
requesting $691 million from the harbor maintenance trust fund,
the export initiative will not be a success. Only if our ports
and waterways are at their authorized depths and widths will
products be able to move to their overseas destinations in an
efficient and economical manner.
Since only 2 of the Nation's 10 largest ports are at their
authorized depths and widths, the President's budget does
nothing to ensure our competitiveness in world markets. I share
the frustration of many of my constituents who find the Corps
to be too slow and too expensive to work with. It will be a
huge loss to the Nation if this agency collapses under its own
weight of burdensome process. We need to streamline feasibility
studies, and focus the funding on areas that provide an
economic return on investment.
The Tennessee Valley Authority does not rely on
appropriations, since it is self-financing. TVA derives all of
its funding from the revenues from the eight million people and
the seven States that it supplies with electricity. I, like
many others in Congress, am concerned about TVA's long-term
financial health, and I am looking to the board to provide some
assurances that they can reduce the Authority's debt while
continuing to strengthen the economy in the Tennessee Valley.
Again, it is estimated that their revenues will exceed their
expenses, yet their debt continues to rise.
The small watershed program in the Natural Resources
Conservation Service provides small, cost-efficient projects
that protect our water and our land in rural America. These
projects also provide an economic return on investment. Sadly,
under this President's budget, this program will receive no
funding.
I look forward to the testimony from the witnesses, and I
recognize Ranking Member Mr. Bishop for any statements that you
would like to make.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very
much for holding this hearing. And I thank in advance the
witnesses who are appearing before us.
This hearing is important, because we are assessing the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for three agencies:
the Army Corps of Engineers; the Tennessee Valley Authority;
and the Natural Resources Conservation Services. Each of these
three agencies before us today is responsible for supporting
and maintaining our national and regional economies in a
variety of ways.
These agencies literally allow our ports to stay open for
shipping, allow commercial navigation to continue to utilize
our waterways, protect countless families and property from the
threat of flooding, provide energy to small and large
communities, assist our small family farmers, and restore and
protect our environmental resources. If nothing else, I hope we
can all agree that the services that these agencies provide are
critical to the well-being of this country.
Mr. Chairman, a running theme of the new Majority is that
Federal agencies need to do more with less. Unfortunately, this
sound byte is not always grounded in reality. And, in realty,
it puts many people in this country at great risk. When it
comes to constructing, operating, and maintaining the critical
navigation, flood control, power supply, and water supply
programs that our Nation relies upon, the bottom line is that,
with reduced funding, Federal agencies will be forced to do
less with less.
As we look at the proposed 2012 budget of the Corps of
Engineers, they are being forced to make tough choices and
prioritize between priority tasks, tasks that may mean the
difference between keeping our economy moving forward, and
falling backward again.
For example, as noted in the Corps' 2012 fiscal year
budget, the reality for operation and maintenance projects is
that they are only being allocated 75 percent of what is
necessary for day-to-day activities. Collectively, for the
hundreds of Corps of Engineer projects around the country,
reductions in budget will result in a growing deficiency and
maintenance that will continue to expand until it becomes an
emergency, or fails at a critical moment. The risk of failure
increases each and every day, and ultimately, the breaking
point will be reached.
As we conduct this ongoing budget debate, let us be clear
that, at least for the agencies here today, less funding means
that fewer projects are constructed, fewer jobs will be
maintained and created, more critical maintenance is deferred
to another day, and more American families are placed in harm's
way, due to the risk of flooding and infrastructure failure.
Cutting back on funding these agencies may seem the easiest way
to address budget concerns.
But leave no doubt. We are placing the American public
increasingly at risk. In my view, this is antithetical to why
we were elected to Congress. Our job is to be good stewards and
leaders of the Nation, and to make the policy and funding
choices that get our country back on the path of prosperity for
today and for the future. In my view, reckless cuts to
infrastructure investment programs such as the civil works
mission of the Corps of Engineers simply passes the buck on our
responsibilities to maintain and provide a workable water
infrastructure for future generations.
We have all seen the statistics that much of our Nation's
water infrastructure is inadequate or failing. Pick up any
newspaper and you will find a reference to flooding, failing
levees, or loss of land, due to erosion. The statistics are
staggering, and yet we continue to put off until tomorrow
addressing the needs of our Nation. With most of our water
infrastructure in this Nation at 50 years and older, we cannot
afford to keep kicking this can down the road. I am very
concerned that we are setting up a potential failure of
infrastructure through incomplete maintenance and delay in
critical oversight and safety responsibilities.
If this is the path that we are now on, then let's be
honest with the American people, and let's tell them the real
risks that they are facing. I believe that we should be asking
all three of the agencies in front of us today what the reduced
funds will mean in real terms to the safety and well-being of
our citizens. We need to know who is going to be at risk, and
to what level. We need to know what projects are going to have
to be cut or delayed, as a result of the short-term continuing
resolution.
Let's stop trying to convince the Nation that, for agencies
like the Corps of Engineers, that they can somehow adequately
maintain the inventory and safety of critical projects with
reduced funding. The real question is: how badly are we adding
to the problem by cutting these agencies even further?
Shouldn't businesses that depend on the free-flow of goods
through our Nation's ports have a clear understanding with
respect to exactly which ports will be silting up and reducing
commerce and transportation?
Furthermore, I'm sure communities located below dams or
behind levees have an acute interest in knowing which among
them are most at risk of an impending infrastructure failure.
We need to be honest with the American people, and tell them
about the true story of the potential impacts and costs they
are facing. It is my hope that this hearing will address these
concerns. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Any Members on our side that would
like to be recognized for any statements? Representative
Cravaack?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs, and Ranking Member
Bishop, for holding this important meeting. And I would like to
welcome the witnesses on our panel today, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony regarding the President's fiscal year
2012 budget request.
Given the aging state of our Nation's infrastructure and
the current fiscal troubles, I will be very interested to hear
how the administration intends to do more with less. I look
forward to hearing the efforts to reduce the waste and improve
government efficiency.
As a representative from the Great Lakes State, I would be
particularly interested in how the President's budget request
will impact the Great Lakes' commerce and prosperity. Annually,
173 tons of commodities are transported between the Great Lakes
ports and waterways. Great Lakes transportation directly
impacts hundreds of thousands of American jobs. And I look
forward to discussing how the President's budget reflects on
this reality.
Make no mistake. Proper maintenance of our locks,
breakwaters, channels, and dams is imperative to our Nation's
ability to grow ourselves out of a difficult recessionary
fiscal time.
Thank you again. I look forward to hearing your
testimonies.
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead.
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member
Bishop, for calling this hearing today. And I want to thank all
of our witnesses, in particular the people from the Army Corps
and the National Resources Conservation Service, NRCS, for the
good work that you do in all of our communities and, in
particular, of course, in Hawaii.
And while we are asking all of the agencies to do more with
less, from my experience and my meetings with the Army Corps
and NRCS in my community, you are already doing more with less.
And as the Ranking Member Bishop said, at some point with these
kinds of cuts that we are contemplating, you can only do less
with less. And that would be a real tragedy for all of our
communities, particularly in the rural areas of our country, in
Hawaii.
Given the fiscal challenges we face, we must work to ensure
that, yes, every Federal dollar is being used effectively to
the benefit of the people. And this will require difficult
choices. But we must view these choices through the prism of
the most severe economic crisis since the Great Depression,
which means that we must focus our energies and dollars on
preserving programs that create jobs and protect public health
and safety.
In Hawaii, both the Army Corps and NRCS have played a vital
role in helping to protect the health and safety of our people,
while also helping to build infrastructure that has helped to
foment economic growth.
For example, the NRCS's watershed and flood prevention
operation program have been instrumental in helping the small,
rural communities in Hawaii. That's most of my district. One of
the best examples of where this program has been a success is
on the Big Island, on a project known as a Lower Hamakua Ditch
Watershed.
The Lower Hamakua Ditch was originally built in 1910 to
help sugar plantations transport cane to the mill sites for
processing. And, as most of you know--or some of you know--
sugar cane and the sugar plantations and pineapple plantations
were a major part of Hawaii's economic life. This ditch was
later converted into an irrigation system, which carried water
to the seasonally dry fields of the lower elevations, the only
source of potable water for the communities along its route.
And the last sugar plantation on Hawaii Island closed in
1994. And the economic and social displacement that ensued was
something to behold. I was a Member of the State legislature
when that happened. And the communities that were dependent
upon the plantations to help maintain this vital lifeline
called the Hamakua Ditch were left with very little, and a
tremendous challenge.
But with strong community support and assistance from the
National Resources Conservation Service, today small family
farmers, many of whom were former sugar plantation workers,
have access to the necessary water resources that have allowed
them to rebound from the loss of a key industry.
And, as some of you probably know, Hawaii is also the most
food-dependent State in the country, where over 90 percent of
the food that we need is imported from outside of Hawaii. So
it's even more important for our small farmers to be able to
produce more of the goods that we use. And small farmers in our
area produce a wide variety of products: papaya, the famous
coffee, lettuce, tomatoes, orchids, and grass-fed beef and
dairy products.
And this is just one example of how the resources made
available through this program is being put to use by people
and communities throughout the islands. And this is a type of
community revitalization that we should be working to support,
nationwide. And I have to say that the money that goes into
these programs through the efforts of NCRS are really minimal,
compared to the benefits that we are garnering from these
programs.
So, to recognize that we are zeroing out NRCS's watershed
and flood prevention and operations program is dire news,
indeed. And I hope that, as we continue to review our budget
priorities for this year, that we will preserve assistance to
small rural communities like the ones along the Lower Hamakua
Ditch, where Federal funds truly, truly makes a difference in
the lives of our people.
I look forward to hearing from you, and once again I thank
you so much for the commitment that you have to the rural
communities and to the people of Hawaii and to our country.
Mahalo. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Herrera Beutler?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
you allowing me to make a brief statement.
It's a pleasure to have you here. I represent southwest
Washington State, so it's basically the seven southwest
counties. We abut the Columbia River, and we go out to the
Pacific Ocean with many streams and rivers and lakes and flood
plains in between--wetlands and flood plains. It's like a
perfect storm.
In every community that I visit, I ask them their important
issues. And, without fail, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
comes up. You play a very critical role throughout my entire
region. And so, my message to you today is I am here to work
with you. You have earned and deserve praise for a tremendous
amount of work you have done throughout the region, whether
it's channel deepening, whether it's dredging at the mouth, you
know, projects that span in between. And it's made a big
difference in our ability, as the region, economically, to
transport goods and services, to build, and to grow, and to
develop.
I have also heard some really important concerns. And some
of those I'm going to just do a brief outline on them. The cost
of projects, the cost of projects and what local communities or
cities are asked to pay for. And I would like to explore some
ways with you--I would like to learn what your cost drivers are
with some of these, and see if there is things that we can do
to help ease some of that cost.
Secondly, the timeliness of permits. In many cases I have
heard that permits take much longer than are expected. And I
want to work with you to see what causes these permitting
delays, and hopefully find solutions that speed up the process.
A caveat there is it's not in every region that these
challenges happen, it's in certain regions. And in my mind, we
should have a standardized process. It shouldn't take
substantially long in certain regions, and a more reasonable
timeframe in other regions. So I'd like to work on that.
And most importantly is predictability and certainty. The
overarching theme around what residents and small businesses
and municipalities and counties communicate to me is
unpredictability.
Just last week I had a gentleman in my office who was
looking to develop a piece of land that his family has owned in
our community for decades. We have double-digit unemployment in
six of my seven counties, and we have been there for multiple
years. So it was music to my ears when one of these land owners
said, ``We've got an idea. We know what we can develop. The
city is involved, the city has already gone out for the bonds,
it is done. They are excited, they are ready.''
And he comes to me and he said, ``You know, the only reason
I almost didn't put this money up, and that the city didn't,
was because we weren't sure we could get a permit from the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers in 2 years.'' And he said it was so
highly unlikely that it literally almost stayed what could be
an 800-job development in a perfect location. I mean they've
even got the State DoT to work with them on the whole deal.
And their big concern--it was more a big question mark--was
whether or not the Army Corps would tell them yes or no. And
that's what he said to me. He said, ``You know, I can handle a
no. What I cannot handle is getting into the process and the
rules change, the goal post changes on me. And it's almost as
if, you know, I'm fighting an ideological, rather than a
process, an ideological barrier that I can't move.'' And that
is something that I think we need to address, especially
considering our economic situation throughout the country.
So those are some of the things that I have heard, and I
would like to work on. So you will probably hear more from me.
I look forward to working with you and your staff as we move
forward on specific issues and projects in the region.
But, overall, this is something we hear across the board.
We hear it from business all the time: predictability and
certainty. I am hearing from people who want to play by the
rules, who want to do it right, who want their applications to
have every possible bit of information that you could ever
imagine, and that was one of the things that he expressed to me
was, ``They wouldn't tell me if they didn't get the right
amount of information. We just check in every so often, you
know, six months into the process, and they say, `Oh, we didn't
have this bit of information,' '' and he is going, ``I will get
it to you,'' but it elongates the timeframe.
So, those are some of the challenges we hear, and we look
forward to fixing those. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Napolitano, do you
have an opening statement?
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs, and thank you,
Mr. Bishop, for holding this hearing. Before I start, I would
like to recognize Steve Stockton, director of civil works. We
have had an opportunity to meet in my office in regard to
foreign assistance, which the subcommittee on water and power
deals with, also.
So, just to let you know that your gentlemen represent the
Corps excellently in my area. Colonel Magnus, now Colonel Toy,
we work with them extensively. We are working, hopefully, to be
able to increase the number of catch basins in the LA area to
be able to take care of the floods. And, as you well know,
that's an endangerment of life, limb, and property in
California.
With the State of California working with the Bay Delta,
it's critical for us. It's a $58 million Army Corps budget for
the restoration. If those levees ever give way, we lose
billions of dollars in property, and probably a life in the
mix. Many of those levees are private, and so it's a big deal
to be able to sort through and find out how we get it done.
Certainly support the Corps' involvement with the Bay Delta
conservation plan.
Then we look at the replenishment of ground water aquifers.
And hopefully we will be able to identify in the future how to
increase the conservation pools for storage of water run-off,
recycled, et cetera. It's going to be critical if Mother Nature
continues to throw drought curves at us, which will happen. And
how do we prepare our communities? And not only in the west,
but the rest of the country.
Moving on to Whittier Narrows Dam, we have been working on
that one now for years to increase the water capacity for 1,100
acre feet annually. We have been able to get the funding, and
now we're waiting for certain other--how would I say--stumbling
blocks. We're waiting for that. Hopefully it will be put
together, because we don't want to lose all that water to the
ocean; we need to be able to store it and put it into the
settling ponds.
With the county, we support the Army Corps' Great Outdoors
initiative. That is key for a lot of us. Pico Rivera and La
Puente, both my cities, use Whittier Narrows for recreation
purposes, including the LA County supporting and being able to
put funding--not matching, but more than enough funding--in
that.
We were very supportive, and will continue to be
supportive, of putting more park space for residential use. In
LA--I think none of the California cities meet the mandate of
park land.
Thank you again, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member Bishop,
for this hearing. It is critical to let people know that the
Corps does great work, but they can't continue to do the great
work they do if we continue to cut their budgets. There is many
backlogs that we have, not only in our communities but in other
communities, and we trust that while they're making do more
with less, that we don't continue to cut them so that they are
handicapped in being able to deliver the great work they do.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Any other Members on this side that
want to be recognized?
[No response.]
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead, Representative.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And let me
congratulate you and the ranking member for being new in this
capacity. I had the pleasure of chairing this subcommittee the
last 4 years.
It's very difficult for me to talk about this, the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget. But for the priorities of
the U.S. Corps of Engineers, Natural Resources Conservation
Service, and the Tennessee Valley Authority, I am committed to
continued oversight of the budget request for the agencies
under the jurisdiction of this subcommittee.
I thank Chairman Gibbs and Ranking Member Bishop for
calling the hearing. I am pleased that we will hear testimony
from these Federal programs that service important public
services, ranging from restoration of our Nation's water
resources, flood protection, to electricity production. The
administration should be commended for producing an adequate
budget in difficult but improving economic times.
However, there are certain budget areas that could undergo
improvement. For one, I have concerns regarding the $56 million
reduction from the appropriated amount of fiscal year 2010, an
investigation fund for the U.S. Corps of Engineers. This
funding goes toward studying the national need, engineering
feasibility, as well as economic and environmental return on
Federal investment and water resource problems across the
country.
I have similar concerns with the 551 reduction in
investigations fiscal year 2010, as well as the $86 million
reduction from fiscal year 2010 in operations and maintenance
programs under the U.S. Corps of Engineers. I fear that at the
present requested amount, the Corps of Engineers will be unable
to plan and design the next generation of projects within its
core mission of environmental restoration, flood damage
reduction, and navigation. Now is not the time to reduce the
Corps' capability to maintain and improve our Nation's ports,
harbors, and inland waterways that are crucial to job creation,
interstate commerce, international trade, and improving our
economy.
I welcome each of the witnesses here today, and thank you
for your testimony. I look forward to you telling me exactly
what you can do at the level of the appropriations that you are
requesting in your budget. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. At this time I would like to welcome
our distinguished panel, and we will start off with The
Honorable Darcy, who is the Assistant Secretary of the Army of
Civil Works. Welcome. Good to see you.

TESTIMONY OF JO-ELLEN DARCY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
FOR CIVIL WORKS, UNITED STATES ARMY; LIEUTENANT GENERAL ROBERT
VAN ANTWERP, CHIEF OF ENGINEERS, UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS OF
ENGINEERS; JOHN M. THOMAS III, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY; AND THOMAS CHRISTENSEN, REGIONAL
CONSERVATIONIST, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE

Ms. Darcy. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to present the President's Fiscal Year 2012 Budget
for the Civil Works Program of the Army Corps of Engineers. I
will summarize my statement and ask that my complete statement
be part of the hearing record.
The 2012 budget reflects the administration's priorities
through targeted investments that help restore the environment
and revitalize the economy. The budget requires new
appropriations of $4.631 billion. In keeping with the
administration's program to put the Nation on a sustainable
fiscal path, this is $836 million, or about 15 percent below
the 2010-enacted amount of $5.445 billion. It is about 6
percent below the 2011 budget for Civil Works.
The 2012 funding level reflects effective and sound use of
available resources, focusing on those investments that are in
the best interests of the Nation. The budget concentrates
funding primarily in the three main Civil Works program areas:
commercial navigation, flood and coastal storm damage
reduction, and aquatic ecosystem restoration.
The 2012 budget continues the Army's commitment to a
performance-based approach to budgeting in order to provide the
best overall return from available funds and achieving
economic, environmental, and public safety objectives.
Competing investment opportunities were evaluated using
multiple metrics, and objective performance criteria guided the
allocation of the funds. The budget focuses on continuing and
completing ongoing projects and studies. The budget also
includes funding for two new construction starts and four new
studies.
The budget provides $50 million for a comprehensive levee
safety initiative. The initiative includes $46 million to help
insure that the Federal levees are safe, and to assist non-
Federal entities as they address safety issues with their own
levees. The levee safety initiative also includes $4 million
for Corps participation in the expansion of interagency teams,
known as Silver Jackets, to include every State, and to provide
unified Federal assistance in implementing flood risk
management solutions.
The Operation and Maintenance Program also includes a new
environmental and energy sustainability program to reduce
energy consumption at Corps projects and buildings. The 2012
budget places priority on collaboration with other Federal
agencies in the development of funding allocations for aquatic
ecosystem restoration.
For 2012, this collaboration is reflected in five major
ecosystems: the California Bay-Delta, Chesapeake Bay, the
Everglades, the Great Lakes, and the Gulf Coast. The
administration plans to work with Congress and stakeholders to
explore ways to support recapitalization of the Corps' aging
infrastructure, modification of its operations, or
deauthorization as appropriate, consistent with modern-day
water resources principles and priorities.
Direct beneficiaries would be asked to pay a significant
share of the cost to rehabilitate, expand, or replace projects,
just as they would for a new project, commensurate with the
benefits that they receive. Options such as direct financing
will be considered as part of this effort, where appropriate.
The budget provides for use of $758 million from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund to maintain coastal commercial
navigation channels in harbors. Despite the overall Civil Works
reduction of 15 percent below the enacted 2010 level, the
amount recommended in the 2012 budget for harbor maintenance
and related work is essentially unchanged from 2 years ago.
The administration also plans to develop legislation to
expand the authorized uses of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
so that its receipts are available to finance the Federal share
of other efforts in support of commercial navigation through
the Nation's ports. No decisions have been made yet on what
additional costs would be proposed to be paid from the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund. Development of proposed legislation
will proceed in the coming months.
Inland waterways capital investments are funded in the
budget at $166 million, of which $77 million is financed from
the Inland Waterways Trust Fund. This is the total amount that
is affordable in 2012 with the current level of revenue coming
into the Inland Waterways Trust Fund. The administration will
work with Congress and stakeholders to authorize a new
mechanism to increase the revenue paid by commercial navigation
users on the inland waterways.
Last year, President Obama established the America's Great
Outdoors initiative to promote innovative community-level
efforts to conserve outdoor spaces and to reconnect Americans
to the outdoors. This initiative was celebrated at several
events around the country, including a public hearing event, or
listening event, that the Secretary of the Interior and I held
in August at a Civil Works project near St. Louis, Missouri.
The Civil Works Recreation Program is closely aligned with the
goals of the America's Great Outdoors initiative and includes a
variety of activities to reconnect Americans, especially our
young people, with the Nation's outdoor resources.
We continue to strengthen the Corps' planning expertise,
including through greater support for planning centers of
expertise, and continued support for the development of revised
water project planning Principles and Guidelines. Also, the
Army has initiated a pilot program to identify means of
enabling studies to reach decisions more efficiently.
A number of low-priority programs and activities receive
reduced or no funding in our 2012 budget. For example, funding
for maintenance of navigation harbors and waterways segments
that support little or no commercial use is reduced by about
half. Also, no funding is provided for small projects in
several of the Continuing Authorities Programs.
The budget proposes to reprogram $23 million of prior-year
funds from these lower priority programs to finance ongoing
phases of projects and higher priority Continuing Authority
Programs that mitigate shoreline damages caused by navigation
projects. Also, to carry out beneficial uses of dredged
materials and to restore the environment. Development of small
flood damage reduction projects also will continue with funds
carried over from prior years.
The Corps continues the work funded by the 2009-era
program, which provided $4.6 billion for the Civil Works
Program. As of last month, more than $3.1 billion of the total
had been spent, primarily in payments to contractors for work
already completed, and 400 projects have been completed, and
about 400 more remain to be completed. These investments create
jobs and carry out important infrastructure work.
Small business awards account for about 51 percent of the
funds obligated. The budget includes funding to continue the
veteran project, which provides vocational rehabilitation and
innovative training for wounded and disabled veterans, while
achieving historical preservation responsibilities for
archeological collections administered by the Corps. The
project supports work by veterans at curation laboratories in
Georgia, St. Louis, Missouri, and here in Washington, DC.
In summary, the President's 2012 Budget for the Army Civil
Works Program is a performance-based budget. It supports water
resources investments that will yield long-term returns for the
Nation.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I look
forward to working with you in support of the President's
budget. And, in closing, before General Van Antwerp talks, I
want to make one point about the Army Corps of Engineers.
Recently the Chief and I--and I think he is going to talk about
this--had the opportunity to travel to Afghanistan to visit
with over 1,000 volunteers from the Army Civil Works Program
who are helping with the war effort in Afghanistan. And it was
truly a privilege for me to visit with them. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
I would like to next welcome Lieutenant General Robert Van
Antwerp. He is the chief of engineers, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
Welcome.
General Van Antwerp. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Bishop, distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am honored
to testify before your subcommittee, along with Ms. Darcy
today.
The fiscal year 2012 Civil Works budget is a performance-
based budget focusing on projects and activities that provide
the highest net economic and environmental returns, or address
significant risk to human safety. The budget funds 92
construction projects, including 55 flood and storm damage
reduction projects--3 of which, by the way, are budgeted for
completion--16 commercial navigation projects, and 19 aquatic
ecosystem restoration projects. Two of these construction
projects, as Ms. Darcy mentioned, are new starts. The budget
supports restoration of nationally and regionally significant
aquatic ecosystems with emphasis on the Florida Everglades,
Gulf Coast, California Bay-Delta, Great Lakes, and Chesapeake
Bay.
The budget includes $104 million for activities in the
Investigations account. It funds 58 continuing studies and 4
new studies. Funding is also included for the Water Resource
Priority study, which is an evaluation of the Nation's
vulnerability to inland and coastal flooding.
The budget supports our continuing stewardship of water-
related infrastructure. The Operation and Maintenance Program
for the fiscal year 2012 budget includes $2.314 billion, and an
additional $131 million under the Mississippi Rivers and
Tributaries Program. The focus is on the maintenance of key
commercial navigation, flood and storm damage reduction, and
hydropower facilities.
Corps teammates continue to respond wherever needed, and
whenever needed, to help during major floods and other national
emergencies. This budget provides $27 million for preparedness
for floods, hurricanes, and other natural disasters, including
$4 million in support of the levee safety initiative in States
known as the Silver Jackets.
A quick update on the Corps' preparation as we move toward
the spring flood events, of which there will be flood events.
We are working with FEMA and the National Weather Service to
monitor the high probability of spring flooding in the great
northwest, the north central U.S., specifically the Red River
of the north, the upper Mississippi River, and the Minnesota
River.
Based on these projections, our commanders have already
requested advance planning funds, and are taking advanced
measures. They verified availability of key flood-fighting
materials. They are also encouraging State, local, and Federal
authorities to discuss and review preparations for flood
response. In a few words, we are ready for this year. But we
know it's going to be high adventure.
On the international front, I am proud of our work on
missions in Afghanistan and Iraq. Men and women from across the
Corps, all volunteers, and many of whom who have served
multiple tours, continue to provide critical support to our
military and humanitarian missions. Currently, 1,168 Corps
employees, both civilian and military, are deployed in Iraq and
Afghanistan, where they have completed over 6,000
infrastructure and water-related projects.
As Ms. Darcy mentioned, we did have the opportunity last
month to travel over to Afghanistan and witness not only the
amazing employees, but the amazing work that they are doing. In
Afghanistan, the Corps is spearheading a comprehensive
infrastructure program for the Afghan National Army, the Afghan
National Police, and is also aiding in critical public
infrastructure projects.
The Corps of Engineers is committed to staying at the
leading edge of service to our Nation. We welcome comments from
you in areas we might improve. We are committed to changing all
that we do to ensure an open, transparent, and performance-
based Civil Works program.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity to
testify. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, and thank you for your service to our
country.
Next panelist is Mr. John Thomas III. He is chief financial
officer for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Welcome.
Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member
Bishop, and distinguished Members. It is an honor to be with
you this afternoon to discuss the Tennessee Valley Authority's
budget for fiscal year 2012. TVA appreciates the oversight this
committee provides, and we are pleased to inform you of our
progress.
For background, TVA is a corporation wholly owned by the
Federal Government, and it is the Nation's largest public power
producer. TVA provides wholesale electricity to 155
distributors and 56 large industries and Federal installations,
serving a population of about 8 million. TVA also has a broad
stewardship role, which includes managing the Tennessee River
for flood control, commercial navigation, water quality, and
recreation.
In fulfilling its mission to serve the region, TVA's power,
environmental, economic development, and related activities are
funded entirely by the sale of electricity. TVA funds new
projects to keep up with electricity demand through the sale of
bonds, which are not obligations of the United States
Government.
Despite receiving no Federal revenues, TVA appreciates its
responsibility as a Federal agency and, in that spirit, has
voluntarily applied the freeze on Federal salaries to our
managers and specialists.
Our preliminary budget for fiscal year 2012 reflects a
continued modest economic recovery in the TVA region. We
currently project revenue of $12.1 billion from the sale of
electricity, fuel and operating expenses of $10.3 billion, and
capital expenditures of $2.6 billion.
Our capital expenditures include $219 million for clean air
projects, and about $1.5 billion for new generating projects,
including the completion of a second reactor at Watts Bar
Nuclear Plant in Spring City, Tennessee. We also anticipate
spending about $175 million on energy efficiency initiatives,
and $91 million to encourage economic development.
TVA's statutory debt is estimated to be at $26 billion by
the end of 2012, and we expect to pay down $2.6 billion on
existing debt.
One of the fundamental changes the TVA board has
established is basing financial decisions on a set of sound
guiding principles. Those principles include issuing new debt
strictly to finance new assets, retiring debt over the useful
life of assets, using regulatory treatment for specific and
unusual events, increasing rates where necessary to fund
operational spending, and aligning rate actions with TVA's
renewed vision and strategy. These guiding principles are
improving TVA's decisionmaking, and will ensure continued
financial health.
Last August, the TVA board adopted a renewed vision to
address many of the challenges the TVA region is facing now and
will likely face in the future. The vision strengthens TVA's
mission to provide low-cost electricity, economic development,
and environmental stewardship to the region, and calls for
cleaner energy by 2020.
Briefly, TVA is focused on six key areas: low electricity
rates, high reliability, responsibility to our customers in the
region we serve, cleaner air, more nuclear generation, and
greater energy efficiency. Our recently completed integrated
resource plan is one example of how we are meeting our
responsibilities to solicit a wide range of stakeholder views
on our energy future. The integrated resource plan supports our
vision of a balanced portfolio, and we expect to formally
present this to our board later this spring.
In conclusion, for fiscal year 2012, TVA's supply of
electricity balances well with our expected demand. We are
addressing the future needs of our region with plans to expand
the power system in an environmentally responsible way. We
would be pleased to invite you or members of your staffs to
visit and see for yourselves how we are progressing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Our next and final panelist is Mr. Thomas Christensen, who
is the regional conservationist of the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
Welcome.
Mr. Christensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of
the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the
watershed program activities of the Natural Resources
Conservation Service. In my remarks today I am pleased to
describe both our ongoing work and the fiscal year 2012 budget
request for NRCS's watershed programs under both Public Laws
534 and 566.
The NRCS watershed programs offer communities and
landowners technical expertise and financial assistance for
watershed projects, including planning, implementation, and the
rehabilitation of aging dams. These programs are designed to
help solve local natural resource problems. The watershed
programs have given NRCS the authority to complete work on over
2,000 watershed projects, nationwide.
Before providing the committee a summary of the fiscal year
2012 budget request, I would like to share a few of our
accomplishments related to the watershed programs under funding
from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Using these
programs, NRCS successfully entered into 1,400 contracts,
grants, and agreements, awarding $340 million in Recovery Act
funding to rebuild America's infrastructure and improve its
natural resources. This represents 100 percent of the Recovery
Act funding the Agency received.
The Agency's Recovery Act projects are being implemented
through flood plain easements, watershed structures, land
treatment, and the rehabilitation of aging dams. To date we
have expended almost 60 percent of the Recovery Act funds. By
the end of this fiscal year, these funds will have been used to
install over 300 flood prevention measures, restore more than
38,000 acres of flood plain lands, and rehabilitate or remove
16 unsafe dams.
The President's 2012 budget was developed after closely
examining all of NRCS's programs and our operations for the
coming years. The budget prioritizes limited resources to
ensure NRCS's position to meet the needs of America's farmers
and ranchers, while doing its share to help reduce the budget
deficit.
It also makes a number of difficult decisions that were
necessary to support the President's goals of restoring fiscal
responsibility, and providing efficient and effective
conservation programs to the American people. Among those
difficult choices was a decision in the President's fiscal year
2012 budget to eliminate funding for NRCS's watershed programs.
Mr. Chairman, while these programs have been tremendously
successful for more than 50 years, we believe that sponsoring
organizations can now assume a more active leadership role in
identifying watershed problems and their solutions.
Public Laws 534 and 566 authorize the Secretary of
Agriculture to provide technical and financial assistance to
project sponsors for planning and installing watershed
projects. The Public Law 566 program has been available
nationwide to protect and improve watersheds up to 250,000
acres in size. Public Law 535 authorized a program that is
available only in areas designated by Congress, which
encompasses about 38 million acres in 11 States.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request does not include
funding for the Public Laws 534 and 566 watershed programs.
This reduction is in keeping with the administration's efforts
to reduce spending. In addition, recent funding for these
programs has not been fully prioritized, based on anticipated
project outcomes or measurable impacts.
Also authorized under Public Law 566, the watershed
rehabilitation program serves to extend the life of dams and
bring them into compliance with applicable safety and
performance standards, or to decommission dams so they do not
pose a threat to life or property. NRCS may provide technical
and financial assistance for the planning, design, and
implementation of rehabilitation projects.
However, the continuing operation and maintenance of dams
built under NRCS watershed programs is the responsibility of
local project sponsors; 11 dam rehabilitations were completed
in fiscal year 2010, and there are 23 dam rehabilitation
projects currently under construction.
Additionally, there were 650 assessments of high-hazard
dams that provided communities with technical assistance about
the condition of their dams and alternatives for rehabilitation
of dams that do not meet Federal dam safety standards.
The fiscal year 2012 budget does not include funding for
the watershed rehabilitation program, again reflecting the many
difficult choices that were made in order to ensure fiscal
responsibility with our current economic climate.
In summary, NRCS has accomplished much through the
watershed programs over the past 50 years. However, because the
benefits from these programs primarily accrue to local
communities, and the projects are owned and operated by the
local sponsors, we recommend that local communities take a
larger role in funding such projects.
I thank the committee, and we would be happy to respond to
any questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I'll start off the questions to
Secretary Darcy.
In the President's State of the Union Address back in
January, he shared a vision for winning the future, and he
said, ``To help businesses sell more products abroad, we set a
goal of doubling our exports by 2014, because the more we
export, the more jobs we create at home.''
Ninety-nine percent of our world trade is oceanborne and
must pass through one of our U.S. ports. It is fairly obvious
that lowering ocean transportation costs makes our exports more
competitive. Yet the administration's budget would invest less
than five percent of the Corps' construction budget on
modernizing, deepening, or widening two ports.
The budget also dramatically reduces the use of the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Funds to maintain our ports to keep them
efficient and keep costs for exporting goods low. Increasing
exports is a key element of the President's vision for winning
the future. Can you please explain how the goal of doubling the
exports has been reflected in your budget for port
modernization and maintenance?
Ms. Darcy. Mr. Chairman, doubling the exports is a goal we
believel that, under this budget, we will be able to meet. In
looking at the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund and funding our
ports for the future, we are looking at taking the monies from
the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund and looking at more national
investment in ports beyond just the original purposes of
navigation. So we are looking at being able to fund the ports
using that Federal investment on a larger scale.
And as I said earlier in my opening statement, we are
looking forward to working with this committee and others to
try to develop how that Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund should be
allocated.
Mr. Gibbs. So are you saying that widening and deepening
the ports is not a top priority? You're maybe siphoning some of
the money off to do other things? I am a little confused by
your answer.
Ms. Darcy. No, sir. It is a priority. But within the funds
in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, in the $783 million, I
think it is, that we're using this year to maintain the ports,
there is also a balance in the trust fund that--we are going to
develop a proposal on how we can use that to improve and pay
the Federal share in port development.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. It's also my understanding in this budget
that it's really targeted toward two ports. Is that correct?
And can you tell the committee which widening and deepening
projects were excluded in this construction budget, which ports
were excluded?
Ms. Darcy. We currently have widening and deepening ongoing
at the Port of New York, New Jersey, and I'm going to have to
defer to the Chief for the second one. The deepening of New
York/New Jersey is ongoing. And the second port is Sacramento
in California.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Also for you, Secretary--on January 18th the
President signed an Executive order improving regulation and
regulatory review. This order got some very favorable reviews
for being balanced and rationale. For example, the major
principle in developing water resources projects is that
Federal agencies select, in choosing among alternative
regulatory approaches, those approaches that maximum net
benefits, including potential economic, environmental, public
health and safety, and other advantages--impacts in equity.
It is immediately compelling to apply the same idea to
selecting among alternative plans for water project
investments. Decisions would be balanced, and all the
alternatives would be laid out. Yet for over 2 years the
administration has been trying to do something completely
different with the Principles and Guidelines.
The National Academy of Sciences says the proposed
revisions are incoherent. How will the administration ensure
development of the new Principles and Guidelines be consistent
with the President's Executive order?
Ms. Darcy. Mr. Chairman, we are currently working within
the Federal family under the direction of the Council on
Environmental Quality to propose the revisions to the
Principles and Guidelines that were required in 2007.
We are balancing all of the demands and considerations for
national economic development, as well as environment and
social impacts for all of those water resources programs. We
have taken to heart the recommendations by the National Academy
of Sciences, as well as all the public comments that were
received on our initial draft, and we're hoping that the
Principles and Guidelines--the Principles and Standards portion
of that revision--will be hopefully implemented and finalized
in June of this year.
Mr. Gibbs. I want to go to the Chief now, the general.
Undoubtedly, the reduction in funding for the Corps will
require contract cancellations. Can you supply the Committee
with a list of project terminations proposed by the
administration's budget and their associated remaining--benefit
to remaining cost ratios and their associated termination
costs?
Does the President's budget just assume Congress will
continue funding these projects?
General Van Antwerp. Are you speaking as if the Continuing
Resolution continues as it is right now?
Mr. Gibbs. No, no, the----
General Van Antwerp. Or--no?
Mr. Gibbs. I think the President's budget that he
submitted--you know, obviously with the cuts that he submitted
from previous expenditures by the Corps, he will have to cancel
some projects. And I was wondering the rationale of how you're
going to move out the benefit, cost ratios, and how you're
going to analyze that, and--or do you just assume that Congress
is just going to fund them anyway?
General Van Antwerp. We have a very strict prioritization
scheme for the projects that are in the budget. So those
projects that are in the fiscal year 2012 budget were done on a
very concerted effort to follow priorities. There are about 168
projects that were in the fiscal year 2010 budget that are not
in subsequent budgets. So they were funded in the Fiscal Year
2010 Act. So, those were projects that were additional adds
from the Congress.
So, our first intent is to, in this budget, fund those
projects that met our criteria. One of those criteria was the
benefit cost ratio. As Ms. Darcy said, we also have
environmental considerations and social considerations. So we
can lay those priorities out, if you would like to go to that
next step.
Mr. Gibbs. Well, and also I would assume economic----
General Van Antwerp. Economic is a big part of it. Life,
health, safety--if it's a dam, safety, for instance. If it's a
biological opinion that, by law, states that we will do it,
then we have to work those priorities. But those are the
priorities that we go through to arrive at the budget.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. I am going to turn it over to Ranking Member
Bishop for his questions.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I am
going to pick up on where you left off, because I think it's a
very, very important area. And let me thank all of the
panelists for your testimony. And let me particularly thank the
Army Corps for the service that you provide to my district. I
am very grateful.
The issue that the chairman is raising is one that I think
all of us either are concerned about or ought to be concerned
about. We have two sets of numbers. We have what was passed in
H.R. 1, the continuing resolution, the fate of which is
unknown, that, as I understand it, cuts funding for fiscal year
2011, cuts it by about $500 million from fiscal year 2010, and
then the President's budget, round numbers cuts by an
additional $300 million. Am I about right on those numbers? OK.
Now, as we sit here, the Army Corps has a set of projects:
A, that have already started; and B, that are authorized but
have not yet been started. And I believe the chairman asked,
``Can you submit to us a list of those projects that have
already been started, if any, that will now lie incomplete for
some period of time?'' Are there any projects that fall into
that category?
General Van Antwerp. Yes, there are projects that fall in
that category, and we can provide that.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. And can you also provide us with a
list of those projects that are authorized, but for which
construction has not yet started?
General Van Antwerp. Yes, we can do that.
Mr. Bishop. OK. And can I further ask, with the chairman's
indulgence, can you provide us with some assessment of the
health and safety impact of not going forward with those
projects, and the economic impact to the communities affected
by not going forward with those projects?
General Van Antwerp. Absolutely.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I think that's very important
information for all of us to have.
And what I would like to--here is a point that I just think
is so important. I want to read from a report prepared by the
Republican staff of this committee in October of 2010 that was
signed off on by now-Chairman Mica. I am quoting now from page
54 of the report.
``The Corps of Engineers budget remains relatively constant
from year to year. Projects are rarely funded at their full
capability, resulting in drawn-out construction schedules. This
leads to an inefficient schedule and higher costs, with
taxpayers footing the bill. In addition, further economic loss
is experienced when this slower pace of project construction
causes a delay in realizing the economic benefits the project
can achieve only once it is constructed and operational.
Projects are rarely completed on time and, due to the inflated
schedule, regularly cost more than initially estimated.''
Now, this, as I say, is a report entitled, ``Sitting on our
Assets: the Federal Government's Misuse of Taxpayer-Owned
Assets,'' prepared for then-Ranking Member Mica October 2010,
signed off on by then-Ranking Member Mica and the ranking
members of each of the six subcommittees of this full
committee.
Aren't we right at that point? Aren't we now at the point
where we are going to not undertake projects because of a
short-term budgetary constraint, but we will be buying for
ourselves a much greater expense, in terms of going forward,
once we ultimately complete those projects? Are we not at that
point right now? Secretary Darcy? General Van Antwerp?
General Van Antwerp. I would say we are at that point now.
There is a time factor involved as you look at the cost of
projects as they are extended over a longer period of time, and
that's part of what that report indicated.
We are at the point now that it's very possible that some
of the projects that have been started--that we'll have to
conclude those projects, or button those projects up, depending
on the funding levels.
We did, in this budget, though, try to look at those
projects that could be completed, and we do have three that are
budgeted for completion. So that is also a factor. If we can
complete them and budget them and close them out, we would like
to do that.
Mr. Bishop. Right now--I'm sorry, Secretary Darcy, did you
want to----
Ms. Darcy. No, I concur with what the Chief said.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Historically, the Army Corps budget has
been comprised of approximately three-quarters of projects that
result from an internal review of the Army--through the Army
Corps process, makes recommendations that then find their way
into the executive budget. And about a quarter of the projects
that the Army Corps undertakes are congressional adds. Is that
about right? OK.
The projects that we are going to leave on the table and
not complete, what proportion of them represent congressional
adds, and what proportion of them represent projects that, in
the view of Army Corps professional staff, have emerged from
this very careful process that you undertake, in terms of the
cost benefit of undertaking a project?
Ms. Darcy. I don't know what that would be, but I think we
can provide that information to you, because I would be
guessing at what the number would be.
Mr. Bishop. OK. If I could ask that you provide that, in
addition to the information that Chairman Gibbs and I have
asked, that would be very helpful.
Ms. Darcy. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Landry, do you have a
question?
Mr. Landry. General, you would agree that a group is only
as good as its leader. And I am sure they don't give you those
stars without being a good leader.
And everyone comes before Congress in these budget
committees to tell us how they have cut and how they have made
tough decisions which justify their budget. But at the end of
the day, we have got to satisfy the taxpayers. And I've got a
problem with the way the Corps--of course, you know, we've got
problems getting the Mississippi dredged, moving our commerce--
but particularly in my district, what I believe is a microcosm
of the problem and some dysfunctionality with the Corps.
Are you aware that I have a--that there is a 2,000-ton
barge that sunk in a navigational canal in my district?
General Van Antwerp. Yes, Representative, I am aware of it.
Mr. Landry. OK. And it's been there for almost a year now.
And I made some suggestions to your legal department, because
they filed suit. And there is specific legislation--33 U.S.C.--
that allows you all to seize and remove that vessel. And as
long as that vessel sits in that canal, the asset deteriorates.
And the cost of removing it increases. And at the end of the
day, the taxpayer pays more.
Any idea how we're going to get that thing out?
General Van Antwerp. Well, first of all, I would say it's
not the taxpayers' responsibility, it's the owner of the
vessel's responsibility. It is not a Federal project or a
Federal----
Mr. Landry. Oh, hold on. Hold on, sir. See, the problem----
General Van Antwerp. We have thousands of vessels----
Mr. Landry. But, sir, the problem is that when the Corps
wants to use its authority over navigational waters, it does
so. But this is a navigational canal. I have letters from my
sugar refineries that it's impeding commerce. In fact, we're
trying to create jobs in this country, and I have a shipyard
who is spending millions of dollars refitting this piece of
property north of this structure. And if we don't get it out,
they won't be able to open their shop.
And I hate to disagree with you, but I can show you very
clearly where the law certainly gives you the right and the
responsibility to remove that, sir.
General Van Antwerp. I would agree that we are authorized
to remove it. But it doesn't say that we are responsible to
move it. The first responsibility is--and the law requires--the
owner and operators of the vessel. It is their responsibility
to remove it. So the Department of Justice right now is
pressing that with the owners and operators.
Mr. Landry. Well, but I hate to beg to differ with you
again. It certainly says that it is our responsibility, that
there is a provision within the statute after 30 days--which
you all have done--which is a presumption that it's been
abandoned, and it is your responsibility to remove it.
General Van Antwerp. Well, I would say the estimates that
we got, that it would be in the neighborhood of $1.5 million or
more to remove it, now the constrained budget that we're
talking about here, it's not a Federal channel----
Mr. Landry. I'm certainly glad you brought that up. Because
I have contractors. In fact, our local and State agencies have
been negotiating with salvage companies who would remove it for
the salvage of the vessel and $100,000. You see, that's the
problem we have here. That's why I say this is a microcosm.
We've got to kind of think outside the box. Every time there is
a problem, you say, ``Well, just throw me a million here and a
million there, and we will get rid of the problem.'' But it
doesn't solve the problem.
We can actually save the taxpayers millions of dollars, if
you would simply use the tools that are available to you all.
Can we agree that maybe we can look into that?
General Van Antwerp. We will agree to look into it, but
we've looked into the issue to quite an extent here. And at
this point it is with the Department of Justice, and they are
going after the owner and operators to remove the vessel.
Mr. Landry. Well, but the law clearly allows you to seize
the vessel. I don't understand why you are involving DoJ. Why
are we spending thousands upon thousands--maybe tens of
thousands of dollars of taxpayer money in litigation? I am not
a big fan of spending the money with the lawyers. I would like
to create jobs.
General Van Antwerp. We will commit to further looking into
it with you. We will.
Mr. Landry. OK, thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Hirono to question.
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I focused my
initial remarks on the work of the NRCS in my district, I do
want to thank the Army Corps for all the tremendous support and
the work that you do for--in Hawaii.
I wanted to take this opportunity, Madam Secretary, to--in
reading your testimony, to bring out to you that, as you focus
on funding on water research and infrastructure projects that
``produce high economic and environmental returns to the
Nation,'' and those that address public safety needs, that's
well and good, except that when you're in a State like Hawaii,
which is non-contiguous, it becomes a lot tougher for us to
show that any project that you're embarking on in Hawaii has
economic and environmental returns to the Nation.
So, we have had these concerns. And the language that we
employ for what constitutes a project that the Army Corps can
engage in, I think when applied to a State like Hawaii--and
also Alaska, a non-contiguous State--I just wanted to bring
that out to you. We face very special challenges, and I want to
make sure that whatever language is being applied is fairly
applied.
And I know that there are provisions such as if a port is
within 50 miles of each other, you can't do certain things, or
you can't provide certain kinds of support. Again, sounds
reasonable, except that if ports are on totally different
islands in Hawaii, and there is not much you can do, right,
except to do that which helps these ports on the islands. So I
wanted to take this opportunity to raise those issues.
And also, you know that, you know, providing priority
funding to the maintenance of high-performance projects,
that's, again, one of your core areas of emphasis. And again,
you know, what would be the definition of high-performing
projects? Is it those projects that have a national impact? And
again, that would make it really tough for any Hawaii projects
to qualify. I just raise that.
And then, for Mr. Christensen, I am glad you noted that the
watershed projects that NRCS engages in have been very
successful. And yet you mention that the primary benefit of
these have been to local communities. And I say that's what is
supposed to be happening. And for us to take the position that
somehow in these tough economic times the local communities, as
you say, should now be able to step forward and do that which
they used to do with the support of NRCS, I think is really not
addressing the economic realities being faced by our local
communities.
And that is why I am so concerned, knowing firsthand,
meeting with the farmers in my district, and the kind of
support and work that they have done with NRCS, that I think
that that's harsh. It's harsh. And I should think that a
relatively small program like your watershed program that has
that kind of, in many ways, a disproportionately beneficial
impact on the small communities is a program that ought to be
kept.
So, that's why a plea to you. I hope that if we can revisit
this situation, that we will be able to do better by these
programs. If you want to make a comment, please feel free.
Mr. Christensen. Well, thank you for your sentiments,
Congresswoman. We appreciate that. And the project you mention
certainly was a very valuable project. I think the total
project cost was around $11 million. So very significant to
that local community.
I think it's a challenge for us, because we're balancing
the need for those projects against many other competing needs.
We also have a host of farm bill programs at our access that
can do some of the same things--not all of the same things--
that were available under the watershed operations. And
certainly I think we would have a long-term interest in working
with you, working with the Army Corps, in regards to our water
resources programs, taking a step back, looking at them more
holistically, and seeing what the future might be.
But right now it is a challenge, because historically, in
the watershed operations piece, those projects in recent years
have all been through congressional directive, and we don't get
the opportunity to prioritize perhaps for the greatest public
benefit. Thank you.
Ms. Hirono. Oh, I see. The congressionally directed
spending very much reflects the needs of a community that we
are in a best position to identify. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Cravaack, do you have
a question?
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
the witnesses here today.
I come from Minnesota, the northeastern portion of
Minnesota, border of Lake Superior. And the Great Lakes
navigation system is extremely vital for us. It brings about
vast quantities of coal from Montana and Wyoming and Lake
Superior ports and power generation through a lot of the
metropolitan areas. Also, it transports over 80 percent of our
iron ore that goes to our U.S. steel. It saves about
approximately $3.6 billion per year than the next least
expensive mode of transportation.
The indirect benefits are approximately $3.4 billion in
revenue, and approximately $1.3 billion in Federal, State, and
local taxes, as well. It also provides a positive economic
impact to the U.S. economy. It's a huge job provider,
obviously. There are 44,000 jobs directly related to the
maritime transportation of--shippers, longshoremen; 54,000 in
the mining industry are dependant upon this great waterway, as
well as 138,000 jobs in the steel industry, including miners,
as well.
My question is, in relation to all this, the President's
budget requests $691 million of the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund for harbor dredging and related disposal of dredging
materials. It's expected the balance of--the Harbor Maintenance
Trust Fund balance right now is $6.12 billion to increase to
$6.93 billion. Only one-third of the Nation's Federal
navigation projects are currently at their authorized depths
and widths. Eight out of ten of the Nation's largest ten ports
are not at their authorized depths or widths, as well.
I have the Federal harbor--two harbors up in the Great
Lakes--and it has not been dredged since 1976. My question is,
in lieu of this great commerce that's on the Great Lakes, why
is this--do you know why this administration has requested such
a small amount from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund?
And, General, I am basically directing that question at
you, sir.
General Van Antwerp. On any given year about $1.4 billion
comes into the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. This year it's
budgeted at about $750 million. The way that we do the
programming of that is that we focus on those harbors that are
high use. A low-use harbor, if I could define it, would be one
that has less than a million tons of commerce within the
harbor, or an inland waterway that has less than about a
billion ton-miles. So, we have some criteria for how we
allocate the dredging funds.
As Ms. Darcy said, what the administration's proposal is,
with the additional money that comes into the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund that is not used for the dredging
portion, is to significantly expand the use of that, and even
by other agencies, but all to support the coastal navigation
business. So that's kind of where we are in the prioritization
of that--of the use of that money.
Mr. Cravaack. Can you tell me, is the Harbor Maintenance
Trust Fund bringing in a sufficient amount of revenue at this
time?
General Van Antwerp. The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund does
have sufficient revenue.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. So my question would go back again. Why
do you think the President's administration just brought out
$691 million of the--right now--correct me if I'm wrong--isn't
there $6.93 billion in the trust fund? Is that correct, sir?
Ms. Darcy. I'm not sure of that exact number, but I know
it's close to $6 billion.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. And the President is just requesting $691
million. Is that correct, ma'am?
Ms. Darcy. I believe--actually, I think it's $783 million
out of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Is that right? It's
$783 million.
Mr. Cravaack. Isn't that quite a small amount, compared to
the amount of money that is actually within the Harbor Trust
Fund?
And, due to our recent infrastructure challenges that we
have--for example, the Soo Locks, as well--don't you think that
we should start allocating these funds, to make sure we have
these vital waterways ready to go?
We're just--you know, as I understand the Corps is
basically a fix-it-as-it-goes kind of mentality right now, in
regards to locks. Why are we not investing $6.93 billion into
our vitally needed infrastructure in these areas? And I only
have eight seconds left.
Ms. Darcy. Well, Congressman, what we are doing is looking
at the entire balance in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund for
the harbor maintenance as a whole, including navigation,
dredging, but in addition, other needs, Federal interests,
investment needs in ports, in national ports, including things
like security.
Mr. Cravaack. I yield back, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, thank you. Representative Napolitano. A
question?
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, certainly. I
am going to take a different track.
We have levees located on Indian Reservations. And how is
the Agency handling safety and remedial activities related to
these levees found on Indian Reservations?
And, as a follow-up, are there any programs that the tribes
can utilize or access that would allow them the ability to
protect their citizens?
General Van Antwerp. Thank you, Congresswoman. We have
about 70 levee systems that are on tribal lands. Those are
basically operated and maintained by the tribes there.
First of all, we have a lot of data, because a lot of those
were built by the Corps of Engineers at an earlier time. So we
are providing----
Mrs. Napolitano. A percentage of how many of them were
built by the Corps?
General Van Antwerp. I----
Mrs. Napolitano. Are they still maintained by the Corps?
General Van Antwerp. They aren't maintained by the Corps.
They--the ones even that were built by the Corps have been
turned over for operation and maintenance by the tribes. But we
do have data on those, and we are providing data to the tribes
on those levees.
The other part is we're going to begin to reach out to the
tribes this year to try and help them, if there is other
information that needs to be gathered that has to do with the
condition and that of those levees. And we have experts in that
area.
Mrs. Napolitano. Would that reaching out--will be able to
identify which are the more salient, in prioritizing?
General Van Antwerp. Absolutely. It will help them
prioritize, and it will also really discuss the risk and life
safety aspects of those levees.
Mrs. Napolitano. Any of those programs going to include any
retrofitting to be able to have some of those pumps run,
hopefully with sunshine?
General Van Antwerp. That's a great idea. We will try and
throw that into the mix there, but trying to make the system
self-reliant and not require power generation and other things.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, the Corps visited the electrical
contractors in my area a couple of years back, and they were
able to find that they are utilizing about 85 percent of their
own created energy. And I would hope that we start looking at
innovative ways of being able to save money, and be able to
produce more energy with--especially if you have levees that
can be utilized.
Why is there a delay in the implementation of the Folsom
Dam joint Federal project for the city of Sacramento flood
control? Is there a funding issue, or some other impediment?
And what is that impediment?
[No response.]
Mrs. Napolitano. It's not in my area, but it's a California
issue.
[No response.]
Mrs. Napolitano. Sorry, I threw a curve.
General Van Antwerp. A little bit of a curve. You didn't.
But we need to get back with you. But it's a contractor
congestion issue, which is causing delay in that project, as I
understand. There is so much work that needs to be done in the
amount of space allocated to do it.
Mrs. Napolitano. OK. Well, it would--I would hope that,
because of the economy, contractors are willing to do it for
less than the original--how would I say--estimate, guesstimate.
So I am hoping that one will--well, if you would, I would very
much like to have an answer.
The last one is the watershed programs. Could you explain
the efforts the Agency is making in working with local entities
in California to capture rainwater? I'm ranking member in the
subcommittee of water and power. That's a great issue that we
have been working on. Capturing of rainwater in small settling
basins seems to be cost effective to augment local water
supplies in reducing flood risk. And does the Agency have a
definitive business and project task associated with developing
these programs in the west?
General Van Antwerp. It is a great idea, and it is
something that needs to be done, and we do--and we are working.
I've got a--as soon as I find it here----
Mrs. Napolitano. You can get that info to me.
General Van Antwerp. We've got the activities on Prado,
Hansom, Whittier. And one of the issues that we have to look at
is the ability to hold more water in these features.
Mrs. Napolitano. Right.
General Van Antwerp. And so, we have to look at the
integrity of the dams. But the idea of the more conservation to
help the groundwater recharge and all that is excellent.
Mrs. Napolitano. Right. Well, talk to me about the Whittier
Narrows, because we've been working on that for about 3, 4
years. And we were able to get the funding, and yet this was to
do an update of a study that was completed, and it's still not
being done. And that would help be able to capture more water
and help protect the communities below it from potential flood
risk.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will look forward to working
with you again.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Harris, you have a
question?
Dr. Harris. Yes, thank you very much. And thank you for the
witnesses coming before us today. Let me just ask a question of
the secretary and the general.
Your prepared remarks that were handed out says that the
administration's priorities with regards here to the matters
before us today--I think Assistant Secretary Darcy's says that
it is ``to help restore the environment and revitalize the
economy, while also reflecting the need to put the country on a
fiscally sustainable path.'' And interestingly, you say,
``restore the environment before revitalizing the economy,''
which I think is very interesting, given the financial
condition we're in.
Whereas, the general says the priorities are ``to reduce
the deficit, revitalize the economy, and restore the
environment.'' Could you just very briefly--which is it? What
do you view the purpose of the Army Corps to do? Is it to
restore the environment? Or is it to actually create jobs and
revitalize the economy?
Assistant Secretary, you can have first at it.
Ms. Darcy. It's all of those things.
Dr. Harris. Well, Madam Secretary, you cannot have all of
those things. Priority means one is number one and one is
number two. Is it revitalizing the economy, or is it restoring
the environment? That's what priorities are all about. I'm
sorry, it's just a plain meaning of the English language.
Ms. Darcy. I think that by restoring the environment you
can revitalize the economy.
Dr. Harris. Well, Madam Secretary, I'm going to disagree,
and we are going to talk a little bit about that today.
Now, the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. This seems to be a
little secret going on here, because I know I'm new to
Washington, but when someone puts the number $6.9 billion in
front of my eyes when we're borrowing money from the Chinese to
pay our debts, I wonder a little bit.
And there was these nebulous things, ``Well, we're going to
expand things,'' and, ``We're going to have other agencies
involved.'' Why aren't you just using it to dredge harbors,
like it's supposed to be used for?
I mean I've got a shipping harbor, I've got people coming
into my office saying, ``You know, they're taking taxes from me
to do this, and they're not dredging harbors.'' What's the big
secret? What is it, this $7 billion which could reduce all the
backlogs of all the dredging?
I've got a little commercial harbor in my district. Army
Corps comes in in 1980, builds a breakwater that then causes
silting into the main channel, and now can't dredge the main
channel anymore. We got $7 billion sitting around we could--all
the backlogs could be gone.
What's the dirty little secret here? What is that slush
fund going to be used for?
Ms. Darcy. The Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, as I had
mentioned earlier--I want to just correct the record--what is
in the President's budget this year for the Corps of Engineers'
use of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund is $758 million. I had
said--it's $758 million of that----
Dr. Harris. I am interested in the $6.9 billion. What is it
going to be used for? And be brief, I only have two more
minutes, and I've got another couple of questions.
Ms. Darcy. Yes, OK----
Dr. Harris. It should be a very simple question. It's $7
billion. I hope there is a simple answer to what it's going to
be used for.
Ms. Darcy. What it's going to be used for is for other
Federal interests in the harbors----
Dr. Harris. Why not dredging?
Ms. Darcy. Partially it's going to be used----
Dr. Harris. Why not use every dollar of it to maintain the
ports? Because that's what the people paying that tax think
it's going for.
Ms. Darcy. Well, there are other Federal interests in those
ports that the administration feels this money can be used for.
Dr. Harris. I understand that. But the people who actually
pay that tax feel they're paying for it to dredge a harbor. I
know the administration feels that once tax money comes to
Washington, it's theirs to keep. This is $7 billion. All the
backlog of every dredging project in the country could be paid
for if we spent those $7 billion on dredging.
Ms. Darcy. Well----
Dr. Harris. Is it the administration--does the
administration--do they not feel that that is important enough
to remove that backlog?
Ms. Darcy. It is important. However, the receipts that we
have in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund all need to be
appropriated.
Dr. Harris. General, the Davis-Bacon Act, are the Army
Corps projects subject to Davis-Bacon Acts, if they exceed a
certain amount of money?
General Van Antwerp. Yes, we are.
Dr. Harris. Could we save a great deal of money by removing
that constraint, or--and just funding more projects?
General Van Antwerp. If you did away with the Davis-Bacon
Act?
Dr. Harris. If we stipulated that funds used in the
appropriation this year, just like we attempted to do in the
CR, could not go for--could not be--Davis-Bacon Act constraints
would not be utilized in those projects.
General Van Antwerp. It would allow you to do more
projects----
Dr. Harris. That's what I thought. Thank you. And, finally,
there is a half-a-billion dollars for environmental aquatic
ecosystem restoration. If we delayed that, and spent that money
to creating jobs by enhancing our water-borne economy, such as
the gentleman from Louisiana suggested--who has left--wouldn't
that be a help to our economy right now, if instead of doing
something which could be delayed, because these projects are
not critical in terms of getting a ship to the harbor--and I
understand you want to use the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
for security, but I've got to tell you, if you don't dredge the
channel, you don't have to worry about harbor security. No
ships are coming in.
So, why don't we move some of those monies from where it's
not urgent, and move them into areas where we have real ongoing
needs that would enhance the economy? General?
General Van Antwerp. I guess, first of all, in the amount
of money from our budget that goes into the ecosystems is about
18 percent. In those five significant ecosystems there are
other agencies whose budgets go to those.
A lot of those issues have to do with our Nation's future.
I think, that--they have to do with the Everglades, and have to
do with the Bay-Delta, and these are huge drivers for our
ecosystem, as a country. So I think that's why they are
significant ecosystems, and we are putting those dollars there.
Dr. Harris. OK, thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you, Mr. Van Antwerp, for the work you do for the country, and
especially here, in the District of Columbia.
You will recall in the last water bill, 2007, included the
Anacostia watershed initiative. This was a landmark bill,
because it was the first bill, comprehensive bill, to clean up
America's forgotten river, the Anacostia River. In 2010 you
rolled out a 10-year plan for carrying out the Anacostia
watershed initiative. And I understand that there is a Sligo
Creek demonstration project, as well. I would like to know the
status of the 10-year plan.
General Van Antwerp. Congresswoman, I am going to have to
get the staff to get back with you on the status of the plan,
unless you have it, Ms. Secretary.
Ms. Darcy. Yes. The plan is currently under review at the
Office of Management and Budget.
Ms. Norton. It's under review with specific next steps for
the plan?
Ms. Darcy. I believe so.
Ms. Norton. What is the status of the Sligo Creek
demonstration project?
Ms. Darcy. That I don't know. I would have to get back to
you on that.
Ms. Norton. Thirty days, please.
Ms. Darcy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. Get back to us on that. Mr. Van Antwerp, the
levee project on the National Mall was begun a few years--a few
months ago, and I understand was to be completed this year,
2010. That is very important. It protects all the monuments on
the mall from floods and that part of downtown Washington where
all the Federal buildings are, and the like.
What is the status of the levee building going on on the
National Mall now?
General Van Antwerp. On the 16th of September, a
construction contract was awarded to build the 17th Street
closure, and that is progressing on schedule.
Ms. Norton. When do you expect the levee--Potomac Levee, I
believe it is called--to be completed?
General Van Antwerp. I believe the completion date is
September 2011.
Ms. Norton. And you're on time?
General Van Antwerp. And we're on schedule.
Ms. Norton. Finally, you are also aware that in part of the
District of Columbia where American University is located also
was located a chemical munitions site, perhaps the only
chemical munitions site located in a residential neighborhood
in the United States. We are pleased that much has been done to
clean that site. I toured the destruction of some munitions
only a few months ago.
Suppose more munitions are discovered, just as those were
accidentally discovered. Would the Corps be prepared to move
right in? Would it have the funds to move right in to handle
such a discovery in this residential neighborhood?
General Van Antwerp. Those funds aren't out of Civil Works
funds. But past history would say we would be prepared and we
would take the appropriate action, if that was discovered.
Ms. Norton. Yes, I understand that those funds simply come
out of funds that are already authorized to deal with such
things.
General Van Antwerp. Right, for those purposes, yes.
Ms. Norton. So you are saying today that, were we to find
somebody to uncover in her backyard yet another mound of
munitions, the Corps would be ready to move right back in to
remove those munitions?
General Van Antwerp. We would work with DoD to move back in
and take care of those munitions.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Van Antwerp, and thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Herrera Beutler?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a
couple of specific questions, but one that's a little more
process-driven. I'm going to start with that.
I mentioned, you know, three main things in my opening. And
one of the ones--more specifically, we are starting to explore,
legislatively, ways to do this. But I wanted to get your
feedback on timelines for permitting and the process for
appeals. It's my understanding that if a permit is denied,
basically, the only place that a permit seeker can go for an
appeal is the Corps. Is that correct?
General Van Antwerp. Through the Corps or the courts? I
didn't----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Corps, excuse me, Army Corps.
General Van Antwerp. The Corps. Yes. And basically, what we
try and do is work with the applicant. If there are issues--and
all along, issues are resolved, and we're looking for the least
damaging, practicable alternative. That's what we're looking
for. And so, most times, things can be worked out. But it is a
give-and-take and sometimes a compromise on what they would
originally have liked to do.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So, I have had a couple folks who have
come to me, and they have been seeking funds that were--that
are appropriated that are available, but they have 2 years to
use them, starting January. And it had to do with two types of
permits. And forgive me if I don't remember this right. I think
it was the national--there is, like, a national permit and an
individual. And the individual is a little bit easier----
General Van Antwerp. We have a nationwide, and then we have
an individual permit.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Yes.
General Van Antwerp. So----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And so, when I had some folks locally
looking to move forward on a project to receive those funds in
concert with the community--a tremendous project, jobs, jobs,
jobs--they communicated to me that the office that they were
working with--and I'm a little split, anything to do with the
Columbia River, we get--we deal with Portland, and anything
north of that we deal with Seattle.
Their comments to me were, ``We don't even know''--we were
told--and they attempted to push us into an individual, but
because of the amount of space that they're looking at, and the
mitigation, and everything else, they're going to need a
nationwide, national--I'm going to say that wrong, but you know
which one I'm talking about.
Is there a way--one of the concerns I have heard is they
won't be told if there are problems in this whole process until
they get to the end. And they've got 2 years. They have a
running time clock. And the only impediment we have run up
against so far are people dealing with that permit in this
timeframe. Is that something you can help us with?
General Van Antwerp. Well, I have the division commander
sitting in the room today, and he is hearing what you're
saying, and we're going to look into this permit. We will get
with your staff.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Great.
General Van Antwerp. And we will look at it, and we will
get our regulatory people, and we will see where we can come
to.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Great. That would be perfect.
General Van Antwerp. OK.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And let me step back, too, since we
have got the gentleman in the room. Capital Lake. In my
district we have the State capital. There is a specific lake
right there that the State and the localities are working on,
how to manage that. And my concern is that the Corps may have
begun to study this lake without any invitation from the State
authorities managing the lake. Our governor is involved. No one
has said, ``U.S. Army Corps, we need you here,'' yet that study
has begun. And, as far as I know, none of the members of the
State capital committee have put out any requests. And there is
a lot of concern because, once you all get involved, things
change.
And at this time of major tightening belts, right, we were
all talking about projects that we want, and ``Your budget is
cut,'' and this is a nightmare. In my mind, I think that
streamlining the permit process and then not getting involved
where there is no request seems like a great way to manage your
budget.
General Van Antwerp. We will have to look into that
particular project. But generally, we wouldn't--if we go to the
next step in the study, the feasibility stage, we actually have
to have a cost-sharing partner, a local sponsor, if you will.
But if it's a life/health/safety, we may be looking at
something that's life/health/safety-related.
But again, we can work with your staff, we can look at that
particular project, tell you exactly what we are doing, if we
are doing something there.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Great, great. And I am just going to
lodge this one, because I don't have time to ask--get into the
details of it. But another area where we're looking at is the
Twin Cities Project in Lewis County, and the flooding that
takes place there, and what your plan is to fix it, and what
the community is asking for. That's another area where we're
going to need to work together.
General Van Antwerp. OK.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Capuano, do you have a
question?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, Davis-Bacon.
I am just curious. How would you be able to save money if
Davis-Bacon were gone?
General Van Antwerp. I think it really is just from some of
the costs that are associated with Davis-Bacon wages.
Mr. Capuano. So wages. So you're basically----
General Van Antwerp. It's people.
Mr. Capuano. You would pay workers less.
General Van Antwerp. I am not sure where the question was
originated, what that is. I mean there is----
Mr. Capuano. Well, if----
General Van Antwerp. There is a reason the Corps uses
Davis-Bacon.
Mr. Capuano. Well, I understand that. But I mean if the
Davis-Bacon law were gone----
General Van Antwerp. Yes.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. You would basically pay people
doing work on your projects lower wages. That's the way you
save money if Davis-Bacon is gone, is it not?
General Van Antwerp. I would----
Mr. Capuano. If you would pay less wages, who would get
those lower wages? Would it be the people who owned the
companies, or would it be the bricklayers and the steel workers
and the laborers on those projects? Who gets impacted by Davis-
Bacon, people who own the company, or the people who actually
do the work?
General Van Antwerp. I would say you're making excellent
points. This was the first I had heard of this discussion, so--
--
Mr. Capuano. No, I understand. But as I understand it----
General Van Antwerp. I guess that would be the case.
Mr. Capuano. I just want to make sure I understand the law
correctly.
General Van Antwerp. That would be the case.
Mr. Capuano. As I understand the law, it requires you to
pay the people doing the work, the bricklayers----
General Van Antwerp. Right.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. The carpenters----
General Van Antwerp. Right.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. Wages that are conducive to the
area they live in.
General Van Antwerp. Right.
Mr. Capuano. So, by saving money, if Davis-Bacon were gone,
you would be basically--not you, but if it were gone and we
didn't live by that, working people would get lower wages. I
just wanted to make sure that we were clear on that, because
that's my understanding of it. I didn't think you were wasting
money, I thought you were helping to maintain the middle
class--not you; the whole county--and that's what the Davis-
Bacon law is all about.
Just as a point of history, do you know who Mr. Davis and
Mr. Bacon were? They were two Republican Members of this House.
And do you know who signed that law in 1931? The noted crazy
Leftie, President Herbert Hoover. Those are the people that
decided to build the middle class. So it's not where I intended
to go.
I want to talk a little bit about the Harbor Maintenance
tax myself. I--my problem with the Harbor Maintenance tax is
not necessary how you use it, though, like anything else, I'm
sure I could disagree with some things. But my problem is the
competitive advantage that you give to neighboring ports that
don't get hit with that tax at a later time, which is a
different issue for a different discussion.
And, by the way, I think the Corps does a great job keeping
Boston Harbor open on a regular basis, and dredging.
But what I really want to talk about was I wanted to make
sure that I understand the Corps' desires and goals. And I'm
sure that I know the answers, but I wanted to ask them anyway.
When the Corps gets into a project, if you were going to, say,
do some dredging, and widen a channel, the--you're not widening
a channel in order to reduce the size of the vessels passing
through that channel, are you? That's not the goal. You're
trying to keep it open for bigger vessels, to meet modern
requirements.
And when we do a bridge-over that the Corps is involved in,
if we widen the span of that bridge, again, you're not trying
to do it so we can get smaller ships through that bridge, is
that correct?
And if you were to have a project that somehow
inadvertently, after you have dredged the channel, and after
the bridge has been built, that the result of that, because of
some changes in the situation, were to be that smaller ships
had to go through that, that bigger ships could not longer
pass, that would be something I would assume the Corps would
want to be involved in addressing and fixing. Is that a fair
statement?
General Van Antwerp. That's a fair statement. We have an
authorized width and depth of our projects. And that would be
the optimum to maintain it to that level. Very few of them are
maintained to the optimum, or to the authorized----
Mr. Capuano. But the purpose of that is to allow modern-
day, bigger ships----
General Van Antwerp. To pass, absolutely.
Mr. Capuano [continuing]. To service our commercial needs.
Is that----
General Van Antwerp. Absolutely.
Mr. Capuano. So that if somehow, by widening a channel, by
changing radiuses and the like, that something happened that
that channel was no longer available to be used by not just
wider ships, but the ships that are currently using it, I would
think that the Corps would want to help address that issue. Is
that a fair statement? Thank you. We will be talking again
soon. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Reed, do you have a question?
Mr. Reed. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony today.
General, I want to start by saying it's refreshing to hear
a direct response to a question from a congressional committee.
You gave us a direct answer, and that doesn't happen all the
time. I've been here two months, and it's amazing to me the
number of witnesses who come in here and dance around the
questions and don't give us their honest assessment and
opinion. So I respect your answers, sir, and I appreciate you
dealing with us candidly.
Now, moving forward, I want to get into a little bit of
some issues that I am facing back in my district, and not
specifically on any specific projects. But one issue that came
to my attention recently is in the areas of the flood insurance
mapping revisions that are occurring. And we have had a lot of
debate back in--western New York is where I'm from--about the
maps, and who is going to certify the levees.
And the roundabout discussion that has occurred is I'm
getting fingers pointed all over the place. And my
understanding, talking to my staff, is that what's happening is
a lot of the agencies--whatever agency it may be: FEMA, the
Corps--are saying, ``We're not going to certify the levees
because of what happened in Hurricane Katrina, et cetera. We
don't want to be on the hook for making those determinations.''
So now what's happened, the proposed maps I see are being
rolled out without those levees being designated on the maps,
which obviously changes the flood plain, which obviously
changes the requirements to get flood insurance for homeowners
and people purchasing a home, which lacks common sense. I walk
on those levees. I go down the rivers and fish on those rivers
walking over the levees. I know they're there.
My question to you: are you familiar with this issue,
either one of you? And who is best to answer the question?
General Van Antwerp. Yes.
Mr. Reed. OK.
General Van Antwerp. And I can answer the question.
Mr. Reed. Please do.
General Van Antwerp. It's the National Flood Insurance
Program.
Mr. Reed. Correct.
General Van Antwerp. It is the FEMA program.
Mr. Reed. Correct.
General Van Antwerp. And it is the responsibility of the
local community to provide the documentation that the levee
meets the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
And basically, it's what we call a 100-year event, meaning that
it's a 1 percent chance of possibility of happening. That is
the standard for the National Flood Insurance Program.
The Corps of Engineers, we have projects that are much
greater than 100-year and much less. Our inspections basically
are to determine if it meets its design criteria.
Mr. Reed. OK.
General Van Antwerp. And so, if it's an 800-year levee, we
expect that it needs to meet an 800-year event.
So, basically, it is the local community's responsibility
for the National Flood Insurance Program, to provide that
documentation. What documentation the Corps has--and we have it
on a lot of levees that are now owned and operated by a local
entity, we provide that data. And a lot of times it's most of
the data that they might need for the FEMA piece.
Mr. Reed. OK. Because my concern is it still doesn't
address the practical problem we have, in that we got to get
these levees located on these maps, so that people who are
protected by these levees don't have to go out and buy flood
insurance. It's a very practical problem.
Do you see any solution to it that you could offer us here
today----
General Van Antwerp. Well, if----
Mr. Reed [continuing]. In getting over that hurdle, at
least to get these maps updated----
General Van Antwerp. Right.
Mr. Reed [continuing]. And make sure that people don't have
to purchase flood insurance when they really don't need to buy
it?
General Van Antwerp. We--if the documentation is provided
to FEMA, that levee will be on the map. I guess so----
Mr. Reed. OK.
General Van Antwerp [continuing]. What they have to do is
they have to get that documentation.
Now, we are trying--we're working with FEMA----
Mr. Reed. What happens if the documentation doesn't exist?
Because a lot of these levees have been constructed, and nobody
has the documentation.
General Van Antwerp. They need to hire an engineer to do
the certification.
Mr. Reed. OK. So the local community has to pick up that--
--
General Van Antwerp. That's----
Mr. Reed [continuing]. And go out and get the engineer,
and----
General Van Antwerp. That's right.
Mr. Reed [continuing]. Come in and document.
General Van Antwerp. That's right.
Mr. Reed. OK. My local communities won't be happy with that
answer, but I will be the messenger on that.
One area that I wanted to talk on, Mr. Christensen, we have
a lot of farmers in our district that are impacted by the
Chesapeake Bay initiatives and the TMDLs that are coming down.
What is your role in trying to help and assist the agricultural
community comply with those implementations, if they do occur?
Mr. Christensen. Thank you for the question, sir. We are
very actively involved. We have a special program called the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed Program, given to us in the 2008 farm
bill. So we have special funding on top of our normal
programmatic funding to help farmers with nutrient management
plans, cover crops, all the types of practices that would be
helpful to the nutrient management issue. So we are working
with them on a voluntary basis, cost-sharing on those
practices.
At the same time, we are collaborating with EPA on the
larger issues. But the bottom line for us is we are actively
involved with the individual producers on the landscape with
the conservation efforts.
Mr. Reed. So, if those--I guess I'm out of time. I will
have a conversation with you offline.
All right. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Lankford, have you got a
question?
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let me run a couple of questions
past you, as well, and a larger context, and specific to my
area. I'm in central Oklahoma. Let me start with that one.
We are in one of those areas around the Port of Catoosa,
which is the Mississippi River area, one of the tributaries. We
have talked before already, and met, and discussed the locks
and the dams and everything to be able to work your way up and
down the tributaries.
Tell me on the priority list where that seems to fall, and
just the movement, because again, you are moving all the cargo
in and out of the central part of the United States when you're
moving up and down the Mississippi and through the tributaries.
I see on your list lower priority items and such like that.
Where do those tributaries begin to fall?
General Van Antwerp. Well, they fit as a navigation system,
and it's a lock. We have 241 locks in the Corps. They are about
58.3 years old. They take a lot of operation and maintenance
funds. We look at each lock. We have done inventories and
inspections to know which are the ones that are of the most
risk. We also hear from our navigation partners that are
running bulk cargo and other things, because it's a very
efficient way to do it. And so that's how we manage the
priorities of what we work on in any given year, using our
operation and maintenance funds.
Mr. Lankford. So it's basically whichever lock is in the
worst shape possible, then you just target from that spot?
General Van Antwerp. A lot of it is fix the worst first,
but it also has to do with the risk of failure and the impact
of the failure of that lock.
Mr. Lankford. Right. Well, you have this list of lower
priority items. I am kind of wondering the metrics on that, how
you get to that spot, and who makes the decision on which items
nationally end up on lower priority and which ones rise up to
higher priority items.
General Van Antwerp. Again, we look for those projects that
have large ton-miles, and carry a lot of commercial navigation
cargo. And we prioritize those. The risk of failure is part of
it.
So, we can--we could come lay out how we do the priorities,
but that's basically how we laid that out.
Mr. Lankford. OK. Let me ask a general question, just for
you to be able to process. And anyone can answer this, and may
be familiar.
With every Federal agency there is going to be a lot of
conversation with other Federal agencies. You deal with a lot
of agencies, just in your day-to-day operation. Is there any
one agency you can make us aware of to say, ``Projects are
driven up in cost and slow down in time because of our
interaction with this agency?'' I know this is going to make
you the favorite of that agency once you answer this, but there
is bound to be an issue that you're dealing with several
agencies saying, ``You know what? This tends to slow down
projects and drive up costs when we're dealing with this agency
and getting things done.''
[No response.]
Mr. Lankford. You are welcome, by the way, for this
question.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Darcy. We work great with the agencies represented at
this table, as well as our other Federal agencies. Quite
frankly, in the year-and-a-half that I have been in this job, I
have found the collaboration between the Federal family to be
better than I had hoped. So I am not giving anybody up here.
Mr. Lankford. OK.
Ms. Darcy. Because we have had a great experience so far.
Mr. Lankford. OK. Everybody good with that?
[No response.]
Mr. Lankford. Let me walk through a couple things. By the
way, I would hope that part of our role here would be to help
resolve issues. So if issues come up, we want to be able to
step in and resolve, and see if we can't--for the good of the
country. This is not a partisan issue; we've got to get things
done. And so, as issues come up, we would like to know on
those, so we can help engage with that.
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget suggests
legislation for a user fee for technical assistance cost for
the conservation plan. Do you have any idea who is going to be
charged that user fee, and what the service is we're going to
be provided in exchange for that? Are you familiar with that?
Mr. Christensen. Sir, I am not too familiar with it. I know
it's an issue being worked on. Conservation planning is one of
the core functions that we have historically provided. And I
guess the view is that there is some opportunity to recoup some
of that cost. But I am not familiar with the specifics----
Mr. Lankford. Who is actually going to be tagged with that
fee, and what they're going to get for it. That hasn't come
out?
Mr. Christensen. I would have to come back to you on that.
Mr. Lankford. OK. That will be an interesting one to be
able to see. They are looking to fee--as we have already
discussed with the harbor fees and such, there is a perception
that they get a return for that in dredging. And sometimes
there is a frustration on that in any location.
Let me just run one other question real quickly past you.
In the design of any project, you have outside contractors that
do the design on many of these, is that correct? So you will
hire in a company to actually do that design?
General Van Antwerp. We do it two ways, if you're referring
to the Corps projects.
Mr. Lankford. Yes.
General Van Antwerp. We can do an in-house design, we do
have our own architects.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
General Van Antwerp. We try and keep enough to keep the
competency in the Corps----
Mr. Lankford. Right.
General Van Antwerp [continuing]. Because when you're
writing a contract, you need that competency. Or, we contract
those out.
Mr. Lankford. Typically, when it's contracted out, do you
also allow the architect that did the design work to then
supervise the construction? Or is that then taken over by a
Corps person, and the architect only does the design and a
Corps person supervises?
General Van Antwerp. Generally, the project--if it's a
design bid build, then the contractor builds the design that
the architect did, and the Corps of Engineers supervises the
construction. But we always have that architect on a string
to--for a request for information. ``Why did that go like
that?''
Mr. Lankford. Right.
General Van Antwerp. And things are resolved. We also have
a design build. We do those, which----
Mr. Lankford. I'm out of time. I would just recommend,
obviously, looking close at having that architect on hand.
There is a reason--they know their plans best--to having them
on hand during part of that construction. I think that would
save us some value, long-term. So thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. General, I have another question. I
understand--you know, we talk about cost, and we need to
streamline the process on--and your performance reviews, I
think that's great, we're going to look at that.
It's my understanding on the Ohio River there are some
hydropower projects that--I know one at the Robert Byrd
facility, it's getting up and running, starting in the planning
process and the permitting process with FERC, the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, and the Corps. But I also
understand there isn't a lot of coordination between these two
agencies regarding licensing and permitting. What can be done
to address that issue to move this forward in a more expedited
fashion?
General Van Antwerp. Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, you have
captured it. Absolutely there has got to be partnering between
the agencies, because we are looking for such things as cooling
water and environmental impacts of this. So, we will look into
that specifically and make sure that that partnering is being
done, and we are expeditiously moving that forward.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. That would be helpful. I think, you know,
run some of this concurrently----
General Van Antwerp. Right, absolutely.
Mr. Gibbs. I would appreciate it. Secretary Darcy, as you
know, recently the EPA retroactively revoked a permit from a
mining operation in West Virginia. And, you know, I think this
causes problems across the whole economy, because people put
capital together to put projects together and get the permit,
do the environmental impact studies and everything.
And maybe this is for the general, too, since, you know,
the Corps approved the permit and the EPA revoked it 3 years
after the fact, and if their investment--what kind of security
or ``assurety'' can we give to any operation that is putting a
project together and gets the permit that they're just not
going to get it revoked after it is approved? Because this is
unprecedented.
Ms. Darcy. Well, I think, as you say, the Corps of
Engineers did issue this permit in 2007. I think you're
referring to the mine permit that was vetoed by the EPA. We
were in collaboration in developing the permit. But under 404
of the Clean Water Act, the EPA does have the veto authority to
veto any permit that----
Mr. Gibbs. Well, wasn't the EPA working with the Corps in
concert during the environmental impact study and all of the
permitting process? Weren't you guys working together?
Ms. Darcy. We were in consultation during the development
of the permit. Yes, sir.
General Van Antwerp. With all of our permits we consult
with the EPA. So it was consulted on initially, and then other
things have changed. But they do have the authorization under
404 to do what they did.
Mr. Gibbs. It appears to me under 404--and I know the
guidance that they're going to be coming out with to expand
their jurisdiction on the Clean Water Act--they're kind of
driving. It looks to me they're driving the train, and you guys
are getting run over. So I have serious concerns about what's
happening. And whatever we can do to help the Corps on this
issue--because I think the EPA is driving the train here. Do
you feel like you have been run over by the EPA and the
permitting process?
Ms. Darcy. No, sir. We are currently developing Clean Water
Act guidance with the EPA and anything that is being reviewed
within the administration, and that would be--it would be a
joint guidance.
Mr. Gibbs. So to just follow up on that, you support the
expanded jurisdiction with the Nexus provision and everything
that would go beyond navigable waters?
Ms. Darcy. We are currently developing the guidance, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, OK. Well, we will probably have some
hearings on that in the future, when you put your guidance out.
Ms. Darcy. OK.
Mr. Gibbs. Also, General, you know the Nation's water
resources structure averages about 60 years old, and we have
discussed that. What in the administration's plan is there to
recapitalize the infrastructure, so we can continue to provide
economical and reliable, environmentally superior inland
navigation, and reduce the flood risks to the public? You know,
do you have a plan to actually capitalize, so we can get these
projects up and running, repaired, and modernized?
General Van Antwerp. We do have a plan. It's--of course the
flexible part of it is: how long does it take to execute that
plan? But the first part of that plan is know what you have,
and know its condition. We know that.
And so, we also know the risks of failure, because we've
got a lot of history with these different features. But on
dams, and on our hydropower facilities, we have a good plan for
the recapitalization of those projects. It is dependent on
funding for how long it takes to recapitalize.
Mr. Gibbs. I would be interested in working with you on
that plan, help you prioritize it and work through Congress
here to get the job done and clean up the balance sheet, so to
speak.
General Van Antwerp. OK.
Mr. Gibbs. Do you----
Ms. Darcy. Could I just add to that? In particular, we most
particularly want to work with this committee in order to
develop this plan because the recapitalization of all of our
infrastructure, and particularly in the inland waterways, is
just something that we have to look to, to be able to share the
cost. And some kind of recapitalization and evaluation of the
projects that we have, are they still necessary, they still
needed to perform, you know, or are they not needed anymore?
So, also for us to look at the assets we have, and whether
we--they're worth another additional Federal investment, and
how we're going to share that cost.
Mr. Gibbs. I concur with that. We need to do that.
Representative Bishop?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to pick up on
the issue of environmental benefit versus economic benefit. And
I made this point at our last hearing. I represent a district
where we recognize that the environment is the economy, the
economy is the environment. We have a resort economy that needs
a pristine environment.
Isn't it fair to recognize that the--two of the biggest
projects the Corps has ever undertaken, the Everglades project
and the Louisiana coastal project, are projects that have
enormous economic benefit and environmental benefit?
Ms. Darcy. I agree, sir.
Mr. Bishop. So the two do not have to be mutually
exclusive.
Ms. Darcy. No.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Thank you. I want to go to the issue of the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. I want to make sure I understand
the issue. Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund was first created in
1986, signed into law by President Reagan.
Ms. Darcy. Correct.
Mr. Bishop. My understanding is that there is a long
bipartisan history of Presidents requesting an annual
expenditure from the trust fund in an amount significantly
lower than the balance in the trust fund. Is that correct?
Ms. Darcy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. OK. For example, in the last budget that
President Bush submitted to the Congress, the balance in the
trust fund was, at the time he submitted the budget, $5.4
billion. And he requested an expenditure of $729 million.
Ms. Darcy. I am going to trust your facts there, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Trust them. They're right. And isn't it also
true that the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund operates in a
fashion very similar to how the Social Security trust fund
operates? That is to say that revenue comes into the trust
fund, an amount of money less than that revenue in a given year
is spent on the purpose of the fund. And then, whatever amount
is not spent, in effect, reverts to the bottom line and serves
to reduce our deficit if we do not fully expend it.
And if we were to fully expend it, we would be increasing
our outlays, and therefore, increasing our deficit. Is that
correct?
Ms. Darcy. I believe so.
Mr. Bishop. OK. So, one of the reasons that Presidents have
a long bipartisan history of spending less than what's in the
trust fund has been an effort at curtailing our total
expenditures, and therefore, reducing our total deficit. Is
that not correct?
Ms. Darcy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Thank you. I think it's important that we
all have that set of facts.
I want to go--I have a little bit of time left--I want to
go to an issue that is concerning to me. One of the great
debates--that's a hyperbole, it's not a great debate--we are
now in an earmark-free environment.
My understanding is that there are four chiefs reports that
were undertaken by the Corps for which the Corps has spent $34
million to construct the report. Pardon me, to undertake the
reports. But there is no authorization pending to allow the
Corps to move from study to construction, and that the
authorization of such construction would be considered an
earmark. Is that correct, sir?
General Van Antwerp. We have four reports with OMB. I have
signed the chief reports.
Mr. Bishop. Right.
General Van Antwerp. We have another six that I have
signed, the reports that are in the process of moving that
direction. And probably another 16 by the end of this calendar
year will be in the queue.
Mr. Bishop. All of which----
General Van Antwerp. Have projects associated----
Mr. Bishop. But all of which lack authorization to proceed
to construction. Is that correct?
General Van Antwerp. Right. It's pre-authorization at this
point.
Mr. Bishop. OK. So we are significantly at risk of having
made a commitment of taxpayer dollars to undertake studies of
projects that may well never be constructed if, in fact, we
remain in this environment in which the authorization of such
construction would be considered an earmark. Is that correct?
General Van Antwerp. If those projects never went to the
next stage of being authorized and then ultimately
appropriated, then yes.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Thank you. I think I will yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Representative Landry, do you have
any other questions?
Mr. Landry. General, I just want to ask unanimous consent
to enter into the record a correspondence to you with some
exhibits supporting that commerce is being impeded in that
canal.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Landry. I also, just real quickly, want to clear up a
couple of matters. Who is your chief legal counsel, General? I
mean who do you----
General Van Antwerp. We have our own legal counsel. His
name is Earl Stockdale. He is the chief legal counsel for the
Corps.
Mr. Landry. And I guess my only question--so that you
understand a bit of my rub--is that as I try to work through
the Corps' legal strategy, I ask them for correspondence
between you all and the Department of Justice, because you
mentioned you all are in litigation. I'm guessing the Plaintiff
in the case is the Federal Government. Wouldn't you agree?
[No response.]
Mr. Landry. I mean you all are representing the Federal
Government?
General Van Antwerp. Well, it probably is. Department of
Justice has the case. It was remanded to them from the New
Orleans District, so----
Mr. Landry. I guess--they told me I wasn't allowed to see
the correspondence between the Corps and DoJ because it was a
matter of client-attorney privilege, and I am trying to
understand what exactly my position as a Congressman is in this
litigation.
Could you just visit with Earl on that, and see----
General Van Antwerp. I will, I----
Mr. Landry. OK.
General Van Antwerp. I will do that.
Mr. Landry. Thank you so much.
General Van Antwerp. Thank you, Congressman. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Cravaack, do you have any----
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you. I wish Mr. Reed was here, and so I
could explain to him that he got straight answers because you
did come from West Point. So that's probably why he got the
straight answers he wanted.
Also, being in the military myself, I understand about
doing more with less, and we always seem to never get what we
need to accomplish the mission. And if I can, sir, give a shout
out to Colonel Price and Tamara from the St. Louis District,
who have been very responsive to our requests trying to get a
mine open in the Eighth District of Minnesota.
With that, ma'am, I would like to ask you a question. And I
ran out of time, so I will try to be a little bit--I have a
couple of questions that hopefully won't go into a third round
here. But regarding the $7 billion that are in reserve--and the
ranking member kind of gave me a segue into this--basically,
there is no real $7 billion, is there?
Ms. Darcy. I'm not sure what your question is.
Mr. Cravaack. Is there $7 billion in a bank account
somewhere for the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund?
Ms. Darcy. The trust fund collects the revenues and, I
believe that there is--I think it's $6.9 billion in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund.
Mr. Cravaack. So there is $7 billion of cash in a trust
fund somewhere. Is that correct? Is that what you're trying to
tell me?
Ms. Darcy. No. I'm told no.
Mr. Cravaack. In essence, what I am telling you is Congress
has raided that through the years and, in essence, not being
able to give the Army Corps the amount of money they need to
make sure that our infrastructure is up to speed in our locks
and our dams and our waterways.
So, in essence, it's Congress' fault--previous Congresses'
fault--making sure that, by raiding this fund, and depleting--
using these funds for something else. So that is the point I
want to make. That's the dirty little secret about this, is
that correct? There is really no $7 billion sitting in cash
somewhere in this trust fund, is that correct?
Ms. Darcy. I don't know that answer, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. And it has been raided. That's why you're
only getting $690 million, when you could have $7 billion to
get the infrastructure we need to complete making sure the
commerce of this country is working successfully. And we hand
this information to the Corps and say, ``Do more with less,''
when there is plenty that should be available to them. But,
unfortunately, previous Congresses have raided it.
Real quick, if I can go on, EPA. I'm very concerned about
what's happening in a mine--especially coming from a mining
region--where the President has basically said that he has
refused, or basically taken back a permit for a West Virginia
mine. Could you comment on that? And where does the President
get that kind of authority? And are you fighting back?
Ms. Darcy. I believe what you're referring to is the Spruce
Mine permit that was vetoed by the Environmental Protection
Agency. Is that correct, sir?
Mr. Cravaack. That's correct.
Ms. Darcy. OK. As was stated earlier, the Corps of
Engineers issued that permit in 2007. And under 404 of the
Clean Water Act, the Environmental Protection Agency has the
authority to veto a Corps-issued permit. And it's not the Corps
of Engineers' veto, it's the Environmental Protection Agency's
veto.
Mr. Cravaack. Have you fought back on this at all? Have
you----
Ms. Darcy. We don't----
Mr. Cravaack [continuing]. Pushed back on the President and
said, ``Mr. President, where do you get such authority? Where
do you--what's next?'' What else is the President going to--is
he going to take one of my mines and attack a mine in
Minnesota's Eighth District, and decide he's going to shut that
one down, too? Do we give the President authority?
Ms. Darcy. The Environmental Protection Agency has the
authority to veto a Corps-issued permit, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. And that's very interesting about the EPA,
the Environmental Protection Agency. I was very curious about
what you were saying in regards to the Clean Water Act.
Tell me. Do you think that the Clean Water Act is also
reaching out to--for navigable waters? Obviously, this is a
very important concept. Do you believe navigable waters would
include a seasonal slough or a wet meadow?
Ms. Darcy. Sir, I think you may have stepped out of the
room earlier when we talked about the Clean Water Act guidance
that the Corps of Engineers is jointly developing with the
Environmental Protection Agency to look at the definition of
navigable waters and isolated waters.
Mr. Cravaack. Yes, ma'am. That's why I'm asking. I was
here, and I am asking your opinion.
Ms. Darcy. Oh, sorry. I apologize.
Mr. Cravaack. Yes, ma'am. What is your opinion? What are
you going to tell the EPA?
Ms. Darcy. We are currently in discussions with EPA on
defining what the reach of that definition would be.
Mr. Cravaack. OK. I understand that, ma'am. And just let me
express to you at least this Congressman from Minnesota will
fight vehemently for the 10th Amendment to the Constitution,
that waters remain within the States rights. If it's a great
big lake out in the middle of Minnesota called Mille Lacs,
those are States waters. So I just wanted to make that comment.
And I have one second. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Mr. Gibbs. I would just like to make one comment on your
questions. Ms. Secretary, when you talk about veto of the EPA,
its authority to veto, and I think it's pretty clear that this
permit was issued, and it's veto versus revocation. It was
revoked 3 years after you guys approved it. That's not a veto
anymore, that's revoking that permit, and that sets a new,
dangerous precedent. We are going to have hearings on that in
the future, I can guarantee it.
Representative Harris, you have a question?
Dr. Harris. Yes. Thank you very much. You know, normally,
as these go on you actually become more enlightened about an
answer. But I am actually a little less enlightened about an
answer.
Assistant Secretary, where are those $7 billion? I mean the
ranking member suggests that it's just like Social Security,
which would mean there is actually an IOU you hold, and you
hope that it will be repaid one day. Or, actually, for those
young people in the audience, maybe it won't in Social
Security. But is there an IOU, or is there actually cash
sitting around, as is suggested by the representative here on
my right? Or is the answer that you really don't know where $7
billion is, which is a little disconcerting to me, but that is
a legitimate answer, I guess.
Ms. Darcy. My answer would have to be I don't know, and I
am going to get back to you.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much. I am just getting used to
Washington, because I guess $7 billion is not a whole lot of
money, because we just don't know where it is.
Let's pretend that actually it was gone to deficit
reduction in past years, but in this year it isn't. And I think
the testimony was that we're going to collect about $1.4
billion in these taxes. Is that right?
Ms. Darcy. That's----
Dr. Harris. That's on the order. OK. So we--where is the
$700 million budgeted for that does not--is not budgeted for in
those funds? Where is it? I mean on paper you've got a balance
sheet. I mean you're taking in $1.4 billion and you're only
spending $700 million. So is it going to deficit reduction, or
is it going to this other nebulous program, you know, security
or something else that supports harbors? Where is it on the
balance sheet for this year?
Ms. Darcy. Currently, I believe it's going to deficit
reduction. But again, I want to make certain of that before I
answer.
Dr. Harris. OK. And if it goes to deficit--is there just,
like the Social Security fund, as the ranking member suggested,
an IOU that will be there in order for a future transfer to
occur so that, you know my little harbor might get dredged one
day from these taxes that are charged on shippers?
Ms. Darcy. Well, if there is a change in the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund, it has to be a legislative change.
Dr. Harris. Well, I'm just talking about the balance. So,
in other words, if you could get back to me not only on what
exists, but actually are IOUs--I mean is there an
intragovernmental bonding process, which is my understanding of
what happens with Social Security and with things like our
retirement pay and things like that? That's just, you know, of
great concern to me.
The last thing I want to ask is that I think, General and
Assistant Secretary, I think both of you used the term ``social
considerations,'' or something like that. Now I've got to tell
you. When it comes to taking care of a harbor, you know, I
think about dredging, keeping things secure, things like that.
Could you elaborate on what ``social considerations'' might be
for the expenditure of monies that most people think about
going to actually mechanical things, you know, keeping a port
open? Could you just expand on that?
General Van Antwerp. That's a great question. I will start
off on it, at least. Under the Principles and Guidelines, and
the Principles and Standards, which is the concept, the notion
is that you would go beyond just the benefit cost ratio, which
is an economic piece, and you would look at the environmental
considerations and the social considerations. The social
considerations can be the number of people affected, the risk
of not doing this on the economy in a local area. What it
means--it really expands it to take a look and say, ``What is
this doing to the community by not doing this?''
Whereas before, it would just be an economic and what's the
benefit cost ratio, and if you didn't have a lot of goods and
services being dealt with there, it didn't matter that you had
100 people or 1,000 people that were disadvantaged. So----
Dr. Harris. Well, General, that's pretty subjective,
wouldn't you say?
General Van Antwerp. I think that's what is the challenge
of the Principles and Guidelines is when you have
environmental, which doesn't have a number, and you have
social, which doesn't have a number, how do you account for
that? But that's our challenge.
Dr. Harris. And that's exactly to my point, you see. This
little harbor, Rock Hall here, was told they didn't have a cost
benefit ratio that was adequate. Well, is that because maybe
you didn't consider that the residents of Rock Hall had as much
social importance as other residents in another location?
I mean how am I going to get my handle on how to help this
little jurisdiction if we have got things like, well, we've got
someone in the agency making an environmental judgment or a
social judgment, instead of the economic benefit of not
dredging a harbor so that ships actually can come into a port?
General Van Antwerp. Up to this point, it has been strictly
on the national economic benefit. So that ratio has been while
that project----
Dr. Harris. So I can expect, in my dealings with the Corps,
that they will not use that as an excuse anymore for not doing
something, a strict economic benefit ratio?
General Van Antwerp. Well, I think under the new Principles
and Guidelines, there will be other factors. But up until this
point it has been we can tell you where your project is stacked
with its benefit cost ratio.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Representative Bishop?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Just very quickly, I would say to my
colleagues from Maryland and Minnesota I would be happy to join
you in filing bipartisan legislation that would build a
firewall around the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, and that we
would do so with the full recognition that if we were to fully
spend down the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, it would either--
if we're still in a zero deficit environment, it would either
require an additional $6 billion worth of cuts, or we would be
increasing our deficit by $6 billion.
But in all sincerity, many of us on this committee have
long felt that that Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund should be
spent for harbor maintenance, and I would join you in filing
this legislation to build a firewall around it, in the same way
that we used to have a firewall around the highway trust fund.
Mr. Gibbs. And I would concur with that, too. These are
essentially user fees, and they ought to go for what they're
supposed to go for.
I wanted to ask the last question to Mr. Thomas, because I
don't believe he had a question today. And I don't want you to
go back to Tennessee feeling left out.
Mr. Thomas. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. We're really concerned about the debt that the
TVA has accrued. And according to the reports I've gotten, your
staff, the TVA staff, has said they would take action if the
debt were to exceed $28 billion.
According to your own budget analysis, you exceed $28
billion by the end of fiscal year 2013. And I guess the
question is, why isn't the TVA taking action today? Why are we
waiting to get up to a certain level when we know it's coming?
Mr. Thomas. Yes, thank you for that question. It is true
that TVA does have a limit on its borrowing authority of $30
billion. It hasn't changed since 1979. And as TVA's assets have
grown, we have taken on debt to fund those assets. And I
mentioned that our financial guiding principles have--we use
that, in terms of borrowing money only for new assets. And over
the next several years, as we meet the needs of the demand for
electricity in Tennessee Valley, we believe that it's prudent
to finance those assets, and that's in the best interest of the
rate payers.
And so, we are, as we look out in our planning horizon,
approaching that $30 billion borrowing authority limit. And we
are currently developing plans. We are not waiting until 2013.
Today we are working on developing what potential options we
could have to continue to provide low-cost electricity in the
Tennessee Valley, and still meet the demand for electricity. So
we are not waiting until 2013.
Mr. Gibbs. Would any of those options include partners,
other utilities to work with to supply power on a partnership-
type arrangement, or not?
Mr. Thomas. As a matter of fact, we are looking at--one of
the potential options would be that we would have a project
financing special purpose entity to be able to have partners,
in terms of financing assets.
Mr. Gibbs. Because I guess my concern is--I'm on a sharp
learning curve here on this issue, but I think a word of
caution, and maybe to bring capital in for new asset
development, to make sure that you can have the adequate base
generation to meet the needs of your customers, that you might
need some partners to be involved in that.
If you look at your balance sheet probably--but it's a
thought.
Mr. Thomas. The one thing I would like to add to that is
certainly utilizing Tennessee--the TVA's borrowing authority is
the most economical way. And bringing in partners will require
higher financing costs than it would if Tennessee Valley were
to do it. But if we do not have other options, then we would
pursue all other means.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes. Well, I want to thank everybody for coming
to the committee today, and to our esteemed panelists, for your
input. And I know that we look forward to working with you in
the challenges that we face here in the future. Thank you very
much.
This concludes the hearing.
[Whereupon, at 4:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

