- REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS, ENSURING THE FLOW OF COMMERCE, AND PROTECTING JOBS: A COMMONSENSE APPROACH TO BALLAST WATER REGULATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS, ENSURING
THE FLOW OF COMMERCE, AND PROTECTING
JOBS: A COMMONSENSE APPROACH TO
BALLAST WATER REGULATION

=======================================================================

(112-45)

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-384                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

?

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
Vice Chair                           (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

?

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
GARY G. MILLER, California           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         Columbia
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            BOB FILNER, California
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington,   GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
Vice Chair                           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               LAURA RICHARDSON, California
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEFF DENHAM, California              NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma               (Ex Officio)
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iv)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY
Panel One

Carlton, James T., Ph.D., Chair, Committee on Assessing Numeric
Limits for Living Organisms in Ballast Water, National Research
Council........................................................    10
Hanlon, James A., Director, Office of Wastewater Management,
Environmental Protection Agency................................    10
Salerno, Vice Admiral Brian, Deputy Commandant for Operations,
United States Coast Guard......................................    10
Swackhamer, Deborah L., Ph.D., Chair, EPA Science Advisory Board.    10

Panel Two

Allegretti, Thomas A., President and CEO, The American Waterways
Operators, on behalf of the Shipping Industry Ballast Water
Coalition......................................................    30
Jewell, Michael, President, Marine Engineers' Beneficial
Association....................................................    30

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Carnahan, Hon. Russ, of Missouri.................................    41

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Allegretti, Thomas A.............................................    44
Carlton, James T., Ph.D..........................................    53
Hanlon, James A..................................................    56
Jewell, Michael..................................................    65
Salerno, Vice Admiral Brian......................................    74
Swackhamer, Deborah L., Ph.D.....................................    77

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Chart entitled, ``Ballast Water & Incidental Discharge Regulation
under the Clean Water Act,'' referred to by Hon. Frank A.
LoBiondo, a Representative in Congress from the State of New
Jersey.........................................................     2
Letter signed by 25 organizations expressing their opinions and
concerns with introducing ballast water legislation, referred
to by Hon. Timothy H. Bishop, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York..........................................     8
United States Coast Guard:

Response to question from Hon. Rick Larsen, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Washington, regarding the
technologies that the Coast Guard Shipboard Technology
Evaluation Program is evaluating.............................    20
Response to question from Hon. Timothy H. Bishop, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York, asking
if the implementation of the vessel general permit has had a
significant adverse impact on the flow of maritime commerce
thus far.....................................................    23

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

California State Lands Commission, Curtis L. Fossum, Executive
Officer, letter, July 25, 2011.................................    86
Passenger Vessel Association, Captain Jay W. Spence, President,
written testimony..............................................    90
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, written testimony,
July 20, 2011..................................................    94

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.008

REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS,
ENSURING THE FLOW OF COMMERCE,
AND PROTECTING JOBS: A COMMONSENSE
APPROACH TO BALLAST WATER REGULATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 13, 2011

House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Coast
Guard and Maritime Transportation, Joint with
the Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment, Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank LoBiondo
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. Good morning. Subcommittee hearing will come
to order.
The joint subcommittees are meeting today to review the
confusing, contradictory, and unsustainable approach to the
regulation of ballast water and other incidental discharges
from vessels that currently exist and explore options to
simplify and improve it.
I think we can all agree on the importance of reflectively
regulating ballast water discharges. Invasive species have
threatened ecosystems and the industries that rely on those
ecosystems across the country.
However, the current system of regulation is killing jobs
and impeding the flow of commerce, which is vital at any time
but especially now for our economic recovery.
Currently the Coast Guard and the EPA have developed
separate regulations under two different Federal laws to govern
the discharge of ballast water. The EPA's ballast water program
under the Clean Water Act is especially burdensome and
troublesome as it allows each individual State to add
requirements on top of the Federal regulations; 29 States and
tribes have done just that.
And as you can see in the chart on the screens, which we do
have up, the result is differing ballast water or incidental
discharge standards for the vast majority of these States and
tribal areas.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.009

Mr. LoBiondo. While this provision of the Clean Water Act
functions well for factories that are fixed in one location, it
simply does not work for vessels engaged in interstate commerce
or international commerce. It is unreasonable to ask a vessel
operator to comply with two Federal standards and as many as 29
different State and tribal standards, several of which are not
even achievable.
Let's take an example: The State of New York, what are they
doing? New York is in the process of implementing standards for
ballast water discharge that are 1,000 times stricter than the
upcoming IMO requirements. As the Science Advisory Board will
point out today, a standard 1,000 times IMO is simply not
achievable and not verifiable. So what are we look--so what we
are looking at is New York State dictating to the whole
industry what they have to meet, and that is an impossible
standard. And if they fail to meet that standard, they then
face a daily fine of over $32,000. That is $32,000 a day to
meet something that is impossible to meet.
For entering the Saint Lawrence Seaway or the Port of New
York and New Jersey. And this is absurd and ridiculous and
cannot be allowed to stand.
The problem is not just limited to ballast water. Other
discharges, such as bilge water, gray water, deck wash, and
even the condensation from air conditioners, is now being
regulated by the EPA and the States in a confusing and
contradictory manner. The current system threatens our
international maritime trade. It is driving industry away from
coastwise trade. It is undermining our attempts to revitalize
the U.S.-flagged fleet, and simply it is killing jobs. It is
hurting our economy.
I hope our witnesses will address these concerns and offer
ideas on how they can more efficiently and uniformly regulate
these discharges.
Additionally, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
representing the scientific community, specifically I am
interested in their views on what the standards should be and
the availability of technology to meet that standard. In other
words, is it workable in the real world?
My understanding is that both the Science Advisory Board
and the National Research Council reports indicate that moving
forward with the IMO standard is appropriate at this time. If
this is the case, I think we will finally have a clear
nonpartisan reason to endorse that standard as a baseline. I
hope to hear more on your research so that we can use the
specific finding to inform much needed and much delayed
legislative action.
We have to overcome this mind set that mandating a dozen
different unachievable standards, each more stringent than the
next, somehow protects our environment. It does not. The time
has finally come to enact a clear, effective and uniform
national standard that utilizes available and cost-effective
technology to reduce the risk of future aquatic invasions. We
cannot afford to delay any longer, as ballast water continues
to threaten our environment and our economy.
I would like to thank Chairman Gibbs of the Water Resources
Subcommittee for agreeing to co-chair this hearing today.
And I want to thank the witnesses for taking your time to
appear here today.
At this part of the hearing, we will have a large number of
witnesses that we want to hear from. We will ask that opening
statements be limited to the chairs and ranking members. Other
Members are welcome to submit their statements for the record
or use their time during questions to make their statements.
With that, I would like to yield to Mr. Larsen for his
opening statement.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, we review current information and new
recommendations related to the discharge of ballast water and
other pollutants from ships. I hope that following today's
hearing, we can develop bipartisan legislation to address these
discharges.
Mr. Chairman, the title of today's hearing encompasses
three concepts: reducing regulatory burdens, ensuring the flow
of commerce, and protecting jobs. While I support all three, I
believe we can do more.
Reducing regulatory burdens, while advisable in many
instances, cannot be a goal in and of itself. As we have
learned from previous experience in the Deepwater Horizon
disaster, the Wall Street meltdown, and the sub-prime mortgage
crisis, when we have regulations in place that can actually
protect lives, property, and the environment, we can actually
get a better result.
We should focus on smart regulations that accomplish
national goals, grow the economy, and protect the public health
and the environment.
I also want to do more than just ensure the flow of
commerce and protect jobs. I want to be sure that we are
expanding the flow of commerce and increasing the number of
jobs. At our subcommittee hearing on June 14, we heard of
opportunities to grow our economy by enhancing our marine
transportation system.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and all
interested members of the committee to implement the
investments in people and property presented to the
subcommittee on that day.
When the district court in California made its decision in
March of 2005 that discharge from vessels could not be exempt
from regulation from the Clean Water Act permitting
requirements, both EPA and this committee began the process of
determining how to comply with that court's decision and
whether changes to the law were necessary. Congress responded
with two bipartisan pieces of legislation, and the EPA
responded with a general permit.
For small recreational vehicles, Congress developed and
enacted the bipartisan Clean Boating Act of 2008. The law
exempted recreational boats from permitting requirements, but
in return for that exemption, the law tasked EPA and the Coast
Guard with developing best management practices to protect
water quality. The result will be improvements in water quality
without the need for permitting individual boats, an example of
a smarter bipartisan legislative response.
A second bipartisan response that we have had in the past
to clean water issues, Mr. Chairman, is that Congress developed
legislation that provides a moratorium from permitting
requirements for nonballast water discharges from fishing
vessels and smaller nonrecreational vessels until December
2013. This moratorium is to allow EPA, Congress and the boating
community more time to analyze the impacts of discharges from
vessels and develop the appropriate legislative or regulatory
response.
EPA's response to the court's decision is a vessel general
permit for those vessels and discharges not covered by the
legislation. That permit expires December 2013, and the general
permit contains a requirement that apply to large commercial
vessels, including discharges of ballast water.
At this point, EPA has done about as much as it can with
the law and the court's decision, and any additional action
concerning the Clean Water Act will be up to this committee and
Congress.
I bring these up, Mr. Chairman, because this committee
should continue its bipartisan approach and develop legislation
that resolves the uncertainty surrounding discharges of ballast
water and other discharges from vessels. The goals of the
legislation should be to help the EPA and the Coast Guard,
ensure that water quality is protected and to allow vessels to
operate safely and cost effectively.
For example, on issues of safety and cost effectiveness, I
have heard from representatives of the tug and barge industry
in my district raising issues about what we should consider.
They asked that we carefully consider the impacts of differing
State laws or requirements on navigation as we consider a
legislative approach to ballast or other discharges.
The issues we need to consider are well-known and include:
Will discharges from vessels be addressed under the Clean Water
Act, some other law, or some combination of laws? What
standards will be set for pollutants and species and
discharges? Will the discharge standards be uniform across the
country? What will the role of the States be in addressing
vessel discharges? How might we address different types of
vessels?
While there is not yet a consensus on the resolution of
these issues, I believe that one is available. Given the
opportunity, the Coast Guard Subcommittee and the Water
Resources Subcommittee can work together in a bipartisan way to
develop legislation that effectively addresses discharges from
ships and boats.
So I look forward to today's witnesses, Mr. Chairman, and
to hear how they seek to help us address this critical water
quality issue.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
We will now turn to Chairman Gibbs of the Water Resources
Subcommittee.
Mr. Gibbs. It is my pleasure to join Chairman LoBiondo and
the Coast Guard Committee to hear testimony on the ballast
water discharge regulations today. A necessity to maintain
stability during water board transit, ballast water has also
will been recognized as one of the ways invasive species are
transported globally.
Lawsuits filed by environmental groups and the subsequent
March 2006 court decision require the Environmental Protection
Agency to regulate and issue point-source discharge permits
under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System,
NPDES.
Pursuant to a court order, the EPA established a vessel
general permit. Vessel operators that did not file a notice of
intent to comply with a vessel general permit can be found in
violation of the Clean Water Act, a criminal and civil offense.
In addition to the Coast Guard and EPA standards, the discharge
of ballast water is managed by an assortment of international,
State, territorial, and tribal regulations. As a result, our
Nation's vessel owners and operators must ensure that they are
in compliance with a burdensome patchwork of regulations.
Changes in ballast water regulation loom on the horizon.
An international standard has been ratified in 28 nations
and could become the first international method for controlling
invasive species in ballast water. Current EPA regulation is
set to expire December 2013. Both the Coast Guard and the EPA
have proposed new methodologies of regulation. States have also
proposed new and, in some cases, unrealistically stringent
standards.
As new regulations are considered the Coast Guard and EPA
have asked for scientific studies that would provide them with
a better understanding of ballast water management. The studies
found that inflexible regulation has not necessarily provided
more effective control of invasive species. Also, technology
hasn't caught up with the regulations. We simply do not have
the technology to uphold some of the proposed standards.
As we consider ballast water standards, we should not
burden our shippers with unattainable, unrealistic, expensive
regulations that have not demonstrated a significant
environmental benefit. Instead, we need a commonsense approach
that can be enacted quickly, protects the environment, reduces
red tape, grows maritime jobs and opens the flow of maritime
commerce.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to the hearing
and look forward to the witnesses.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Gibbs.
Now we will turn to Ranking Member Mr. Bishop for a
statement. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to both of the chairmen for holding this hearing.
The spread of invasive species as a result of ballast water
discharges has significant impacts. While the Long Island
sound, which borders my district on its northern edge, has
fortunately not had significant problems, there are many areas
of the country where invasive species introduced through
ballast water are wreaking havoc on ecosystems and economies.
Consider the Great Lakes. Zebra mussels clog water intake
pipes, impede recreational activities by accumulating on boats,
docks, and buoys and have a wide range of impacts on the Great
Lakes' native species. The States and Federal Government have
spent two decades trying to control zebra mussels at an
estimated cost of $500 million per year.
The San Francisco Bay Area, where oceangoing ships from
around the globe come into port, has the dubious distinction of
being the most invaded aquatic ecosystem on earth. The economic
and environmental costs associated with invasive species are
mind boggling, as green crabs originally from the Black Sea
feast on native shellfish and Chinese mutant crabs weaken the
levee system when it burrows into the banks. Thousands of other
species also cost the State hundreds of millions of dollars a
year in lost revenues and mitigation expenses.
In short, controlling invasive species after they have been
introduced through ballast water discharges is often difficult,
if not impossible, and extremely costly. So while it is easy to
categorize ballast water discharge rules as yet another
regulatory burden, as the title of this hearing implies, the
facts are much more complex.
It is true that there are costs associated with ballast
water controls, but the costs of doing nothing are much
greater. It makes sense that we should implement discharge
standards that are technologically feasible, but we should not
become complacent with existing technology. We should encourage
and support the development of new technologies that will
reduce costs while providing greater benefits in terms of
ballast water treatment. That is good for business. It is good
for jobs, and it is good for the environment. It is a win-win-
win.
Finally, while I certainly understand the argument for a
consistent national discharge standard for ballast water given
the interstate nature of maritime commerce, I hope we will all
find it ironic that some would be arguing over the need to
preempt States at the very time when this committee just
reported H.R. 2018, the Clean Water Cooperative federalism Act,
that would turn implementation of virtually the entire Clean
Water Act over to the States. One has to wonder how divergent
the discharge standards for ballast water would become if that
bill were to ever take on the force of law.
In closing, I thank the chairman again for holding this
hearing. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on this
important subject. Before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, I ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record a letter from 25
environmental organizations in which they state their views on
this issue.
Mr. LoBiondo. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7384.011

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
We have two distinguished panels today. For Members who may
have come in a little bit past the opening gavel, we are going
to ask you to withhold your opening statements. If you choose
to make an opening statement, you will be able to do it during
your time for questioning as we try to move forward.
Our first distinguished panel includes Coast Guard Vice
Admiral Brian Salerno, Deputy Commandant for Operations; Mr.
James Hanlon, director of the EPA's Office of Wastewater
Management; Dr. Deborah Swackhamer, chair of the EPA Science
Advisory Board; and Dr. James Carlton, chair of the Committee
on Numeric Limits for Living Organisms in Ballast Water of the
National Research Council.
We won't try to say that three times fast, but I thank our
witnesses for being here today.
Admiral, you are up.

TESTIMONY OF VICE ADMIRAL BRIAN SALERNO, DEPUTY COMMANDANT FOR
OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD; JAMES A. HANLON,
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT, ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY; DEBORAH L. SWACKHAMER, PH.D., CHAIR, EPA
SCIENCE ADVISORY BOARD; AND JAMES T. CARLTON, PH.D., CHAIR,
COMMITTEE ON ASSESSING NUMERIC LIMITS FOR LIVING ORGANISMS IN
BALLAST WATER, NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL

Admiral Salerno. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman LoBiondo, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member Larsen,
Ranking Member Bishop, and distinguished members of the
subcommittees, I am very happy to be here this morning to have
this opportunity toinform both committees about the Coast
Guard's actions to strengthen ballast water management
regulations.
Coast Guard has been involved in reducing the risk of
invasive species from ballast water since the early 1990s, and
since that time, we have worked in close collaboration with
other Federal agencies, the States, the affected industry and
the international community to develop standards which are
rigorous enough to protect our environment and which can be
practically adhered to by those who must operate within these
standards.
The Coast Guard has established its existing ballast water
regulations and its proposed new regulations under the
authority of the National Invasive Species Act, NISA. In so
doing, we have worked very closely with the Environmental
Protection Agency, which has a similar mandate under the Clean
Water Act.
NISA and Clean Water Act represent two different legal
frameworks, each focussed on achieving similar outcomes related
to invasive species. The Coast Guard and EPA are committed to
harmonizing, to the degree possible, the requirements of both
legal regimes in the proposed ballast water rulemaking and to
further expand the excellent level of cooperation and field
enforcement already established under EPA's vessel general
permit.
The proposed ballast water discharge standards, which we
published in 2009, represent a significant improvement in the
level of protection from invasive species. Currently, the risk
of invasion is reduced through mandatory exchange of ballast
water in mid ocean. However, this practice varies in
effectiveness based upon ship design and route.
In contrast, the proposed rule will shift to a standard
whereby the concentration of organisms in a known quantity of
ballast water will be specifically limited. In determining the
concentration limits, we relied heavily on inputs from the
scientific community, from industry and equipment
manufacturers, and from policymakers at the Federal and State
levels.
We also led the U.S. Delegation to the International
Maritime Organization, IMO, joining the negotiations and the
ultimate adoption of the International Convention on the
Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediment. Although this
convention has not yet entered into force internationally and
has yet to undergo ratification by Congress, it has
nevertheless provided a useful benchmark in our proposed
rulemaking.
Our proposed rule follows a two-phased approach. Phase one
would establish a standard similar to that adopted by IMO. This
is consistent with the level of technology currently available,
and it represents a significant improvement over the current
practice of mid ocean exchange. To put the IMO or phase one
standard into some context, the standard of ten 50-micron-sized
organisms in a cubic meter of ballast water is on the order of
1 part per trillion. This is analogous to 1 second in 31,700
years.
As these ratios suggest, we are talking for the most part
about relatively small numbers of microscopic organisms. This
phase one standard is the most protective standard that can be
practicably implemented at that time.
Phase two is based on the most stringent quantitative
discharge limits proposed in U.S. State regulations and
essentially provides a target to encourage the development of
significantly more effective ballast water management systems.
Since neither NISA nor the Clean Water Act preempt State
requirements, it remains very important in this process to
develop a standard that will satisfy the States and thereby
provide a consistent target for industry compliance.
The rulemaking will also contain provisions for Coast Guard
type approval of systems used to treat ballast water for
discharge. The Coast Guard has relied heavily on scientific
input, and in that regard, we would like to thank the EPA's
Science Advisory Board and the National Research Council's
Water Science and Technology Board for their essential efforts
to inform the way ahead on this issue.
We believe that the proposed two-phased approach will
significantly reduce the risk of invasive species and will
ensure the environmental protection is increased as science and
technology allow.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to answering
any questions you may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Admiral, thank you very much.
Mr. Hanlon, you are now recognized.
Mr. Hanlon. Good morning, Chairman Gibbs, Chairman
LoBiondo, Ranking Members Bishop and Larsen, and members of the
subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss EPA's regulation
of ballast water discharges from vessels under the Clean Water
Act. My testimony will provide an update.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Hanlon, excuse me, could you just pull
the microphone a little closer to you?
Mr. Hanlon. My testimony will provide an update on our
current activities with respect to regulating ballast water
under the vessel general permit, including the role of the
recent National Academy of Sciences and EPA's Science Advisory
Board reports will play in the development of the ballast water
provisions for the next iteration of the permit.
Aquatic nuisance species introductions contribute to the
loss of aquatic biodiversity and have associated significant
social, economic, and biological impacts. Economic loss from
invasions of aquatic nuisance species are estimated to be over
$1 billion annually. In particular, the Coast Guard and EPA,
operating under different statutory authorities, have worked to
develop a strong Federal ballast water management program,
which will reduce the risk of new introductions.
In administering our respective authorities, the Coast
Guard and EPA have worked closely to harmonize as appropriate
the proposed Coast Guard ballast water discharge standard
regulations and EPA's vessel general permit. I want to
recognize at this time that the Coast Guard has been a trusted
and valuable partner in our ballast water activities, and we
would not have accomplished this significant progress to date
without their expertise and cooperation.
The vessel general permit issued by EPA in December of 2008
regulates approximately 69,000 domestic and foreign vessels
while in U.S. waters. In the development of the vessel permit,
EPA found that it was infeasible to calculate numeric limits
for ballast water discharges. Therefore, the current permit
contains best management practices that permittees must employ,
such as all of the Coast Guard's ballast water and saltwater
flushing standards and offers increased environmental
protection with several additional management practices, such
as requiring U.S.-bound vessels with empty ballast water tanks
to conduct saltwater flushing, and mandating ballast water
exchange for vessels engaged in certain Pacific near-shore
voyages.
The current vessel permit expires in December of 2013. EPA
plans on proposing for public comment a draft of the next
permit in November of this year and expects to finalize the
permit in November of 2012 so that vessel owners and operators
will have time to plan for and implement any new permit
conditions.
In order to further our scientific understanding of the
state of ballast water science and technology, EPA and the
Coast Guard commissioned a report from the National Academy of
Sciences to inform our understanding of the relationship
between the concentration of living organisms in ballast water
and the likelihood of nonindigenous organisms successfully
establishing populations in U.S. waters.
EPA and the Coast Guard also sought advice from EPA's
Science Advisory Board on the performance and availability of
ballast water treatment technologies. EPA's primary purpose in
requesting the National Academy and the Science Advisory Board
reports was to receive expert input and advice regarding the
derivation of numeric limits for ballast water and the status
and availability of ballast water treatment technologies.
The National Academy report identified the strengths and
weaknesses of existing approaches in evaluating the risks from
ballast water discharges and made recommendations on how to
improve our future scientific understanding of this risk. The
report also recommended that a benchmark discharge standard
should be established that reduces concentrations of organisms
below current levels resulting from ballast water exchange.
EPA will use the results of this study to inform
development of the next vessel permit. Furthermore, EPA will
also work with our Federal partners to implement the
recommendations of the report for improving our understanding
of the risk posed by ballast water in the future.
The Science Advisory Board in their draft report found that
treatment systems currently exist to meet the International
Maritime Organization standard. EPA will also use the results
of the SAB study to inform our next vessel permit. EPA and the
Coast Guard will continue to work closely to minimize the risk
of the introduction and spread of aquatic nuisance species.
This cooperative EPA-Coast Guard effort, augmented with other
Federal expertise provides substantial opportunities for moving
forward with enhanced communication, coordination of Federal
activities, and engagement with external stakeholders to
develop and implement an effective national ballast water
management program.
Once again, Chairman Gibbs and LoBiondo and members of both
subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to discuss EPA's
ballast water-related activities, and I look forward to
answering any questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, thank you very much.
Now Dr. Swackhamer, you are now recognized.
Ms. Swackhamer. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo and Chairman Gibbs, Ranking
Members Mr. Larsen and Mr. Bishop, and members of the
subcommittee.
My name is Deborah Swackhamer, and I serve as chair of
EPA's Science Advisory Board. I am a professor at the
University of Minnesota and codirector of the university's
Water Resources Center.
I am here today on behalf of the Science Advisory Board to
present testimony on our review of the background and issue
paper prepared by the U.S. EPA and U.S. Coast Guard staff. This
review was conducted by the SAB Ballast Water Advisory Panel,
whose members had expertise across a wide array of relevant
disciplines. The SAB reviewed and accepted the advisory panel
report.
EPA's Office of Water asked the SAB for advice on the
effectiveness of existing technologies for shipboard treatment
of vessel ballast water. The SAB reviewed data on 51 existing
ballast water management systems provided by EPA. Detailed data
were available, however, for only 15 ballast water management
systems. These data were mostly from the time period of 2008 to
2010, and it should be kept in mind that this dynamic industry
continues to evolve. EPA asked the SAB to address four charge
questions, and I will summarize our responses.
The first question asked about the ability of existing
shipboard ballast water management systems to meet proposed
discharge standards. Only 9 of the 15 systems had reliable
data, and they consisted of 5 different treatment types. The
SAB concluded that these five treatment types of existing
ballast water management systems could meet what is known as
the phase one standard proposed by the U.S. Coast Guard. Also,
the SAB concluded that none of the existing ballast water
management systems can meet a standard that is 100 or 1,000
times more stringent than the phase one standard. It may be
possible in the near future for the five system types
identified to meet a standard that is 10 times more stringent
than phase one if both treatment performance and testing
approaches improve. The SAB also found that the available data
indicate that none of these systems will meet a no-living-
organism standard.
The second question asked what types of systems, based on
their engineering design, would be likely to meet different
discharge standards? The SAB concluded that all of the current
ballast water management systems are based on reasonable
engineering designs and use adaptations of standard water
treatment processes. However, significant difficulties are
encountered in adapting standard water treatment technologies
to shipboard operation, and there were insufficient data to
determine whether particular types of systems could meet
standards more stringent than phase one. The SAB noted that
factors beyond biological efficacy need to be considered as
these technologies improve and mature.
The third question asked about ways in which ballast water
management system performance could be improved. The SAB
concluded that reasonable changes in existing systems are
likely to result in incremental improvements but are not likely
to lead to 100 or 1,000 times further reduction in organism
concentration. It is likely that entirely new systems will need
to be developed.
The fourth question asked about limitations of existing
studies and how the limitations could be overcome in future
ballast water management system assessments. The SAB recommends
using improved and consistent testing protocols for verifying
discharge concentrations and exploring the use of surrogate
test organisms and performance measures. The SAB suggests using
a practical step-wise approach to compliance, reporting,
inspections, and monitoring. Also, developing standards to
limit organisms that are less than 10 microns in diameter is
essential to protect against certain harmful algae.
Finally, the SAB's overall recommendation is that EPA adopt
a systems- and risk-based approach to minimize the impacts of
invasive species, rather than relying solely on numeric
standards in ballast water discharge. The SAB found that
insufficient attention has been given to integrative sets of
practices that could used to systemically advance ballast water
management. These practices include, one, managing ballast
uptake to reduce the presence of invasive species; two,
reducing invasive risk through changes in ship operation and
design to reduce or eliminate the need for ballast water;
three, development of voyager-based risk or hazard assessment;
and four, consider treatment of ballast water in onshore
reception facilities.
The SAB refers to an example used in the food industry,
known as Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points, or HACCP.
HACCP identifies specific steps in the process where hazards
can be addressed, rather than focusing only on the end result.
In the context of ballast water management, this would mean
identifying critical points throughout the process where
invasive species could be controlled in developing monitoring
and control systems for these critical points.
You will find much more detail in our report to the EPA
Administrator and my written testimony. Thank you for your
interest and attention, and I will be happy to provide answers
to any questions you may have. Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Doctor.
Now, Dr. Carlton, you are now recognized.
Mr. Carlton. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Chairman
Gibbs, Ranking Members Mr. Bishop and Mr. Larsen, and members
of the subcommittees.
My name is James T. Carlton. I am a professor of marine
sciences at Williams College, and I served as chair of the
Committee on Assessing Numeric Limits for Living Organisms in
Ballast Water of the National Research Council, the arm of the
National Academy of Sciences that operates to advise the
Government on matters of science and technology.
Our study, requested by the EPA and the U.S. Coast Guard,
was to advise these agencies as they develop plans to regulate
the concentration of living organisms discharged from ballast
water. These plans assume that there is a quantitative
relationship between invasive species concentrations in the
released ballast and the probability of their successful
establishment.
Here are our five key conclusions: First, the methods for
determining an exact numeric standard for ballast water
discharge are limited by profound lack of data by which to
develop and validate the necessary models that relate organism
release to the probability of invasion.
Second, while the number of released organisms is
important, it is only one of many variables that determine
when, why, and where species will invade. Any method that
attempts to predict invasions based on only one factor is
likely to suffer from a high level of uncertainty.
Third, that said, there is evidence that significantly
reducing the number of released organisms reduces invasion
probability. Therefore, a benchmark discharge standard that
reduces the concentration of organisms below the levels
achieved by open sea ballast water exchange is an important
first step.
Fourth, we urge the development of robust statistical
models, experimental studies, and field investigations that are
focused on the relationship between the quantity, quality and
frequency of released organisms and invasion risk. This
research could be focused on the types of species that have the
highest probability of being good invaders and are likely to
pose the greatest threats to our economy and health.
This focus on the best case for invasion scenarios sets the
regulatory bar high, noting that by best case for invasions, we
mean of course the worst case for our society.
And fifth, our databases on what invasive species are now
becoming established in American waters and our knowledge of
the details of many vectors that bring these species to the
United States, including ballast water, vessel fouling, the
aquarium industry, and the live seafood and bait trades are
patchy and substantially mismatched. For example, we have
anecdotal accounts that there are now fewer invasions since
extensive open ocean ballast water exchange has been in place
for ships arriving from foreign shores. On the other hand,
there is no--no--national survey program to determine if in
fact invasions have decreased.
Let me conclude on a personal note, as a marine biologist
and as a scientist who has worked on invasive species for 49
years. I have had the privilege to testify before Congress nine
times since 1990 and my message is the same as it was 20 years
ago. Our oceans are under great pressure. Our natural resources
and our economic health derived from our rich maritime assets
and heritage are under great pressure. Our fundamental goal has
been and remains to limit invasions of exotic species in order
to protect and preserve our existing populations of fish,
wildlife, shell fish and the many other beneficial uses of our
Nation's waters.
Given the sobering reality of the uncertainty of our
knowledge about what regulates and promotes nonnative species,
our ability to make accurate predictions is severely
limited,underscoring more than ever that only the strongest
science behind the policy will ensure the outcomes we seek.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I welcome any
questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Doctor, very much.
I want to start, Admiral Salerno, with you. What will the
Coast Guard do if the practicality review you plan to conduct
to ensure a verifiable system is available to meet phase two
standard comes back negative? Will you implement the best
available technology, even if such technology is only
marginally more effective than phase one? And my concern is if
there is mandated technology that only gives us a little bit
better edge, are we going to force vessel owners and operators
to buy that technology and put it on board if there is only a
minimal ability to increase their effectiveness?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, we did include in our rulemaking a
provision to have an interim standard, in other words, if it
appears that technology has advanced to such a degree that you
can have a significant improvement in protection but still not
fully meet the phase two requirement, that there is a provision
for an interim standard. So that is part of the framework of
the regulation, yes, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. Where would be the definition of significant
improvement? Is it in the eye of the beholder or something that
can be tangibly measured?
Admiral Salerno. It would need to be tangibly measured.
That is the framework for this, is that we need to have the
technology in place to measure the number of organisms in a
specific quantity of ballast water. So, without the ability to
measure, there is not that tangible proof of an improvement. So
only in the case of technology that that can achieve a
significant improvement would we seek to impose an additional
rule.
Mr. LoBiondo. Also, for you, Admiral, the EPA and the Coast
Guard signed a memorandum of understanding in March of this
year to outline Coast Guard enforcement of EPA vessel general
permits. Is the Coast Guard checking to see if vessel operators
are following these vessel general permits best management
practices for incidental discharges, other than ballast water,
such as gray water? For instance, if you board, are you
checking to ensure that vessels are carrying only phosphate-
free soap? Is that something you are doing?
Admiral Salerno. Typically, sir, we are boarding vessels in
the course of our normal duties, and we are including
verification of compliance as part of our routine boardings.
Essentially it is checking records, making sure that they have
the proper procedures laid out to be followed by the crew and
look for apparent compliance. I don't believe we are checking
soap.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. And Mr. Hanlon, will the draft VGP
include regulation of commercial fishing vessels and other
commercial vessels less than 79 feet, which are currently
subject to a moratorium?
Mr. Hanlon. Mr. Chairman, our current plans are, given the
earlier conversation this morning and the recognition that the
moratorium expires in December of 2013 is to prepare a permit
that would be available to the moratorium vessels, those under
79 feet and all fishing vessels, so that if the moratorium does
expire in December of 2013, there would be a permit available
for that class of vessels to be able to apply for the permit.
In the alternative, if we did not include them in the
permit and the moratorium were to expire, then that whole class
of vessels would be vulnerable under the Clean Water Act for
discharging without a permit.
Mr. LoBiondo. Do you have any idea how many vessels would
come under that?
Mr. Hanlon. Approximately 120,000 to 140,000.
Mr. LoBiondo. And does the EPA have the resources to
administer to these additions.
Mr. Hanlon. Yes, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
Also, Mr. Hanlon, the science to establish a foundation for
regulation and incidental discharges other than ballast water
is seriously lacking. Does the EPA fully understand that the
impact of these discharges, that they have on water quality--
so, I mean, do you know what it is doing to water quality? Can
you measure that?
Mr. Hanlon. As we have discussed this morning, the 2008
vessel general permit was EPA's first permit dealing with this
class of dischargers. Clean water permits under the Clean Water
Act had a term of 5 years. It is an iterative process, and so
as I outlined in my statement, we are in the process, and we
gathered information. That is why we, along with the Coast
Guard, commissioned the National Academy report, why we
commissioned the work done by the Science Advisory Board, to
better inform us in terms of where the science is at, where the
release risk paradigm is at, as Dr. Carlton spoke to; where the
technologies are at, as Dr. Swackhamer spoke to; to inform the
EPA decisionmaking process as we work to propose the next
vessel general permit in December--in November of this year.
And so that understanding is being developed with--across this
category of dischargers and will be reflected in the proposed
permit.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, correct me if I am wrong, is that not
just for ballast water?
Mr. Hanlon. No, basically EPA's vessel general permit that
we issued in December of 2008 includes the consideration of 26
different waste streams from vessels, including ballast water,
and that scope will be continued in the proposed permit in
November.
Mr. LoBiondo. But have you studied these other discharges,
such as air conditioner condensation or deck wash-off, the way
you have studied ballast water to determine the impact?
Mr. Hanlon. As part of the bill or law that included the
moratorium, the Congress directed EPA to do a study of vessel
discharges. We did that study and delivered it to Congress.
Again, it was based on a limited study, not a comprehensive
study of all vessel classes and all dischargers, and that
report identified across a number of waste streams where there
are potential concerns, not globally, not nationally, but in
specific locations where there are discharges from vessels that
could have adverse water quality impacts.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Well, I will end with that for you, but I
just have to say that I have a very, very serious concern that
air conditioner condensation or deck wash-off that could result
in serious fines, that we don't fully know the impact that
these are having and that it is a little bit different than
ballast water. And I hope, as we move along, that we can get a
better handle on that.
Dr. Swackhamer, what are the major challenges in adopting
standards more stringent than the IMO standard?
Ms. Swackhamer. I would say the major challenges, Mr.
Chair, are with the technologies themselves. We can probably,
by improving detection limits of the verification methods and
by tweaking some of the technologies that are currently being
developed, we could meet the standard, those systems could meet
a standard that is 10 times more stringent than the phase one.
However, it is unlikely that the current systems, even with
tweaking, would get to 100 or 1,000 times more restrictive than
the phase one standard.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK thank you.
Dr. Carlton, and this is my last question in this round, in
your report you find that available methods for determining a
numeric standard for ballast water discharge are limited by a
profound lack of data to develop and validate models
determining risks of invasion. Why, given your finding that
available methods of determining a numeric standard for ballast
water discharge are limited by a profound lack of data, do you
feel the IMO standards should be implemented?
Mr. Carlton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What we suggest in the report is that we now seek a
benchmark discharge standard that is lower than what can be
achieved by current ballast water exchange, which is limited
and often very patchy. What we identify in the report was that
was a different kind of discharge standard and what we
suggested was that something like the IMO D-2 standard--such as
the IMO D-2 standard--would be a direction to go in, but we did
demure from specifically saying that that particular standard
should be implemented because of our concern with being able to
identify a specific number, based upon all the models we
discussed in the report, but we did go in that direction of
saying that a standard that would achieve concentrations lower
than that--than what is achieved by ballast water exchange,
such as the IMO D-2 as an example, would be a direction to go
in.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Dr. Carlton, continuing on that point, again, while your
report doesn't endorse a specific standard, it sure seems to
point in a direction, the IMO D-2 or Coast Guard phase one
standard, at least in the direction of it. If that standard is
put in place, did you--in regulation or legislation--does the
NRC consider at all whether that should be a uniform standard
or a baseline for States to build on, and if it didn't, do you
have your own personal opinion?
Mr. Carlton. We did not go in that direction. We did not
address the question as to whether it should be a national or
how it would work at State or international levels. It was more
of a broad approach to where we should go to get beyond ballast
water exchange. And my personal opinion is that a uniform
standard would certainly the wise direction to go in terms of
what the industry could respond to.
Mr. Larsen. Could you explain why, in your opinion?
Mr. Carlton. Yes. Certainly, and again, this is my personal
opinion; the committee did not address this. That various
vessels that are arriving at different ports, different port
facilities, various COTP regions would be faced with
potentially a wide variety of different regulatory frameworks,
which would make putting on-board or other kinds of ballast
water management systems a tremendous challenge. I look at that
internationally as well. These vessels are visiting many
different countries, and certainly something that would achieve
a strong global standard would be the way to go, in my opinion.
Mr. Larsen. Dr. Swackhamer, regarding the standards and
technology, for many years, this debate has included the
question of whether standards should be set at the level of
available technology or whether standards should be set and
then basically give the incentive for the private sector to
move technology to the standard. Based on the results of your
review, it appears the establishment of the IMO standard caused
the private sector to develop technologies designed to meet the
standard. Do you believe the five technologies that you
identified would have been developed in the absence of this
standard?
Ms. Swackhamer. Mr. Larsen, it is hard for me to second-
guess what the industry would do, but I would agree with your
statement that once they have a regulatory goal or guidance,
they then can--that spurs innovation to develop the
technologies to meet those goals.
Mr. Larsen. Would strengthening standards in the future
result in further improvements in technology?
Ms. Swackhamer. I am sorry could you repeat that.
Mr. Larsen. Would strengthening standards in the future
result in improvements in technology?
Ms. Swackhamer. Mr. Larsen, I do believe that that would be
the case, that once you set another standard, you begin to show
where the road map is going to go, it does spur the innovation
to develop those technologies.
Mr. Larsen. Admiral Salerno, the Coast Guard Shipboard
Technology Evaluation Program is currently evaluating four
different technologies on six vessels. The SAB identified five
technologies that can meet the phase one IMO D-2 standard. Are
any of these the same technologies?
Admiral Salerno. I believe they are, sir. There are also
some additional applications that are currently being reviewed,
and some of these are fleet-wide applications, so an
additional--actually, a total of 60 vessels that have applied
for entry into the step program, which provides that platform
to test new technologies. So I can get back to you for the
record, but I believe all of the available technologies would
be represented in these additional step applicants.
[The information follows:]

The Science Advisory Board report identified five
different categories or general types of Ballast Water
Management System (BWMS) technologies that are able to
definitively meet the D-2 (and hence the U.S. Coast
Guard Phase I) standard. These five general categories
are:

(1) Deoxygenation + Cavitation
(2) Filtration + Chlorine Dioxide (Cl
O
2
)
(3) Filtration + Ultra-violet light (UV)
(4) Filtration + UV + Titanium Oxide
(TiO
2
)
(5) Filtration + Electro-chlorination

Vessels that are enrolled in or that have applied for
enrollment in the Coast Guard's Shipboard Technology
Evaluation Program employ all categories of BWMS
technologies except ``Filtration + UV + Titanium
Oxide.'' There are no pending applications which have
identified this technology as their treatment method.

Mr. Larsen. A question I have with regard--is the
relationship here between the vessel general permit and the
science and the research that is being done because I think--
and Dr. Carlton, your fourth point is about urging the
development of robust statistical models, studies, further
investigations and so on. Do you have an idea, a concept of the
timing of the kind of research that we need to get done to get
to the, you know, highest probability of killing the bad guys,
killing the critters?
Mr. Carlton. Mr. Larsen, in terms of timetable of the
research agenda, that kind of thing?
Mr. Larsen. Yeah.
Mr. Carlton. We suggest in the report that there was low-
hanging fruit that was available within 3 to 5 years if some of
these programs could be instituted, complementary programs that
would be both experimental and field in nature. Basically, what
our committee found again and again was that when we turned to
looking for research data that would support the basic
constructs, the basic parameters and models of where we were
going, it just wasn't there. We felt that there were some
programs that could be designed if they were to be implemented
where we could get very useful data in fairly short term.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Chairman, I think I will hold there and,
perhaps on the second round, come back.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK, thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to explore a little bit invasion prevention with Dr.
Carlton in just a second, but start with Admiral Salerno.
You mentioned, currently, technology is there I think you
said 10--I will call them critters--per 1 cubic meter of water
was that equal to 1 parts per trillion, correct?
Admiral Salerno. There are different size categories of the
critters, sir, and what I referenced was the largest size,
which is 50 microns, which is essentially the size of a human
cell, and that the standard, the phase one standard is 10
organisms or less in a cubic meter.
Mr. Gibbs. And that would be the equivalent to parts per
trillion?
Admiral Salerno. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. So that would be the phase one, that would be
similar to the IMO standard that 28 nations have ratified?
Admiral Salerno. That is correct.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. I guess, to Dr. Carlton, then, your
testimony about invasion prevention, I guess what I am hearing,
the science isn't there to determine, even at parts per
trillion, if that is a threshold that is great enough for, the
zebra mussels in the Great Lakes to be able to adapt and
multiply--is that correct? We just don't know what the number
should be, or it has to be zero?
Mr. Carlton. Right. At those kinds of numbers, where we
have something like 10 or less organisms at 50 micrometers (50
microns) per cubic meter, that is well within the size range of
quite a number of different organisms. The tiny larvae of a
number of invertebrates, the cysts of organisms that cause red
tides are all within that 50-micron and smaller range. When we
multiply that times the cubic meters that are in a ship, the
volume, so that number actually goes up substantially. So,
within that range, we understand that there is still an
inoculum available, even at what seems like disappearingly
small numbers. It is multiplied by the volume of water in that
ship, how many hundreds of thousands of cubic meters, and then
the number of ships that continue the arrive. That said, it is
those kinds of numbers that we struggled with in terms of what
minimum inoculum density is necessary to get an exotic species
population going.
Mr. Gibbs. So, knowing all this and knowing we don't have
technology to go further, are you supportive of the United
States ratifying the IMO and before when this permit expires, I
think in a year or two? Would you support that, or something
else?
Mr. Carlton. As my personal opinion--again, the committee
didn't address this--I would certainly support going in the
strong directions that move us beyond ballast water exchange.
Ballast water exchange has very large gaps in the management
system for coast-wide trade. A number of vessels are exempt
from it. We know that vessels in the foreign trade in fact
cannot achieve ballast water exchange at times or not
efficiently, and so we know that we need to move beyond that.
And so I am supportive of both a global and national program
that ratchets this down considerably and gets us beyond what
was widely considered to be a stopgap measure for the past 20
years.
Ballast water exchange has always been a temporary measure,
and what we need to do is get beyond that and get moving on to
these programs, where combining what we can with ballast water
management systems and however those are manifested reduces the
concentration of those organisms considerably, and that we
think will have a huge impact on invasion probability.
Mr. Gibbs. Dr. Swackhamer, I guess I am intrigued with
HACCP because I know a little something about that in the food
supply line. Has that been more developed, or is there an
actual proposal for critical points in how we could work to
prevent the invasion of a species?
Ms. Swackhamer. Mr. Gibbs, to my knowledge, it has not been
developed specifically for invasive species, but the SAB feels
that that particular HACCP approach, which has been in play for
a long time and been quite successful at protecting the food
supply, that that approach would be an ideal--it would
translate ideally to the management of invasive species, from
the taking of ballast water to its final discharge. So it would
really be--instead of--it would include the numeric standard,
but it would be managing ballast water from start to finish and
finding those critical points in that process and then putting
in place controls and monitoring to make sure that you are
dealing with invasive species at each critical point in that
line.
Mr. Gibbs. I guess my last question is for Admiral Salerno.
When I was back in the Ohio legislature, we had some committee
hearings on ballast water exchanges and issues in the Great
Lakes. Mechanically, ships are coming in and staying in the
Saint Lawrence Seaway. They are required to exchange their
ballast water 200 miles out or something like that. Most ships,
can they exchange it, or do they flush through? Can you just
explain briefly the mechanics of how all that works?
Admiral Salerno. Yes, sir, the exchange is required to take
place beyond 200 miles, which is our exclusive economic zone.
It can, it is required to occur, but there are some provisions
for allowing a ship not to do it. Mostly they are safety
related; if, for example, if a ship is engaged in a storm, then
it would be unsafe for the ship to shift ballast; there is an
exemption there.
The seaway also has a requirement for flushing. Coast Guard
has a policy; the seaway has a requirement for flushing for
empty ballast tanks, and that obviously also takes place out in
mid ocean. And what we do is, in conjunction whether the seaway
and Canadian authorities, is verify compliance at Massena, New
York, so, essentially, in the seaway prior to entering the
Lakes, and we are finding a high degree of compliance with
those requirements.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hanlon, the title of this hearing is, ``Reducing
Regulatory Burdens, Ensuring the Flow of Commerce and
Protecting Jobs,'' and I think it is fair to say that the
implication of that title is that there is a view of some that
ballast water treatment requirements and discharge standards
constitute a regulatory burden that is impeding commerce. To
your knowledge, has the implementation of the vessel general
permit had a significant adverse impact on the flow of maritime
commerce thus far?
Mr. Hanlon. Chairman Bishop, thank you----
Mr. Bishop. I can only hope.
Mr. Hanlon. Or Ranking Member Bishop, thank you for your
comment and question. The effective date of vessel general
permit was February of 2009. We are going on 2\1/2\ years of
implementation. To the best of my knowledge, there have been no
interruptions of trade or commerce resulting from the permit.
Mr. Bishop. Any other member of the panel wish to comment
on that?
Admiral Salerno, are you in a position to comment on that?
Admiral Salerno. If I can take that one for the record,
sir.
[The information follows:]

With regard to the ballast water requirements in
Section 2 of the Vessel General Permit (VGP), which
mirrors pre-existing ballast water requirements in the
pollution regulations in force before VGP came into
effect, there is no significant adverse impact to the
flow of maritime commerce. This is based on the exams
conducted by the Coast Guard since March 2011, where
only minor deficiencies have been identified and
provided to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
for further action.

Mr. Bishop. All right.
Mr. Hanlon, the second question. One argument that is
raised is that we have two different laws. We have the Clean
Water Act and we have the National Invasive Species Act, and
that the two are duplicative and that we don't really need
regulation under the Clean Water Act with respect to this
issue. Is that of a view that you share? And if so, why, and if
not, why not?
Mr. Hanlon. The last time I appeared before this committee
on a hearing on this subject, I testified that the EPA view was
that we did not need duplicative coverage. That was a view
supported by the last administration. This administration has
not taken a position in terms of the value of NISA and Clean
Water Act coverage of ballast water.
I believe that EPA, working very closely with the Coast
Guard, has succeeded in implementing a system that has
successfully made progress in the management of ballast water;
in our case, implementing a commonsense workable permit.
Mr. Bishop. But more specifically, do you believe that the
application of the Clean Water Act provides protections beyond
those that the National Invasive Species Act provides?
Mr. Hanlon. Yes, I do.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, anyone else care to comment on this
issue?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Coble, Master Chief Coble.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. I
thank you for that elevation.
Admiral Salerno, when will the Coast Guard release its
final ballast water regs?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, they are in clearance. Of course,
they were published initially in 2009. We have received over
2,000 comments largely from industry. Very carefully went
through all of those. But the interim final rule is in
clearance.
We do feel a great sense of urgency to get these
regulations published for the simple reason that we are seeking
to harmonize with EPA, and EPA has a deadline to revise its
vessel general permit. So when these regulations are published,
that would be useful to EPA. And their deadline is really later
this fall. So we are working very aggressively within the
administration to meet that deadline.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir.
Will the Coast Guard regulations, Admiral, allow the use of
shore-side systems, rather than shipboard systems?
Admiral Salerno. Shore-side systems are a possibility, sir.
But it brings with it a great number of complications. Similar
to what we have for sludge or oily waste, every facility would
have to have that capability for the system to work.
So, currently, the proposed regulations are really
shipboard-based so that every ship has its own system to deal
with the limitation of invasive species.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Hanlon, as you note in your testimony, EPA expects to
release a draft vessel general permit, VGP, to replace the
existing one by the end of the year. Has the EPA worked with
the Coast Guard in developing its due discharge standards to
prevent duplicity, and how can you ensure the uniformity if the
VGP becomes subject to another lawsuit or further litigation?
Mr. Hanlon. We continue to work closely with the Coast
Guard in terms of the development of options that will be
considered for the draft general permit to be released by the
end of the year. Again, we develop permits, the vessel general
permit in this case, under the authorities of the Clean Water
Act implementing regulations, and that based on that, we make
decisions, Administrator Jackson makes decisions based on final
permits, final regulations. It is not uncommon we are
challenged on those decisions like we were challenged on the
2008 vessel permit. But as I mentioned a minute ago, we
continue to implement that permit and have done so
successfully.
Mr. Coble. Thank you all for being with us.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Master Chief.
Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Salerno and Mr. Hanlon, Dr. Dennis King with the
University of Maryland Maritime Environmental Resource Center
has written that based on planned IMO compliance deadlines,
over 50,000 merchant ships will need to install certified BWT
systems by 2016 to 2017. That is about 10,000 ships per year
for 5 years or so.
And since many larger ships may need to install multiple
BWT units to meet IMO discharge standards, the number of actual
BWT units that will need to be manufactured and installed
during those years to achieve widespread compliance may be
closer to 20,000 or 30,000 per year.
Based on the Coast Guard's research, how many vessels would
need to install ballast water treatment systems if the U.S.
adopts the proposed ballast water standards?
Admiral Salerno. Morning, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Good morning. Good to see you again.
Admiral Salerno. Good to see you, sir.
Sir, let me talk about the international fleet first.
Every year, the U.S. is visited by between 8,000 and 9,000
individual ships. All of those vessels would need to comply
with our standards. Internationally, of course, that number is
much higher because the international fleet includes ships that
don't necessarily visit the United States. So 40,000 to 50,000
is probably in the accurate range.
There is also a domestic fleet that would need to comply
under the NPRM, and there the numbers are not as clear. Our
proposed rulemaking estimated about 2,600. The feedback we
received from industry suggests that number needs to be revised
upwards significantly. I don't have an absolute number for you,
but I would say it would be a several-fold increase in the
number of domestic vessels that would need to comply with the
proposed standard.
Mr. Cummings. Now, Dr. Swackhamer, are existing companies
capable of producing the number of treatment systems needed to
meet the demand.
Ms. Swackhamer. Our panel did not actually address that
question so I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. Cummings. Is there anybody that can answer that
question on the panel?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, I can tell you that a lot of the
feedback we received from industry suggests there is concern
about the availability of equipment. So that is something that
we are paying very close attention to.
Mr. Cummings. All right.
Admiral Salerno, a report that the EPA commission found
that the systems currently exist to meet the International
Maritime Organization's standards. Can you state how many such
systems exist, and roughly speaking, how much does each system
cost to install and maintain? Further, how large are such
systems, and could they be easily accommodated in the existing
vessels?
Admiral Salerno. Sir, as far as the availability of
systems, internationally, there are about seven other countries
that have approved systems under the provisions of IMO,
totaling about 11 individual system types. The Coast Guard has
not yet approved any of those systems, but we are aware of them
and would go through the approval process with those
manufacturers.
The cost to acquire and install, obviously, will vary
depending on the ship type and service. For a large ocean-going
ship, the cost of acquisition is probably somewhere at $1.8
million. And then installation, you are probably $2.5 million
on average. Less so for a domestic vessel. But you are still
talking probably several hundred thousand.
As far as size goes, again, that will vary, but for a large
ocean-going ship, this is a significant bit of installation,
roughly equivalent in volume to a large freight container. And
that would require additional pumping and power requirements so
that, in many cases, it will require the ship to have that
installation done in a shipyard.
For smaller vessels, obviously, the units would be smaller
but still quite substantial. For example, a small coastal
vessel, probably looking at several hundred thousand for
installation and the unit, maybe the size of one or two home-
sized refrigerators.
Mr. Cummings. With the chair's indulgence, I just want to
ask one quick other question.
I just want to--I am concerned. Before I close, I also want
to take a moment and note that yesterday the National
Transportation Safety Board issued its report on a 2009
accident--are you familiar with that--in San Diego, in which a
Coast Guard patrol boat collided with a recreational boat
killing a young child. The NTSB identified excessive speed of
the Coast Guard patrol boat as a cause of this accident. This
report of course is very troubling to us. As the NTSB noted, it
is the Coast Guard that is charged with ensuring the safety of
our recreational boating activities and enforcing the rules of
the road on our waterways. I hope that you all are acting on
that because that is of great concern to us. It sets a very
poor example, I think.
And wouldn't you agree, if we have got our own folks who
are supposed to be saving lives speeding down the waterways and
leading to such a tragic incident? I wouldn't be making this
comment if the NTSB had not already made its finding.
Admiral Salerno. Sir, I can assure you we take that
incident and anything like that incident extremely seriously.
It did trigger very in depth internal investigation, and
disciplinary action has been taken as well as policy measures
that have been put in place to ensure that that type of
situation does not occur again. But we take that extremely
seriously.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
We will now recognize the gentleman from coastal Louisiana,
Mr. Landry.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carlton, I can't help but sit here listening to all of
this and think about being down on the coast and growing up and
doing a lot of fishing and having a lot of social interaction
with commercial fishermen.
I could think of one old shrimper down in my district, Mr.
Sharem. He is about 85 years old. He has got no formal
education. And as you all were talking, and I think if he would
be sitting here, he would probably look at me and say, ``You
know, boy, just put a little more Clorox in the ballast, and we
could solve the problem.''
And it seems that is exactly what you were saying. You
know, we could spend millions of dollars trying to come up with
processes to filter the water, but it seems like if we just put
a little more Clorox in the ballasts, we would do a lot more
good and save a lot more money. Is that not what you were kind
of alluding to?
Mr. Carlton. It is an interesting question. I am going to
pass this over to Dr. Swackhamer; her committee looked at all
of these various technologies. But I do appreciate--I spend
time at Grand Isle and Cocodrie and along the Louisiana coast.
And I appreciate those senses of those who are living and
working along the coastline as to the more pragmatic strategies
that we should take.
But in fact, chemical control, although it wasn't something
our committee looked at, has been looked at for ballast water
management and it has been considered to be a challenge, of
course, as to chemically treating water. But let me pass that
over to Dr. Swackhamer, whose committee looked at that
question.
Ms. Swackhamer. Mr. Landry, on a small scale, certainly
using diluted bleach is a good way to clean your kitchen, but
it is not a very good way to actually get at large volumes of
ballast water. And the reason is the number of organisms and
the number of particles in the water. So you have to go through
multiple kinds of treatments to really, one, remove as many
organisms as you can from some sort of physical filtration, and
then you want to disinfect using----
Mr. Landry. Would you say there is more ballast water than
there are household sinks in this country?
Ms. Swackhamer. No. It is a small-scale issue versus a
large-scale.
Mr. Landry. It is a small-scale issue if you look at it
from a sink to a ballast, but if you go from a city to a ship,
I think the amount that you are putting down the drain is
probably more in the city than it would be in the ballast.
But I guess my problem is we seem to not be taking
pragmatic approaches and rather trying to look at something,
which I think you all do a lot of, and that is to dream up what
is the best case scenario to just filter the water to a point
where even sometimes it seems like you are just going above and
beyond what we need.
And it strangles industry, and it kills jobs. And that is
my concern whether it is Clorox or some other agent that we
could use, it seems like you all could come up with something
that is a lot cheaper.
Before I run out of time, I wanted to ask the Admiral why
is it--tell me what we could do to keep EPA from having to get
involved in maritime vessels. I would rather keep enforcement
of these issues strictly under the Coast Guard's supervision,
just because I think that is where it belongs. And now we are
paying for two agencies to basically do the same thing, and
then we can't seem to come to an agreement.
Admiral Salerno. Sir, the way we have approached that is in
cooperation with EPA, we have actually signed a memorandum of
understanding----
Mr. Landry. I don't want you all to cooperate. I just want
to give it to you.
Admiral Salerno. I will leave that to Congress, sir.
What we do is our people go out on the vessels. They are
trained in what the EPA requirements are, and we act as
detectors. We wrap that into our normal requirements.
Mr. Landry. I wouldn't want to task the Coast Guard with
making sure that we enforce household--you know, sewage
treatment facilities land-based. And that is my point is, I
don't want you all to be doing their job and them to do your
job. And I think they would be better off where you are.
But one quick before--I have got 20 seconds. Mr. Hanlon,
you testified that approximately 69,000 domestic and foreign
vessels, which are subject to the permit requirement while in
U.S. waters. Do you know how many of these regulated vessels
are owned by the U.S. Government?
Mr. Hanlon. I don't have that information. We can certainly
get back to you for the record on that.
Mr. Landry. Are those Government vessels going to have to
adhere to these same guidelines as the private vessels, or are
we going to exempt DOD vessels?
Mr. Hanlon. Under provisions of the Clean Water Act,
military vessels are not subject to the 402 Clean Water Act
permit. That is a separate rulemaking process under way for
military vessels.
Mr. Landry. So the Coast Guard vessels won't have to meet
the same criteria as the private vessels, is that what you are
saying?
Mr. Hanlon. That is correct. But EPA vessels--basically, we
have a very limited number of vessels--they have applied for
and are complying with the permits.
Mr. Landry. Would they have to?
Mr. Hanlon. Yes, sir. Only military vessels.
Mr. Landry. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Ms. Herrera Beutler, do you have questions?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I mean, I have more questions for the
second panel.
But just maybe just to the group, what happens if Congress
doesn't step in and do something? In terms of where we are at
in the regulatory framework, what happens, and what would the
cost be? That is really to the group.
Mr. Hanlon. I think the path forward--well, as the Admiral
testified, their regulation is in the final review process and
will be issued. EPA will continue to coordinate and work with
the Coast Guard staff in terms of their final regulation. The
next generation of the vessel permit that is supposed to be
proposed in November of this year and as we have with the past
permit and Coast Guard regulations, we will continue to
coordinate to ensure that there are sort of commonsense
implementable solutions on the ground that ship owners and ship
operators can comply with and will sort of know what the
standards are so that there isn't any fuzziness in terms of
what the requirements are at any point in time for any vessel
on the water.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Those rules, both of them, they don't
supersede State, any kind of State, the State framework at all.
So if a State has additional--so it is what you are putting out
in addition; correct?
Mr. Hanlon. That is correct.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Gibbs indicated he had some additional
questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is for Mr. Hanlon, kind of a follow up on my last
round of questions. We were talking about the parts per
trillion and the IMO standard. My understanding is New York and
California are putting into place standards 100 to 1,000 times
greater than the IMO standard. And do you have any idea how
vessel operators could expect to comply with those standards?
Mr. Hanlon. The conditions that New York, for example, has
placed on the EPA 2008 vessel permit was under the authority of
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act, where Congress said, for
any Federal license or permit, a State can attach conditions
relative to that license or permit complying with State water
quality standards, so those are independent decisions that are
made by States and are subject to challenges in courts. As Dr.
Swackhamer testified, we are not aware of any technologies
today why----
Mr. Gibbs. My follow-up question to that is does the U.S.
EPA have any mechanism to override any burdensome restrictions
put on by States then?
Mr. Hanlon. Under 401 certifications, we do not.
Mr. Gibbs. So in the EPA's opinion, should the Federal
Government have the primacy in determining ballast water
regulations then? Would you agree with that?
Mr. Hanlon. The vessel general permit was issued by EPA.
That is our permit, yes, sir.
Mr. Gibbs. Can vessel owners or operators face citizens'
lawsuits for failure to comply with the 401 certifications?
Mr. Hanlon. In as much as a 401 condition is a condition of
the permit, the answer to that is yes.
Mr. Gibbs. Would the EPA support a waiver of 401
certifications for vessels engaged in interstate commerce?
Mr. Hanlon. That is a question we would be happy to get
back to you on the record.
Mr. Gibbs. I am just trying to address some uniformity on
the issue with regard to interstate commerce.
Mr. Hanlon. We understand that. We also understand that in
the 2008 permit and the 401 certifications, for some States, it
had been 30 or more years before they had been in a position to
issue a 401 certification on an EPA permit. And they had to do
that in a relatively short period of time.
Our plans are to give States a minimum of 6 months on the
next permit to consider their certification requirements, if
any, that may continue after a proposal of the next permit. And
again, that permit will be informed by the work of both the
National Academy and----
Mr. Gibbs. Giving States more time wouldn't guarantee
uniformity, though, under that permitting process, correct?
Mr. Hanlon. I am sorry, I didn't hear----
Mr. Gibbs. Giving States more time under this permitting
process wouldn't guarantee uniformity, correct?
Mr. Hanlon. Correct.
Mr. Gibbs. OK, thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Do any Members have additional questions for
the first panel?
Well, thank you very much for a helpful, very informative
session.
We are now going to move to our second panel, give a chance
to switch out and announce who they are.
Our second panel includes Mr. Thomas Allegretti, who is the
president The American Waterways Operators, who is also
representing the Shipping Industry Ballast Water Coalition; and
Mr. Michael Jewell, who is president of the Marine Engineers'
Beneficial Association.
I would like to thank them for being here today, and in
just a second, we will go forward with their testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS A. ALLEGRETTI, PRESIDENT AND CEO, THE
AMERICAN WATERWAYS OPERATORS, ON BEHALF OF THE SHIPPING
INDUSTRY BALLAST WATER COALITION; AND MICHAEL JEWELL,
PRESIDENT, MARINE ENGINEERS' BENEFICIAL ASSOCIATION

Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Allegretti, whenever you are ready you
are recognized.
Mr. Allegretti. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo.
Today's hearing is aptly titled and most timely. Our Nation
urgently needs the commonsense approach which your
subcommittees are seeking.
Without congressional action, the flow of critical maritime
commerce will be constrained, American jobs will be
jeopardized, regulatory burdens on business and workers will
multiply, and American taxpayers will continue to foot the bill
for duplicative and contradictory programs.
The bipartisan leadership of these two subcommittees is
crucial to ensure that our Nation avoids these unwarranted
outcomes.
The good news is that Congress has a huge opportunity to
change the situation by enacting legislation that is good for
U.S. business and American mariners, is good for the U.S.
environment, and is good for the American economy and jobs.
In my remarks to you this morning, I would like to address
three fundamental issues: First, we must streamline existing
regulations so they are clear to companies and mariners. The
30,000 American mariners who live and work aboard the 4,000
towing vessels in our industry are currently subject to the
regulations of two Federal agencies and 26 States. These
regulations have overlapping and conflicting requirements about
how to use and discharge water on vessels that are operating in
interstate commerce. The situation is confusing and unfair for
hardworking Americans. And it is legally treacherous for law-
abiding companies.
These mariners and companies are at risk of unwittingly
committing a felony because of the patchwork of requirements
that differ from one side of an invisible line in the water to
another. Consider this: A tug and barge unit on a typical
Northeast coastal voyage must traverse the waters of seven
States to move petroleum from a refinery in New Jersey to a
terminal in Maine. A typical inland barge tow will traverse the
waters of 11 States moving cargo on the Ohio and Mississippi
rivers from Pittsburgh to New Orleans. These vessels are
required to comply with Federal standards established by both
the EPA and the Coast Guard. The vessels must also comply with
State and sometimes water-body specific conditions established
by each of the States through which they are passing. Failure
to comply with these rules is a crime.
This simply is not the right way to regulate an interstate
industry that is vital to the American economy. The lack of
uniform Federal rules creates confusion that makes it more
difficult for companies and mariners to comply with
environmental regulations, and it puts hardworking Americans at
risk of becoming felons. American companies, mariners and
taxpayers deserve better and more streamlined standards from
their Government.
Second, we need to really protect the environment. The
current regulatory situation actually undermines that
objective. The absence of uniform national standards has
encouraged a competition among States to establish the most
stringent treatment standards on the books. Under the logic of
this competition, if the international standard is good, a
standard 100 or 1,000 times more stringent must be better.
There are two big problems with this thinking. One, the
technology to achieve those standards, or even the science to
measure them, simply does not exist. And two, no responsible
business can invest millions of dollars per vessel to install a
ballast water treatment system that might be accepted in some
States but not in others.
The unfortunate result of the situation is that we have
spent much of the last several years arguing about and
litigating fantasy standards instead of implementing effective
ones. That is as bad for the environment as it is bad for
business.
Third, we must protect American jobs. The economic stakes
are very high. The barges and towing vessels in our industry
safely and efficiently move more than 800 million tons of
critical cargo each year. Our industry is mostly comprised of
small businesses and the regulatory burdens of this broken
system are complex to the point of crushing.
Mr. Chairman, the problem is not that vessels discharges
are regulated; it is how they are regulated. The current
situation is untenable for the movement of American commerce.
It is harmful to the high-quality jobs that our industry
provides. It is an obstacle to the real protection of the
marine environment.
We respectfully urge the Subcommittees to take the lead in
correcting a regulatory, environmental, and economic wrong by
passing legislation that establishes a national framework for
the regulation of vessel discharges.
Thank you for your leadership in holding today's hearing
and for providing us the opportunity to testimony.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Allegretti.
Mr. Jewell, you are recognized for your statement.
Mr. Jewell. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Gibbs and
Ranking Members Larsen and Bishop. I am Mike Jewell, president
of the MEBA. And I hold a U.S. Coast Guard chief engineer's
license and am a captain in the U.S. Navy Reserve.
On behalf of the Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association,
the American Maritime Officers, the International Organization
of Master Mates and Pilots, and Seafarers International Union,
I thank you for the opportunity to testify and for your
continued support of the U.S. Merchant Marine.
Collectively, our maritime leader organizations represent
men and women working aboard U.S.-flag commercial vessels
operating our Nation's foreign commerce and domestic trades.
The regulations that govern this fleet are very important. They
have a large impact on its ability to compete for a larger
share of America's foreign trade and the creation of vibrant
coastwise shipping industry and maritime related jobs.
There is a need for clear and consistent measures to
address ballast water. The discharge of ballast water in U.S.
could disrupt the environment if it contains invasive species.
The U.S.-flag maritime community continues to work diligently
to address the issue.
As the subcommittee moves forward in their consideration of
ballast water regulatory policies, we ask you to include the
following factors: The uniformity by flag. In order for its
intended effect to stay competitive in the world market, any
ballast water regulation applied to the vessels operating in
U.S. waters should apply to both U.S.- and foreign-flagged
vessels.
A comprehensive Federal standard. Under current law,
individual States are able to implement their own regulations
and establish State-specific permits. Unfortunately, the State
permit development process does not always follow the Federal
model of public comment and industry involvement. With
constantly changing laws and regulations, it is difficult for
vessel operators to formulate and conduct a sound business
plan.
The maritime industry will be well-served by a
comprehensive Federal standard rather than individual
legislation by the States.
The consideration of lakers. Vessels operated exclusively
on the Great Lakes require a unique consideration because of
the particular environment in which they operate. First,
Congress should question the need for any enhanced ballast
regulations on those vessels that spend their entire life
solely on the Great Lakes. Since the lakers do not leave the
system, they will never introduce non-indigenous species into
the Great Lakes.
Second, most vessels operating on the Lakes rely on a
higher level and speedier transfer of ballast water. Because of
the uniquely rapid transfer, many of the ballast treatment
systems proposed for their coastal and inland counterparts are
not suitable for use on these vessels.
Finally, there is no system today that satisfies the
proposed regulatory changes. Because of this and the cost
associated, the shipping industry on the Lakes would be put in
jeopardy. Well-intentioned environmental policies could have
unintended effect of pushing cargo to transportation means that
are vastly less environmental friendly than shipping. Therefore
when considering regulations on the Lakes, it is important to
consider the unique region-specific factors and operating
parameters
The promotion of coastwise shipping. Congress and the
administration have strongly supported the development of a
vibrant coastwise shipping industry that can supplement and
compliment the increasingly congested rail and roadways. This
energy-efficient and economically friendly industry would
create many new transportation jobs that would require little
or no Federal funding. Like the lakers, these vessels will
spend their entire life in the same waters. Therefore, the risk
of introduction of invasive species to the coastal communities
would be limited. To that end, Congress should consider
coastwise shipping when drafting regulations that stay within
U.S. waters.
Safety. Foremost in the consideration for the ballast
standards and the corresponding implementation deadline should
be safety. Both the rate and volume of ballast transfers ensure
ships remain stable. And should requirements be put in place,
where improper technology exists, the ship's integrity and
safety of its mariners are put at risk.
In conclusion, the American policymakers have long
recognized the best interest of the United States to maintain
and support a strong U.S.-flag Merchant Marine industry, our
men and women protect, strengthen and enhance our Nation's
economic and military security.
Promoting the water-borne shipment of goods would
dramatically reduce the country's environmental footprint and
create good jobs. Developing highly skilled middle class jobs
in today's economic environment is invaluable. To best serve
the economy surrounding the U.S.-flag industry, the United
States should develop a safe, sound, economically feasible
regulations that affect ballast water transfer.
Working together we can achieve a high level of
environmental standards as well as foster developments of new
jobs.
Thank you. I welcome your questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Jewell.
Mr. Allegretti, would you tell the committee from your
perspective, what would the impact be if the 401 certifications
in California and New York were enforced?
Mr. Allegretti. It is difficult to contemplate what the
effect is on real people when something like that happens. We
are talking about real mariners who work aboard vessels. We are
talking about companies that have been developed over the
course of generations, family-owned companies. And the impacts
of those kinds of enforcement are real.
The situation we face with the State certification
requirements, as I said in my remarks, is untenable.
Mr. Chairman, you said it is unsustainable. I think that is
absolutely correct. It is totally unsustainable.
Today we live with a dysfunctional system that we comply
with at great cost, with great difficulty and, at the end of
the day, with great uncertainty about whether we are actually
in compliance with the law.
There is no way that over the long term, our industry can
live with that kind of a system without impacting the folks who
make their living aboard the vessels and the ability to move
commerce in the interstate system.
Mr. LoBiondo. So it would, from your perspective, have a
dramatic and very negative impact on the ability to retain the
level of jobs we have now, let alone hire more people?
Mr. Allegretti. Absolutely. I mean, companies have to make
decisions about future investments. Nobody can make rational
judgments about investing millions of dollars in the capital
equipment and in the training that goes into their workforce
when they look down the road and see a system that is
fundamentally dysfunctional.
Mr. LoBiondo. Your opinion, how would you suggest we, the
Congress, go about creating a uniform Federal framework for
regulation of vessel discharges?
Mr. Allegretti. Our coalition, the Shipping Industry
Ballast Water Coalition, has spent a lot of time talking about
that, consulting with folks on the Hill about the art of the
possible and also looking at the legal paths forward to make
sure that if and when Congress enacts remedial legislation,
that it will not be subject to being overturned in the courts.
And the best thinking that we can provide to the
subcommittees is that the regulation of ballast water and
vessel discharges in the future should be done under the
framework of the Clean Water Act. That is the proper place for
the regulation to take place. But it has to take place within a
new subtitle of the law which provides for a national system of
regulation, a national system of uniformity, and removes vessel
discharges from the NPDES permit system that it is currently
subject to as a result of the Circuit Court decision in
California.
So we would recommend that the Clean Water Act be amended
to allow for a national framework. We would also recommend that
the authorities for implementing that framework be jointly
provided to the Coast Guard and to EPA. Which should take
advantage of the natural strengths of those two agencies. EPA
has enormous scientific expertise. The Coast Guard has enormous
operational and Maritime expertise. And together, they can set
effective national standards, and they can implement and
enforce them.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Jewell, we have had a lot of discussion over the last
couple of years and I think pretty broad-based acceptance that
we have to really focus on marine highways and implement a
short seas shipping program. Your opinion, if we continue to
move forward with dozens of State and Federal laws regulating
ballast water and other incidental discharges, what impact will
that have on our efforts to revitalize our marine highways and
implement a short seas shipping program?
Mr. Jewell. When you look at the short seas shipping, and
if--you can overregulate it. And if you do overregulate it, you
are not going to have people and companies willing to invest in
the short seas shipping if you overregulate the ballast water
concerns.
You are in the EEZ zone of the United States, and these
ships are going to be designed supposedly not to transfer
outside the EEZ zone of the United States. Therefore, they are
going to stay in the intercoastal waters of the United States.
Very rarely will they probably go outside the 50 miles. And if
you regulate them too much, you will not find owners coming in
to want to build ships and invest in the marine highway system.
Mr. LoBiondo. In your opinion, what issues should Congress
consider when developing legislation to address these ballast
water issues?
Mr. Jewell. I look at it as a very simple thing. Less than
a year ago, I was on a ship. We had to come into the United
States, and we did have ballast water. And under a U.S.-flag
ship, it is very simple; once we get inside the EEZ zone, we do
not pump ballast out. And when we go to the dock, we do not
pump ballast water out in the pier or in the bays. We just
simply do not do that. One of the reasons we don't do that is
you have fuel lines that run through ballast tanks. And what
those ballast tanks--and you don't know the age of the ships,
the United States fleet, it could contain oil. We simply do
not--and I think it is very simple--is we don't deballast at
the pier or dock or in the bays or estuaries. We just simply
don't do that. It is a very simple rule.
We exchange the five times out there in the middle of the
ocean. Coming from Korea, we actually ballast in Korea to get
the ship down to the water to make it safe to passage. Once we
get the middle of the ocean, we actually do our five exchanges
with good water. Then when we come into the United States, we
do not deballast in the bays and estuaries. Simply put.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Allegretti, is the issue facing your
industry the two Federal agencies or the 26 States?
Mr. Allegretti. It is the 26 States.
Mr. Larsen. So from what I understood you to say in
response to the chairman's question is that what you propose a
separate subtitle under the Clean Water Act that would be
specific to ballast water discharge, taking it out of the NPDES
process and creating--well, I don't know if you could create a
standard--but create a separate subtitle with regard to
discharge.
Mr. Allegretti. Ballast water discharge and all vessel
discharge; they should all be regulated together within the
same subtitle. And Mr. Larsen, there is precedent for doing
that. In the Clean Air Act, there are separate subtitles, one
of which deals with point sources and one of which deals with
mobile sources and so you would be kind of modeling it along
the Clean Air Act model.
Mr. Larsen. Do you have--does the industry have a view on
the Coast Guard's phase one standard?
Mr. Allegretti. Yes. We think that the Coast Guard's phase
one standard is the appropriate standard because it is the
internationally recognized standard, and it is the only
standard on which there is general consensus is technologically
achievable.
Mr. Larsen. Are any of your members participating in any of
the technology evaluations that Admiral Salerno discussed?
Mr. Allegretti. I don't believe so, but I would like to
clarify for the record. There may in fact be some who are
participating. And the challenges of ballast water management
on towing vessels are unique to what we understand. Most of the
knowledge and the science today focuses on large ocean-going
vessels and international commerce. The amount of ballast water
they carry and their flow rates, are very different, of course,
than the smaller towing vessels that operate domestically.
So just a technical challenge that we face as we move
forward is making sure that we size the ballast water
requirements to the vessels so that it is practicable and
achievable.
Mr. Larsen. And you don't want the technology applied to
the vessel to be larger than the vessel itself?
Mr. Allegretti. That would be a good standard to start
with, yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Just trying to help.
Mr. Jewell, are any of the vessels that your members work
on participating in technology evaluations.
Mr. Jewell. Not that I know of, no.
Mr. Larsen. Can you get back to us?
Mr. Jewell. Yes, we will. My staff will.
Mr. Larsen. And then, from your point of view as well, is
the issue the two Federal agencies or the 26 States?
Mr. Jewell. As a deep sea person, it is mainly the Federal,
but I truly, and being on the Great Lakes also, so it is kind
of a twofold so it is kind of both.
Mr. Larsen. OK, that is great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jewell, I just want to highlight in your written
testimony, you state, on January 1, 2012, New York State
regulations add to the EPA's vessel general permit will require
that ballast water be as pure as distilled water or similar to
bottled drinking water before it can be discharged into the
waters of the State. These well-intentioned regulations would
have the effect of closing the St. Lawrence Seaway thus
disrupting shipping throughout the region and eliminating the
waterway's workforce.
I want to highlight that because if you close the Saint
Lawrence Seaway because New York State is allowed to do this
and January 1, if that was implemented, that would shut down
the whole Great Lakes--it is unbelievable to me. I don't know
if you want to expound on that or not, but I wanted to make
sure that was highlighted because I don't know if you said that
in your oral testimony. I don't believe I heard it. I just
wanted to highlight that.
Mr. Allegretti, you just said you are in support of phase
one uniform standard. What would be the--what is the cost per
vessel approximately in order to implement the technology to
comply to phase one?
Mr. Allegretti. It is largely an unknown. I can tell you
what I think we understand the range of costs to be.
There was a survey done in California a couple of years ago
that looked at 14 different ballast water technologies and
tried to price them out. And the average number as I recall--
the average cost of the ballast water system was about $900,000
according to the survey. If you think about that relative to
the cost of equipment in the towing industry, a barge can cost
$400,000 to $500,000 so you would be putting a system on a
barge that costs twice the actual construction cost of the
barge. An inland towing vessel can cost somewhere in the $3 to
$4 million range. So you are putting equipment on the vessel
that is 20 to 25 percent of the cost of the original
construction price.
So you are talking about very significant, potentially
significant economic burdens relative to the cost of the
equipment that was constructed and bought for the purposes of
the transportation.
Mr. Gibbs. To go beyond phase one, you know I have heard
testimony that technology doesn't exist anyway to determine
that the thousands or hundred times the IMO standard, the phase
one standard, I am not going to speculate or assume that to put
in a ballast water system to go beyond phase one to phase two
would be totally out of reach for most people and would shut
down the industry.
Mr. Allegretti. Sir, I guess what I would ask the
subcommittee to be particularly attentive to is not using the
industry as a test bed for driving the improvement in
technology or further stringency of the standards. Those are
very good--I think those are very good goals that we should try
to achieve. But there is a different way to come at those as
opposed to requiring new technologies on vessels to figure out
how well it works. We should first make sure that it is
technologically feasible, practicable and available
commercially before we put a regulation in place that requires
people to purchase it.
Mr. Gibbs. My last question, Mr. Jewell, on training and in
preparing engineers to operate these ballast water management
systems and what is all involved in that and manpower
requirements.
Mr. Jewell. As far as the training, I can honestly say as
far as the American merchant marine, we are probably one of the
best trained in the world for all of us. I would think that we
would adapt very quickly to the training aspects. Each of the
unions have their own schools, and what I would expect is that
we would go to the manufacturer and get one of their engineers
to come in there and set up a class, and we would adapt
ourselves very quickly to the new ballast system if that were
to be put in place.
I truly look at it as it is not the American domestic fleet
that should be the problem because they are actually taking in
water from the coasts of the United States. And that way, I
truly look at it as a foreign-flag coming into this country
that brings in more of the invasive species and everything else
like that.
But on the domestic trade, you are taking water, if you are
in the Great Lakes, you are taking in the Great Lakes. The Gulf
Stream that comes up from Florida all the way to New York, that
is where you are going to be getting your ballast water, and
then to treat it, it seems to be not productive and at a cost
to the companies that right now, the way shipping is, cannot
really afford $1 million or $2 million of new equipment to be
put on ships.
Mr. LoBiondo. Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jewell and Mr. Allegretti, you have heard our chairman
reference, as well as Chairman Mica, of an interest in putting
some things in place to increase short seas shipping. Do you
feel that our current systems are in place to support that
potential growth?
Mr. Jewell. Yes, I do. I think we are moving more and more
and to get the trucks and everything else off the highways, I
think it is very important to establish the short sea shipping,
so to speak, and to build a short sea shipping up to get the
shipyards more productive, to build ships in the United States,
to provide the jobs. And as the ships are built, then the
mariners get to man the ships, and they are all U.S.-crude,
U.S.-flag vessels. And I think it is very productive.
Ms. Richardson. Is there anything that you think you need
prior to this being implemented? Is there any support or any
regulations or anything that you think you need from this
Congress in order to implement that effectively?
Mr. Jewell. Can I get back to you with that?
Ms. Richardson. Sure. Absolutely.
Mr. Jewell, actually I have a couple more questions for
you.
In your testimony, you described some of the imbalances you
see currently implemented on the U.S.- versus foreign-flag
vessels. Could you describe some of those imbalances that you
are currently experiencing?
Mr. Jewell. The cost of the foreign-flag crew is a big
thing, and foreign flags, they actually do not have the same
regulatory burdens that the Americans do. The American Merchant
Marines are probably the most regulated individuals in the
country, with driving records--we have to renew our license
every year--every 5 years, excuse me. Every 5 years, we renew
our license. We have to go through a driving check. We have to
go through two or three different other steps to be able to sit
there and get our license and to be able to sail. One DUI could
actually hurt your career as a U.S. Merchant Marine.
Ms. Richardson. Mr. Allegretti, what impact do you think
would we see if we were to impose a national standard on the
shipping industry, meaning from these 26 States that multiple
people have asked these questions about today? Have you heard
discussions as far as are they supportive, or are they
completely opposed?
Mr. Allegretti. You would have national jubilation.
Ms. Richardson. From States.
Mr. Allegretti. Did you ask about the States?
Ms. Richardson. Yes.
Mr. Allegretti. I can't speak for the States.
I will say that one of the major impediments to the
movement of this legislation has been the kind of theoretical
and philosophical arguments about the authority of States and
the unwillingness to preempt their actions in this area. And it
is obviously a significant issue that the subcommittees have to
deal with. I understand it is a sensitive issue.
But in the case of the movement of interstate commerce, it
is very clear, it is very clear in the Constitution, it is very
clear in two centuries of case law, it is very clear in recent
enactments of Congress that there are a small handful of areas
where the national interest trumps the authority of States to
act independently, and this is one of them.
Ms. Richardson. Are you aware of any specific opposition
that has been presented by the State?
Mr. Allegretti. Not personally, no.
Ms. Richardson. If you have any information, would you mind
supplying it to the committee?
Mr. Allegretti. Be happy to, ma'am.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you. And then my last question.
Mr. Jewell, you state in your testimony that domestically
U.S. vessels operate more efficiently, safely, and more
environmentally consciously than any other means of
transportation. And having worked on transportation now for my
entire legislative career, I thought that was an interesting
comment. Could you explain further why you feel that is the
case?
Mr. Jewell. Well, we put Americans to work and Americans
are the greatest people in the world and that efficiently we do
things--the American Merchant Marine adapts so quickly and so
well. The ships are run very efficiently in how we do it. Even
though we are regulated, we go by all of the regulations.
Safety, I think the safety record of the American Merchant
Marine--I don't remember the last time a merchant ship crashed
into the Golden Gate or the San Francisco Bay Bridge. So I
think our safety record speaks for itself.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Cravaack.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for our witnesses for being here today.
The steel-making facilities across the country cannot
operate without vessel delivery from ore from the range in
Minnesota. Vessels typically deliver 8 to 9 million tons of ore
from my district to Gary, Indiana, alone each year.
In 2009, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers reports estimates
that the Great Lakes shipping annually saves its customers $3.6
billion in transportation costs when compared to the next least
costly mode of transportation.
All vessels seeking to travel within the Great Lakes,
between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario, or between the Great Lakes
and the Saint Lawrence Seaway must transit New York waters.
Imposing requirements that simply cannot be met technology-
wise, such as the New York ballast water treatment system
requirements 100 times or 1,000 times the IMO standard will of
course have huge negative effect on North American steel
industry.
If it does not disrupt it entirely, even trying to comply
will drive up transportation costs significantly. It would also
set dangerous precedent that could eventually affect other U.S.
waterways and threaten international commerce in profound ways.
So, essentially, under U.S. law and the Federal Clean Water
Act, a single State can effectively blockade traffic from
leaving or entering the Great Lakes, New York Harbor or any
other harbor they deem fit. For example, if Michigan adopted
such a standard, they could affect the waterways down line and
affect millions of jobs all over the U.S. and Canada, on the
Great Lakes, Saint Lawrence Seaway, Hudson River, and the New
Jersey and New York Harbor, including 260,000 jobs in New York
Harbor alone.
In understanding all of this, it just seems to me that this
is not only going to affect jobs within the maritime community
on the docks and at sea, but it is also going to affect the
average American downstream.
Mr. Allegretti, could you address that and tell us how this
is going to affect just the average American if this was
adopted?
Mr. Allegretti. Well, you said it very well, sir, and there
is not a lot that I can add to what you said. And it really
underscores the urgency of moving forward remedial legislation.
I guess I would say with respect to the impact on the
American consumer, there are really two, I think. One is that
to the extent that you raise transportation costs, those costs
get passed down the line to the end of the retail chain, and
they ultimately end up in the shopping basket of Americans in
one way, shape, or form.
The other thing may be a little more philosophical than
sort of the economic impact, is really the proper expectation
of American citizens that its Government functions well and
functions smartly. And this system of the taxpayer paying for
two Federal programs and then paying State tax bills to
underwrite 26 additional contradictory programs really is a
poster child for wasteful Government spending.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you very much, sir. I appreciate those
comments, and I would have to agree; we do have the best
maritime sailors in the world. So thank you very much for those
comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. I want to thank you, Mr. Allegretti, Mr.
Jewell, very much. We will try to come up with a commonsense
real-world solution that accomplishes what the goals are but
allows for us to continue to move forward.
And the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

