- POLICY PROPOSALS FROM MEMBERS OF CONGRESS TO REFORM THE NATION'S SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POLICY PROPOSALS FROM MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS TO REFORM THE NATION'S
SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

(112-21)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON

TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 5, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-643                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

Subcommittee on Highways and Transit

JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           JERROLD NADLER, New York
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         BOB FILNER, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
GARY G. MILLER, California           TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    LAURA RICHARDSON, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                        (Ex Officio)
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York, Vice
Chair
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Blumenauer, Hon. Earl, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon................................................    29
Butterfield, Hon. G.K., a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina........................................    29
Chabot, Hon. Steve, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio........................................................    29
Chu, Hon. Judy, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.....................................................    29
Critz, Hon. Mark S., a Representative in Congress from the State
of Pennsylvania................................................    29
Davis, Hon. Geoff, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Kentucky.......................................................    29
DeLauro, Hon. Rosa L., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Connecticut...........................................    29
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..................................................    29
Green, Hon. Gene, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas..........................................................    29
McGovern, Hon. James P., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.........................................    29
Tonko, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York.......................................................    29
Velazquez, Hon. Nydia M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New York..............................................    29

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY CONGRESSIONAL WITNESSES

Blumenauer, Hon. Earl............................................    84
Butterfield, Hon. G.K............................................    87
Chabot, Hon. Steve...............................................    94
Chu, Hon. Judy...................................................    96
Davis, Hon. Geoff................................................    98
DeLauro, Hon. Rosa L.............................................   101
Garamendi, Hon. John.............................................   104
Green, Hon. Gene.................................................   108
McGovern, Hon. James P...........................................   113
Tonko, Hon. Paul.................................................   117
Velazquez, Hon. Nydia M..........................................   124

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Chu, Hon. Judy, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California, request to include the following materials in the
record regarding America Fast Forward: Creating Jobs the Right
Way:

The QTIBs Provision: General Explanation of Qualified
Transportation Improvement Bonds Provision...................    38
The TIFIA Provision: General Explanation of Transportation
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act Provision..........    40
America Fast Forward: Creating Jobs the Right Way..............    42
America Fast Forward: Proposed Federal Financing Tools To
Stimulate Transportation Infrastructure Investment...........    46
Napolitano, Grace F., a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, request to include recommendations for the
surface transportation reauthorization bill submitted by Cindy
McKim, Director, California Department of Transportation.......     6
Prepared statements submitted by Members of Congress:

Barletta, Hon. Lou, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Pennsylvania..............................................   129
Bass, Hon. Karen, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California................................................   131
Berg, Hon. Rick, a Representative in Congress from the State of
North Dakota; Canseco, Hon. Francisco ``Quico,'' a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas; Conaway,
Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Texas; Cuellar, Hon. Henry, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Texas; Gardner, Hon. Cory, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Colorado; Neugebauer, Hon.
Randy, a Representative in Congress from the State of Texas;
Rehberg, Hon. Denny, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Montana; Smith, Hon. Adrian, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Nebraska; and Thornberry, Hon.
Mac, a Representative in Congress from the State of Texas....   135
Bordallo, Hon. Madeleine Z., a Delegate in Congress from Guam..   138
Calvert, Hon. Ken, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California................................................   142
Coffman, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado..................................................   145
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Virginia............................................   147
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maryland............................................   149
DeFazio, Hon. Peter A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon..............................................   151
Filner, Hon. Bob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California................................................   154
Fincher, Hon. Stephen Lee, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Tennessee.......................................   159
Garrett, Hon. Scott, a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey..........................................   161
Green, Hon. Al, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas........................................................   169
Lummis, Hon. Cynthia M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wyoming.............................................   170
McMorris Rodgers, Hon. Cathy, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Washington......................................   173
Michaud, Hon. Michael H., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maine...............................................   175
Nunes, Hon. Devin, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California................................................   178
Price, Hon. David E., a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina......................................   179
Quigley, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Illinois..................................................   183
Reichert, Hon. David G., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington..........................................   185
Schmidt, Hon. Jean, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio......................................................   186
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Washington................................................   187
Southerland, Hon. Steve, II, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................   190
Young, Hon. Don, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Alaska.......................................................   211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.003

POLICY PROPOSALS FROM MEMBERS

OF CONGRESS TO REFORM THE NATION'S

SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 5, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John J. Duncan,
Jr., (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Duncan. All right. We will call the hearing to order
today. The subcommittee is convening a hearing to receive
testimony from various Members of Congress on their policy
proposals for the reauthorization of the Federal surface
transportation programs.
I ask unanimous consent that members of the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure who are not on the
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit be permitted to sit with
the subcommittee at today's hearing, offer testimony, and ask
questions. Is there any objection?
[No response.]
Mr. Duncan. Hearing no objection, it is so ordered.
Chairman Mica and I have gone around and held various field
hearings around the country in regard to the highway bill. And
then last week we heard testimony from over 40 different
transportation organizations and associations. The subcommittee
is in the process of reviewing the information provided during
last week's hearings, and many of the innovative ideas put
forward may become part of the surface transportation
reauthorization bill.
Today we will hear reauthorization policy proposals from
Members of Congress. Several Members have introduced individual
bills that make changes to the Federal highway, transit, or
highway safety programs. This hearing will provide Members the
opportunity to advocate for the reforms and improvements they
are proposing in those bills, and proposing for their
districts.
This reauthorization of the highway, transit, and highway
safety programs will be more challenging than any other in
recent memory. Fiscal constraints will cause us to be more
creative and find ways to do more with less. The committee will
consider proposals to better leverage our highway trust fund
dollars through loan and bonding programs and public-private
partnerships.
I also hope to hear ideas from Members on how to speed up
the project delivery process. Time delays and inefficiencies in
project delivery not only postpone needed improvements in our
Nation's transportation and infrastructure, but also result in
increases in the cost of projects.
Additionally, the committee is seeking proposals on how to
reduce the number of Federal surface transportation programs.
Today there are more than 100 highway, transit, and highway
safety programs. Many of these programs are duplicative or no
longer serve a national need. I know there will be several
proposals today to create new programs, but before we create
new programs we must perform a thorough review of the existing
programs, and eliminate the programs that are no longer needed,
or that we can no longer afford.
I look forward to working with Chairman Mica and Ranking
Members Rahall and DeFazio on improving and reforming the
Federal surface transportation programs. And with that, as soon
as he has a chance to catch his breath, we will hear from the
ranking member, any statement that he wishes to make at this
time.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
continuing discussion of the authorization of the Surface
Transportation Act. I look forward to the testimony and hope
that some of our colleagues can give us some solutions to the
problem which confronts us: a deteriorating infrastructure
which has vaulted us from First World status to what I call
Fourth World--that is, worse than Third World--in terms of the
percent of our GDP that we are investing and the rapidity of
the disintegration of the system.
Given the rules adopted by the Republicans, we are not
allowed to talk about new revenues. And if we live within
existing revenues without some creative sort of financing, we
will see the rate of deterioration accelerate. So I hope our
colleagues have some good ideas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much. We will now
hear from any Members who wish to make opening statements. And
first we will call on the vice chairman of the subcommittee, a
gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was pleased that this
subcommittee was able to hold a listening session in my
district earlier this month. It sent a strong message that we
went directly to our constituents, as well as consulting with
industry groups and other stakeholders down here in Washington.
This bill is about our constituency, mobility and
transportation needs of their communities, which they know
best. I would like to reiterate a common theme that I have
heard from my folks in my district throughout the discussion.
New York is unique in many ways, and our infrastructure
challenges vary from region to region.
However, too often, small communities are left out of the
planning process, and given little or no input with the State
DOTs regarding project funding. Urban areas with high
populations receive special sub-allowances and metropolitan
regions with 50,000 or more people are represented at a State
level by metropolitan planning organizations, MPOs.
However, small rural communities like I represent are left
to fend for themselves amongst very stiff competition. If
metropolitan areas are given a say in where their Federal
transportation dollars are spent, we should provide smaller
rural communities with that same input.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on the
committee to include language in the reauthorization that gives
local governments a seat at the table. While some States have
voluntarily included regional planning groups in the process,
many, including New York, have not.
I ask that our 6-year bill incorporate language that
accomplishes the following: allow for the creation of regional
planning organizations to provide formal input in the State
level planning process; direct these organizations to
cooperate, not just consult, with their State DOTs, to put them
at a par with their counterparts at MPOs; recognize at the
Federal level these planning organizations to reinforce the
role in the planning process; provide these organizations with
a formal structure and delineated responsibilities to match
those of MPOs.
Rural communities face stiff competition for limited
Federal transportation dollars. And I look forward to working
with the committee to ensure local governments get a fair seat
at the table.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much, Mr. Hanna. The first
Member here on the minority side is Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
thank you, Mrs. Napolitano. Everyone in this room--this is one
of those rare opportunities where we have business and labor
together, a very popular topic out in my district of moving
forward on a surface transportation bill, understanding that it
won't only create short-term jobs, it puts us back to compete
economically in the long term, whether that is moving farm
produce out of Minnesota or in New York.
I would like to associate myself with the gentleman from
New York's remarks, Mr. Hanna, the vice chair. This idea of a
regional transportation planning organization is a better and
more efficient use of our dollars. It does not add extra
bureaucracy to it, but it does give the voice that the
gentleman was speaking of to our rural communities, making sure
that we are connecting parts of this country in the most
efficient manner.
In the previous Congress, I had introduced 2782 that did
exactly that. This piece of legislation gained great bipartisan
support. I certainly think that is the way to go. I think it
allows for that voice to be there, and does the things exactly
as the gentleman said, allows for more local control, which I
think is--in this piece of legislation, is right.
Secondly, I would like to speak just for a moment on trying
to streamline and uniform some of our policies on--truck
weights is an issue and a particular interest of mine that I
think we can get some uniform ability to get those weights
where they are manageable. We pay for them, they are not
doing--and we do the research necessary to make sure that
bridge harmonics and everything are taken into consideration.
The problem that I have is our limit is 80,000 in
Minnesota. North Dakota is 105,000. South Dakota, on the other
side of my district, is 129,000. Canada is 100,000. What we
would like to see is an opt in on this to allow for the higher
weight. State of Minnesota's Department of Transportation has
agreed with this, and certainly think that is the way to go.
So, we have got a great opportunity in this committee,
bipartisan-wise, to agree on this is an issue that is clearly
delineated in the Constitution for us providing for the post
roads and the infrastructure of this country. It is a smart use
of resources. I thank the chairman for getting out there,
holding these hearings, listening to the American public. And I
look forward to getting this thing done. And I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Walz. Next on
our side is Mr. Southerland.
Mr. Southerland. Mr. Chairman, I have no comments. Thank
you.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you,
Ranking Member DeFazio. There was a hearing in Los Angeles with
Chairman Mica and Senator Boxer not too long ago on
transportation. We very much appreciate that.
We must produce a very robust transportation highway trust
bill. It is a major economic recovery tool, creates jobs,
provides congestion relief, gets the goods to market, and gets
people to work faster. All committee members have agreed to
$550 billion last year. It is supported by the Chamber, by
business, by unions, by highway and transit officials. It would
increase safety, improve public transit, reduce congestion, and
reduce the freight impact on communities, especially mine.
Strongly support the inclusion of a metropolitan mobility
program that should address major bottlenecks in urban
corridors, especially on I-5 in my district, the Santa Ana
Freeway, one of the most congested freeways in the United
States, with 25,000 trucks per day, and of course, our Alameda
Corridor East, the 54 crossings that cause delays through the
eastern Los Angeles, and slows delivery to--for on-time
delivery to the rest of the Nation.
We must include a program to deal with urban congestion, as
well as freight improvement program--the dedicated source of
funding to address the effects of freight movement on
communities and improve that mobility.
The freight movement from the ports Los Angeles and Long
Beach do impact my district. And it is burdened with traffic
delays on the freeways and at crossings. The air quality for
diesel-spewing engines, the noise from the whistle on the rail
cars are safety concerns on roadways and, of course, partly the
road rage. We must provide funding for grade separations and
cleaner truck programs to mitigate problems caused by freight,
especially in those areas that have high concentration of these
movements.
There are 54 crossings in--as I said, in my area, and
only--not even half are funded. Must increase funding for
transit to keep cars off the road, especially mass transit.
Buses and cars do get held up on freeways, just like everybody
else. But mass transit would be very, very much an improvement
in Los Angeles.
And we must provide some incentives. One of the things that
we have talked about are the grants, the TIFIA, improvement of
the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act.
The lowest interest bonds, such as Build America bonds, we--in
that area I am looking for information on how we can provide
any of the transit companies looking for assistance from the
Federal Government, how to produce a private-public
partnership, so that they may be able to move faster on these
projects.
The bill should streamline the environment and review
program. California is the only State to participate in the
surface transportation project's delivery pilot program
authorized in SAFETEA-LU. It gives States stringent
environmental review standards, and the ability to easily
certify the NEPA and CEQA, once they have obtained their
State's environmental certification. Programs very successful
in streamlining the environmental review and speeding up
project delivery for highway projects, and we need to expand
this program to transit and other transportation projects. They
should not have to do the work twice.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to include materials
submitted by Caltrans director Cindy McKim and Los Angeles
Metropolitan Transit Authority director Art Leahy, with their
public policy recommendations for the bill.
Thank you both, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. Is there any objection to
attaching any statements that any Member wishes to do so?
[No response.]
Mr. Duncan. Hearing no objection, any statements or
materials that the Members wish to attach to their opening
statements will be included in the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.014

Mr. Duncan. The next Member on our side is Mr. Gibbs. No
statement? All right. Ms. Edwards?
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing, because I do think that when, as Democrats, we were in
the majority and had the opportunity to move forward a
reauthorization, I think that we didn't do service to the
public in that, and that, you know, we look at transportation
for a number of reasons: one, because we have transportation
needs across this country that are unmet; we have challenges in
moving projects through the approval process so that it stymies
many projects that are worthy in the States; and because we
want to improve commerce and create jobs.
So, I think it is important for us to be both courageous
and bold to meet the Nation's infrastructure needs, to look at
creative and unique ways of financing, so that we have some
capacity not just to delivery projects for today, but to make
sure that we are doing what we need to do to move forward for
the future, because we are way behind in our infrastructure. We
can see that when we look from this country to other Nations
that are both emerging and developing, who seem to be investing
by leaps and bounds over what we are investing to meet our
infrastructure needs.
I represent a district that is here in the national capital
region. We are home to a metro system, a metro-rail system,
that services not just the people who live and work here in the
capital region, one of the largest regions in the country, but
also serves the Nation, serves the Nation in terms of
facilitating Federal workers keeping our government moving--but
the 20 million or so visitors who come from every region of
this country and across the world, and who need a safe and
reliable transit system to get around.
And so, how do we find a way of identifying and
prioritizing the unique needs of our States and our districts,
rather than just leaving everything to the discretion of any
one administration, whether that administration is a Democratic
administration or a Republic administration? I think each of us
on this committee and in the Congress can attest to the fact of
our ability to know and understand the unique needs of our
districts and our States when it comes to transportation. We
are closer to the ground, so to speak.
Projects such as those here in the metropolitan region,
like the purple line that would wrap itself around the beltway
in the national capital region are important, not just for my
district, but also for freeing up the congestion and bottleneck
along the I-95 corridor that serves the commerce needs of an
entire eastern seaboard. And so, even though I might prioritize
a project like this, it serves a broader public need.
I think here in this region, as in across the country, we
have to have a commitment to mass transit for the purposes of
facilitating our ability to have clean air for our children to
breathe, and clean water, and for the ease of commerce.
And so, while I believe that it is good for us to get our
work started--we are several months ahead of the next
expiration of our authorization--I think it is important for us
to get it right, and to make sure that, across the country, our
States understand what our transportation priorities are, and
they can get on with funding those long-term needs to match
what happens at the Federal level. I have talked with our
governor and our department of transportation officials, and
they are, in some ways, in a stalemate because they do not know
what it is that we will make a commitment to at the Federal
level. And so it makes it very difficult to plan for the long
term at the State level.
And so, I--Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with
you, to working with our Members, to make sure that we are
making the kinds of investments in transportation that will
lead us to job creation toward greater economic success, and to
make sure that we have a transportation system that meets our
21st-century goals. Thank you very much, and I yield.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Dr. Bucshon?
Dr. Bucshon. Thank you. I want to thank the committee for
the opportunity to discuss what I believe are the critical
issues in transportation.
I come before you today to tell you the story of my home
State of Indiana, and the advances that we have made in our
infrastructure. Thanks to the leadership of Governor Mitch
Daniels, in the past 5 years Indiana has repaired or built over
41 roadway projects that are open to traffic, repaired 588
bridges, and invested $5.7 billion in new construction and
preservation projects. It is critical to note that the governor
has done this without raising taxes on the people of Indiana.
In late 2005, Governor Daniels launched an aggressive 10-
year, $12 billion transportation plan known as Major Moves, to
significantly improve and expand Indiana's highway
infrastructure. Governor Daniels and the Indiana General
Assembly approved the lease of a toll road for 75 years to a
private corporation, resulting in the State acquiring a $4
billion up-front payment that was put back into infrastructure
projects in Indiana. This public-private partnership is funding
road projects across Indiana, including expansion of Interstate
69 through my district in southwestern Indiana.
There are currently no interstate connections between
Evansville and Indianapolis. The largest city in my district is
Evansville, and the State capital is Indianapolis. Past
governors have tried to get this done. In fact, Governor Evan
Bayh in the late--in the 1990s even broke ground on the
highway, but never had the money to complete the project.
Governor Daniels has broken ground in 2008. And finally, our
city of Evansville will be connected to the State capital.
While many members of this committee and in Congress have
in past been critical of public-private partnerships, Indiana
has proven that it can be successful. This $12 billion plan has
provided thousands of transportation jobs in Indiana, and
created new and safe roads in one of the most heavily traveled
States in the country.
In 2005, Indiana labor unions worked with Governor Daniels
on the original idea of Major Moves, and have continued to
support this project.
While Indiana has been building roads rapidly, they still
face many of the problems that others across the country have
been facing. What I have heard from countless engineers,
construction companies, and State employees is that, ``Federal
regulations and red tape are slowing us down.'' We are spending
too much time making sure our paperwork is filled out
correctly, and too much money on various permits that are
needed to test ground for a potential new project. The
regulations that we have put in place in Washington, DC, are
hurting people in towns like Washington, Indiana, in my
district.
Let me give you an egregious example on I-69. They had to
hire a box turtle-sniffing dog that they had to import from
Tennessee for long stretches of the road, to make sure that the
box turtles were out of the way. Now, as I have nothing against
box turtles, this is something that is an egregious regulatory
thing that the Federal Government has put in place, and shows
an example of how ridiculous that this can get.
We need to give back in whatever we do here in Washington,
DC, more power to our States, and allow them to make decisions
on what is best for their State. I would argue that none of us
in this committee or in Congress knows what will work for each
State better than the governor of the State and, more
importantly, the citizens of our States. But yet we continue to
put restrictions on what each State can do.
Indiana would be able to save an estimated $8 million a
year if current Federal ban on rest park commercialization, for
example, was taken away. It is good public policy, possibly, to
have rest parks on the interstate system. But in a time when we
have critical shortages in funding, we need to revisit what our
priorities are.
As I have stated, Indiana has successfully completed
public-private partnerships. They should be able to investigate
doing this going forward. Denying States options by putting in
onerous Federal regulations are inhibiting our States and our
country from advancing.
I would implore us to create legislation going forward that
cuts red tape, and we need to invest our money in ways that are
working and quit investing money in an old system that is not
working. Give our States more flexibility, give our citizens
more flexibility. Create an environment where States and cities
can actively pursue public-private partnerships like in Indiana
going forward in this time where we need out-of-the-box
thinking on funding our infrastructure, going forward.
Thank you, and I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Dr. Bucshon. Mr. Boswell?
Mr. Boswell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
leadership, and what you are doing here by getting us focused
on what is going on.
Mr. Chairman, I--maybe you can help me out, Mr. Chairman,
but I know a few years ago we sat in here and it was a Shuster-
Oberstar or a Young-Oberstar, where we had quite a discussion,
bipartisan discussion, about use tax. And we came to an
agreement.
And as I recall--and correct me, if you need to--but I
think we recessed for 2 or 3 days, and they went to the White
House to see, if we labored through this like we had in this
committee, would we get support. And then they called us back
together, and I think we were sitting pretty close, they walked
in the room. We saw that they did not have a smile on their
face, and they said, ``No, it would be vetoed.'' So we did not
do it.
Meanwhile, we labor on and on and on. And I have a lot of
hope. I have confidence. You got handed the keys to this
committee in one hand, and a whole list of longstanding
problems in the other. And we are falling behind. A lot of you
have traveled. You know what is going on in China, you know
what is going on in Europe. You know a lot of places. And our
infrastructure is falling behind. And we cannot compete in that
situation, whether it is road, rail, mass transit, the whole
thing.
In my State, when I was in the legislature, and the old new
governor is back--he was governor at that time, Governor
Branstad--the last time we raised the fuel tax. But inflation
alone has changed that to about $.15 short. And so, my farmers
and manufacturers and contractors and everybody across--``Why
are you waiting to do what is inevitable, we have to do?''
And I told them about the experience I am just sharing that
we did here in this committee. And, you know, we were going to
make that adjustment. And I believe we were going to index, if
I remember, so we would not have to go through this turmoil and
keep up with inflation.
So, I just wanted to give you encouragement, and work with
you, and say, you know, I hope we do not just come up with
another study. We have studied it to death. We need to do
something. And I know you, I think what--you intend to do
something. I am not sure what it is going to be yet. But we
have got a challenge, and we cannot be competitive in this
world economy if we do not take care of our infrastructure.
That is just--whether it is farm-to-market, whatever it is,
looking at Mr. Long down there, we understand if he cannot get
the grain to town, he cannot get the cattle to town, cannot get
the pigs to market, you know, it does not work. And we got a
lot of things we need to work on.
So, with that, I yield back and wish us all well, that we
can actually move forward under the leadership we have got now.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Boswell, for a
very accurate statement. And we are sure going to try.
The next one in line is Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today and giving us an opportunity to share with you
some of our priorities.
I participated in several of the listening sessions that
Chairman Mica had, and I think it is important, and I would
like to highlight five bills that I have brought forward that
reflect my priorities, and I think should be incorporated in
the main bill.
I recently introduced the Freight Focus Act, H.R. 1122. I
represent 40 percent of the Nation's goods going through my
particular community. I have a bridge that carries 15 percent
of the Nation's cargo that has a diaper underneath it to catch
the concrete that is falling down. That is the same bridge that
approximately 10 years ago would have cost us $600 million to
fix. Now it is going to cost us $1.3 billion to replace.
The Freight Focus bill contains many provisions that I
think we need to consider with goods movement in our
infrastructure. One, I strongly believe that we need an office
of freight within the Department of Transportation. Two, we
need a national freight advisory committee that would include
the private sector, so they would have an opportunity to give
input, in terms of where dollars are spent, in priorities--
highways of significance. Three, we need to improve freight
planning, and actually designate corridors of national
significance. Four, I want to concur with what my colleagues
have said. We need to create a goods movement trust fund.
Now, I would like to focus my comments on the diesel tax
side, as opposed to the general tax. When you look at a tax
that has not been increased since 1993--and, as we heard last
week when we had a hearing, if the industry is willing to tax
themselves, why are we standing in the way?
And my comment of this committee is I just think we need to
have some opportunity--I don't think today is the forum, but
there has got to be an opportunity for us to talk about the
elephant in the room, and that is to say no taxes for no tax
sake I don't think really makes any sense for either side.
There needs to be an honest discussion about that particular
issue or any other revenue opportunities that we have. Because,
clearly, we are not generating enough dollars in the current
gas tax.
I have pushback that I think the diesel tax, in
particular--you heard right here in this committee, where the
American Truckers Association supported taxing themselves.
Also what we heard--when you look at others who are willing
to support this idea, who are also supporting my bill, Retail
Industry Leaders Association, RILA, which is the largest group
that is responsible for moving goods in and around all of our
corridors. The Waterfront Coalition, the International
Warehouse and Logistics Association. Something is wrong when
all of the people who are actually doing the work are trying to
move forward ideas that, for some reason, we have got groups of
people who do not even want to discuss.
The second key point I wanted to talk about is the TIFIA
Enhancement Act. That is also a bill that I introduced, H.R.
1123, that would increase the size of the current program, and
it would continue to give local governments flexibility to be
able to do long-term financing. I think you are familiar with
that, and so I will hold my comments on that one.
Third is the Build America bonds, which you have heard
several Members mention. I have a bill, H.R. 736, which would
extend this program into 2014.
The other point is number four for me, which is my bill
that has to do with what many people have talked about, which
is the environment current regulations, and expanding our pilot
program, which I do support. But we need to make sure that, as
we balance this funding, and we look at these new ideas with
regulation, that we do it in the correct way, that we not
only--yes, we want to make sure that permits are not holding
projects from going forward, but we also need to make sure that
our environment is protected, as well.
Finally, my fifth bill that I wanted to talk about is the
Prevention of Unreasonable Fees Act, and that has to do with,
in many of our airports today, there are areas where there is
pre-arranged ground transportation services. In my State--I
know in others--for example, if you have a car service that is
picking up versus a taxi service, they are charged how many
times they are going around the airport, and it really does not
make sense.
So, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, I just want to
summarize my comments, that I and other colleagues have great
pieces of legislation. We would like an opportunity to speak
with you and your committee staff about how they can be
incorporated. But while you were talking with Mr. Boswell I
want to end with this point, which is what I started with.
By us not looking at revenue options, the cost is not going
to go away. The cost is still there. So for me, of a bridge
that used to cost $600 million that is now going to cost $1.3
billion, it has to be addressed.
So, I look forward to working with you and the rest of my
colleagues. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much, Ms. Richardson.
Ms. Johnson?
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, and let me thank our
subcommittee chairman, Mr. Duncan, and Ranking Member DeFazio,
being represented by Congresswoman Napolitano right now.
As a member of the Highways and Transit Subcommittee I
would like to express my appreciation to the leadership, as
well as members of this committee for an opportunity to talk
about what we consider to be priorities. And hopefully we will
continue to have more input.
I have introduced several bills that I would like to bring
before the subcommittee's attention. First, I have authored
H.R. 341, the Transportation and Infrastructure Finance and
Innovation Act, TIFIA, which increases the maximum Federal
credit assistance and local authority under TIFIA program for
such projects from 30 to 49 percent.
TIFIA funding is designed to leverage non-Federal funding,
including investment from the private sector. This legislation
will continue to allow substantial private co-investment to be
leveraged at a time when Federal gas tax revenue and most
States' resources are inadequate to meet the funding needs for
large-scale transportation projects.
And, secondly, I have introduced H.R. 551, which is a bill
that would allow States to continue their own funds toward
Federal and State agencies for transportation projects
undergoing national environmental policy act. This is an
environmental streamlining legislation falling directly in line
with one of the committee's primary goals, to provide States
the flexibility they need to address their unique
transportation challenges by establishing innovative financing
options. And I applaud the committee for its efforts to invest
in these funds safely.
Now, I guess 2, almost 3 years ago, I served on a task
force that Speaker Pelosi put together where we had economists,
researchers, Wall Street representatives, and it was very clear
that it would be a long time before we would have the money to
address the infrastructure needs in this Nation. And out of
that came the idea of an infrastructure bank.
I worked with Mr. Mica for a long time, trying to agree on
an amount which we would work on. He wanted it to be $300-some
billion, and I had in mind $50 billion. So, we did not get very
far with that. However, I think it is still an idea that we
should be considering on the table so that we can move on with
continuing to curve the crumbling of our infrastructure in this
country.
And so, I thank you for this opportunity, and I hope that
out of this we can get a package that would address many of
these needs. As Congresswoman Richardson just said, putting it
off does not make it go away. But it will make it more
expensive. So, thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Thank you very much, Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Hirono?
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There will be few
opportunities for this Congress to truly impact not only the
day-to-day life in our communities, but also to affect the
prosperity of our future. Few pieces of legislation authorize
programs that touch every State and community in a fundamental
way. And our Federal surface transportation programs do just
that.
These programs create well-paying jobs, putting people to
work, doing things that make it possible for our communities to
thrive. They also provide the foundation for our well-
functioning economy. Reauthorizing these programs and reforming
them for the future are important to the people of my home
State of Hawaii. As the only island State, we do face unique
transportation challenges. We have the highest gas prices in
the Nation. We are a growing population, and traffic congestion
is a serious problem.
According to the urban mobility report by the Texas
Transportation Institute, the average Honolulu motorist pays
$709 each year in time and travel cost, due to congestion.
Outside of Oahu, which is our most populated island, our
neighbor island population is also growing. Demand for
affordable public transportation options for workers on the
neighbor islands have increased. In addition, we need to expand
the capacity of our harbors and improve our airports and
roadways.
These are vital to the future success of Hawaii's economy.
The Hawaii Institute of Public Affairs estimates that Hawaii
needs a minimum of $14.3 billion in capital improvement
projects. Many other States are facing similar challenges, and
are looking for solutions, just as we are. Addressing these
challenges will require a robust, long-term transportation
reauthorization bill.
I would like to share what I believe is a unique approach
to dealing with our transportation challenges, or at least
thinking about them, as well as some ideas that I hope will be
included in a final bill. The Hawaiians divided our lands into
ahupua'a, wedge-shaped land areas that went from the mountains
to the sea. The idea was that everything that happened in the
uplands will ultimately affect the coastal area and the ocean.
In those days, the ancient Hawaiians managed the resources of
each ahupua'a effectively and holistically. This allowed them
to manage food and water resources to ensure prosperity and
plenty for all, year-round.
The idea behind ahupua'a is certainly appropriate today. If
we approach things holistically and embrace smart development
and transportation policies, I am confident our modern
communities can also ensure prosperity and plenty for all,
year-round.
So, a good first step for us to work to achieve an
integrated, inter-modal transportation system. This means
investments in transit and transit-oriented development. These
are the types of systems that give our citizens the option to
take a train or a bus or a bike, or even just to walk, or any
combination of these on any given day. Linking different modes
of transportation also helps to connect workers with jobs,
businesses with customers. Increasing transportation options
also increases mobility and opportunity for people of all ages
and income levels.
Second, we have to continue investing in the safety and
security of those using our transportation systems. The State
of Hawaii has successfully used National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration funds to reduce motor vehicle fatalities,
increase seatbelt usage, and keep pedestrians safe.
Third, we have to ensure that we are protecting and
enhancing our environmental resources. This means that we must
constantly pursue alternative energy, and focus on getting more
cars off the road to help keep our air clean. And we must be
diligent in incorporating these values into project
construction, which means that people should be working
together.
In Hawaii, the Army Corps of Engineers works in concert
with other agencies--the EPA, Fish and Wildlife, and others--
during the early stages of public works projects. This way,
each project is looked at from a variety of perspectives at the
outset. This saves time, money, and paperwork.
Finally, we have to determine how to effectively finance
these new projects and initiatives. Others have talked about
the national infrastructure and development bank. This will
provide a much-needed alternative means of financing these
large projects--certainly not enough. We need to have an annual
Federal commitment of some $225 to $240 billion for 50 years,
just to upgrade all the modes of transportation to a state of
good repair throughout our country. But all options should be
on the table. The President's 2012 budget provides a solid
blueprint from which to work, in terms of what we need to do.
But I think we can also learn from the ancient Hawaiians to
think about our shared challenges holistically, in order to
effectively manage our prosperity for generations to come.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing to solicit policy proposals for Members of Congress
about the service transportation authorization bill.
Many of us on this committee, myself included, recognize
that in order to truly meet the infrastructure needs across the
country, we need to write a bill that significantly increases
funding. We know that there is a $2.2 trillion backlog, just to
get our infrastructure up to a state of good repair.
I have heard the mention in this committee the past couple
of months about looking for ways to do more with less. I am
deeply concerned about the implications of that approach, and
fear that any cut in funding will have disastrous effects on
jobs and on the economy, on the quality of life, on the state
of good repair of our roads, bridges, tunnels, and rails, and
on the environment.
Unfortunately, considering the political climate in the
House these days regarding public spending, I fear we will not
report a bill with adequate funding levels. So, rather than get
into every policy provision or program that I have worked on in
this committee for the past 2 decades, I would like to focus
today on two overarching concerns.
First, it is extremely important that transit, public
transportation and alternative modes of transportation,
continue to play a prominent role in the surface transportation
bill. I have heard Chairman Mica indicate the transit funding
will remain ``about the same.'' I certainly hope that this--I
certainly hope that at least that is true, if we cannot realize
a substantial increase in transit funding. But in any event, it
is imperative that we retain adequate funding and eligibility
under the Federal program for public and alternative modes of
transportation.
Second, it is absolutely essential that the bill includes a
rail title, and adequately deals with freight and goods
movement. Too often we distribute funding through the silos of
highways, transit, et cetera, and do not consider some of the
bigger projects that cut across all modes, but which have a
direct benefit to the highway system and commuters.
I agree with Chairman Mica that we need a national
strategy, and that freight and, in particular, rail freight
must be a part of that equation. I am hopeful that in the next
transportation bill we can include a program to fund projects
of national and regional significance, as it was originally
intended to ensure that we complete a few initiatives that are
too big for one State to carry on its own, and which might not
fall under the traditional eligibility requirements, but that
are vital to the economy and national security or have other
significant public benefits.
I have had conversations with Chairman Mica and others on
the committee about this, and I look forward to having more
detailed discussions as the bill moves forward. I want to thank
you, Chairman Duncan, for holding this hearing. I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. Mr. Young?
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I know that we have
to go through this exercise of futility, and I do recognize you
for that.
I am very concerned about this whole process. I was the
author of the last bill, and everybody in this room that was
here before voted for that bill four times. And I have told the
chairman I am not excited unless we figure a way around this
program about writing a bill that gives the money, basically,
to the President--I don't care who the President is--for the
next 5 years, and then have that Federal Highway Commission
decide they are going to send it to the State department of
transportation.
Now, I do not know how many of you in this room realize
what that means. That means you have no say of anything about a
highway bill. So why in the hell would we write a highway bill?
Think about it a moment. Why would I give the President and the
State department of transportation monies and I have no say
where it goes?
And I represent a whole State, I do not represent one
little district. I have two major metropolitan areas, two of
them. And I know my State department of transportation. We
ought to eliminate all State departments of transportation, by
the way. I think we would be a hell of a lot better off.
Because they will put the money where the largest wheel turns.
And the rest of the State transportation will be neglected.
Neglected. And this is about transportation for all of the
people, not just the few of the people. All of the people,
small communities and large communities. Make it a network that
serves this country.
We are way behind the act. And, by the way, I have yet to
speak to the chairman how we are going to finance this thing.
If you had done what I wanted you to do 8 years ago we would
have had it done. Now you did not get any support from my
President and your President, or any of the leadership. ``Oh,
we cannot raise any money.'' Gas is $1.36 at that time. And I
wanted to raise it $.05 one time, index it, and we would have
had this thing funded. I do not know how you are going to fund
it right now.
But in the meantime, as we go forth in this program, if we
have any opportunity, as this committee of all committees,
stick together and make sure our people understand on my side
of the aisle, your side of the aisle, this is about
transportation. There is no Democrat, there is no Republican.
This is a transportation system for the United States of
America, the people of America.
Now, to have us shortchange this by an idea, ``Oh, we are
going to let the Federal Government run this program,'' shame
on us. Shame on us. We are the ones that said less government,
less control, less regulations. And we are going to give it to
the Federal Highway Commission?
And, truthfully, Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about
this, and if there is not some breakthrough where every Member,
as a congressman, has a right to dedicate where dollars should
go--yes, it is called an earmark--and if you will go back
through history, that is the Constitution. Only the Congress
can raise money and spend money, not the President of the
United States or an agency of his designation.
We have neglected our duty by being true representatives of
the people. The people have a right to address the government,
and we are the government, not some unelected bureaucrat that
does not know his backside from his sun side, but he thinks he
does.
So, Mr. Chairman, I am saying this very strongly, I hope
you understand where I am coming from. This is not a good idea,
to try to write a bill where we have no say in what occurs.
Now, I have got that off my chest and I have got to go to
another meeting. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Young, for
a very fine statement. And Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to be
associated with the remarks of the gentleman from Alaska,
because I likewise feel that Members who raise the capital
should have some input. You can call it earmarks, you can call
it Members' priority. But the first Congress had an earmark and
it was a lighthouse in Maine. So it has always been the
responsibility of the Congress to raise the revenue. And we, of
course, should have some input as to how that revenue is spent.
I do want to talk about how happy I am that we are having
these hearings. I want to thank Mr. Mica and Mr. Rahall for
holding these hearings, because I think that we need the 6-year
reauthorization bill. I think it would kick-start our economy.
The railroad subcommittee will be holding a similar hearing on
Thursday to hear testimony on issues that would be included in
the reauthorization bill. I would encourage anyone that has
suggestions for improving rail, pipeline, and hazmat programs
to get them to the subcommittee as soon as possible.
We are experiencing a renaissance in passenger rail in this
country. And if we want to keep up with our international
competitors, we need to make a significant investment in
commuter and high-speed rail. I am an advocate for the support
of a dedicated source of funding for rail, and would encourage
the committee to include a minimum of $50 billion over the life
of the bill.
Compared to the funding level in the overall bill and the
money being spent in other countries--for example, China, $350
billion--this is a very small amount of money to dedicate to
rail.
Although we have some very small-minded governors, support
for high-speed rail is still very high around the country. In
fact, last night, as of 8:00 p.m., application deadline for the
Florida high-speed rail funds was approaching, applicants
throughout the United States was rolling in, into the FRA for
the Florida money. I know New York is right in there, and
California, and probably even Texas.
I also believe that this reauthorization offers us an
opportunity to improve the Railroad Rehabilitation and
Improvement Finance program, RRIF. The RRIF program can help
railroads, shippers, and States meet these rail infrastructure
investment needs. But I think we are not taking full advantage
of the program. I met with railroads and others and they tell
me it takes too long, it is too expensive, you have to go from
agency to agency. This is one example that we need to combine
the regulations and work to make it more streamlined and find a
way that we can reinvest in the infrastructure through the RRIF
program.
There is one program I do want to talk about. I want to
encourage the committee to include language that ensures
minority veterans and women-owned businesses are getting their
fair share of the transportation pie. Federal transportation
spending have historically served as a crucial means to empower
socially disadvantaged businesses.
Thanks to the effort of the Congressional Black Caucus and
a bipartisan group of members of the House Transportation
Committee, including Bud Shuster, when he was chairman, every
major transportation bill since 1983 have mandated minimum
levels of participation for minorities or women-owned business.
Unfortunately, because the Federal Railroad Administration has
not historically been a significant grant-making agency, it
does not currently authorize--require opportunities for
disadvantaged business.
I strongly encourage the committee to take the steps
necessary to provide the FRA with the authority and to develop
other programs such as small business set-asides,
subcontracting, goal-setting, and other avenues that ensure
that minorities and disadvantaged businesses have fair access
to Federal fund contracts.
During the field hearing process, we have heard from
witnesses who want to limit the scope of the bill to just
building roads. In fact, I was just appalled when one person
said that--and I support building roads, but he indicated that
just roads, not even sidewalks, not overpasses. What about the
children? What about the handicapped? When we develop a
transportation bill, it should be comprehensive. It should
serve all of the people.
And so, with that, I would yield back the balance of my
time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Ms. Brown. And we have been joined
by the ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Rahall. Do you
have a statement?
Mr. Rahall. No, thank you.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Mr. Altmire.
Mr. Altmire. Thank you, Chairman Duncan, for calling this
hearing as the committee prepares the next transportation
authorization. We can all agree that the priority of this
committee is to advance policies that promote a surface
transportation system that guarantees safe and efficient
travel. We are also aware that American infrastructure
currently faces challenges on several fronts, and my home State
of Pennsylvania is no exception.
Last month, Transportation for America released a report on
our Nation's bridges that revealed that 26.5 percent of bridges
in Pennsylvania are structurally deficient, giving Pennsylvania
both the highest percentage and the greatest number of
deficient bridges in the entire United States. This is an
unacceptable statistic, but it is the reality for the traveling
public in western Pennsylvania, and it needs to be addressed as
a priority of this authorization.
Mr. Chairman, repairing crumbling bridges is a safety
concern not just for western Pennsylvanians, but for all
Americans who want to be confident that the bridges they cross
daily to get to work and take their children to and from school
are structurally sound. Despite the fiscal constraints we face,
this committee must focus on initiatives that connect
communities safely now and in the future. This is one area
where we can not afford not to act.
And in addition to crumbling roads and bridges, we must
confront the reality of our Nation's aging population. It has
been estimated that 25 percent of American drivers will be over
the age of 65 by the year 2025. These drivers have years of
experience behind the wheel that help them make smart
decisions. But they also have some physical and visual
limitations that need to be addressed by sound public policy.
The Federal Highway Administration's older driver handbook
lays out several vital road safety alterations that can improve
safety for older drivers on the roadway. These include signs
with more legible font, reflective pavement markings, left-turn
lanes at intersections, and better placement of signs. These
improvements are inexpensive and have a proven track record of
being extremely effective at reducing roadway deaths and
injuries. By improving the markings and traffic patterns on our
roads and highways, and making older drivers' daily travel as
safe as possible, we increase road safety for every driver and
every passenger on the road.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and the
rest of the committee as we craft policies that will shape the
way Americans travel for generations to come.
Western Pennsylvania deserves safe roads and bridges, and I
appreciate your leadership and cooperation in achieving that
goal as this authorization moves forward. And I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Altmire. And now
we are honored to have the Honorable Geoff Davis and the
Honorable Steve Chabot. And I thought maybe Ms. Schmidt was
going to join--you are going to be up here, a member of the
committee.
And we will now hear their testimony. We will ask unanimous
consent that the full statements of all Members be placed into
the record. Is there any objection?
[No response.]
Mr. Duncan. Hearing none, that will be so ordered. Since
your full written statements are now--or will be--included in
the record, we will request that you summarize these statements
in 5 minutes.
And, Ms. Schmidt, do you want to go first, or do you want
the----
Ms. Schmidt. No, I am just listening.
Mr. Duncan. OK, all right.
Ms. Schmidt. We are packaged as a team.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Well, thank you very much. We will
hear first from Congressman Davis.

TESTIMONY OF HON. GEOFF DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF KENTUCKY; HON. STEVE CHABOT, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO; HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA; HON.
JUDY CHU, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA; HON. EARL BLUMENAUER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON; HON. ROSA L. DELAURO, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT; HON.
GENE GREEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
TEXAS; HON. MARK S. CRITZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA; HON. NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK; HON.
JAMES P. MCGOVERN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE
OF MASSACHUSETTS; HON. G.K. BUTTERFIELD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA; AND HON. PAUL TONKO,
A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Davis. Thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking Member
Napolitano, for the opportunity to testify today. We are here
today to discuss the necessity for Congress to develop and
prioritize a program to finance nationally vital transportation
projects where costs cannot be borne by one or two States
alone.
An example of such critical infrastructure projects is the
Brent Spence Bridge, which, as you can see from our first
handout, is a vital interstate structure on the critical north-
south I-75 corridor that crosses the Ohio River between our
districts. As you can see from the second handout, one-third of
the population of the United States lives within 275 miles of
this corridor. The Brent Spence Bridge carries more than 3
percent of our gross domestic product across the Ohio River
annually. Replacement of this bridge is critical to America's
economy.
As you begin to develop core elements of the surface
transportation reauthorization, we submit that a new process by
which nationally vital transportation projects can be addressed
and funded should be developed for the economic well-being of
the Nation, as a whole. We must develop a rational process
whereby critical infrastructure projects will be objectively
identified and funded, based on merit. The 2011 authorization
presents an opportunity to fill that need.
Despite our best efforts during the previous transportation
authorization bills, Congress has not established a sufficient
mechanism for funding critical infrastructure projects where
costs are so high they cannot be funded by one or more States.
For example, the Brent Spence Bridge project will
ultimately cost between $2 billion and $3 billion to complete,
a burden which Kentucky and Ohio cannot shoulder alone. And we
take a generation or more to fund this one project under
current highway trust fund allocations.
The Brent Spence Bridge enables more than $400 billion of
commerce to travel from origin to destination, annually. With
interstate truck traffic projected to grow by 10 percent by
2030, the bridge, in its current state, will gridlock a vital
national corridor causing lost income, wasted fuel, and reduced
employment because we cannot efficiently deliver goods to
customers.
However, Ohio and Kentucky would have to dedicate their
entire highway transportation budgets, to the exclusion of
everything else, in order to fund the Brent Spence Bridge
project. This is fiscally unrealistic, and would be
unreasonable, given the benefits of the project that flow to
the Nation, not just two States.
Major transportation bottlenecks cost thousands of hours of
delay, and have a negative impact on individual travelers,
commuters, families, truckers, shippers, and receivers,
particularly when the routes they travel are hostage to under-
funded critical infrastructure modes of national significant.
The Woodrow Wilson Bridge between Maryland and Virginia,
just southeast of downtown Washington, DC, is traveled daily by
some in the room here. In 1993, 200,000 vehicles crossed that
bridge every day. The Wilson Bridge carries Interstate 95 and
495 across the Potomac River. The bridge supports a
transportation corridor of national significance, connecting
the southeastern and northeastern United States.
At the time, the U.S. Department of Transportation
estimated that the value of the freight trucked across this
bridge was equivalent to 1.3 percent of the entire gross
domestic product of the United States, less than half that of
the Brent Spence Bridge mentioned earlier. By the mid-1990s,
the bridge was carrying 250 percent of the traffic volume for
which it was designed. The bridge only had three lanes with
five highways lanes worth of traffic trying to squeeze through.
The bridge had become a bottleneck with national significance,
causing tens of thousands of hours of delay to American
travelers and commerce.
Neither Maryland nor Virginia could assume the $2.5 billion
cost of this project, which was several times the annual
statewide infrastructure budgets for both States. Additionally,
there was no Federal program to fund projects that impacted the
Nation as a whole. If Congress had not prioritized funding for
the Wilson Bridge, funding that paid for the majority of the
cost of the project, the bridge may have come to closure with
economic impacts felt across the eastern seaboard.
Congress helped resolve the funding issue, and the Wilson
Bridge project was completed. However, resolution was cobbled
together through exception, not by a cohesive decisionmaking
and prioritization process like the one we are advocating for
today. The 2011 authorization must include a mechanism for
dealing with critical infrastructure projects like the Wilson
Bridge that will hasten economic recovery and put Americans
back to work.
As we have noted, a current example of a project impacting
the Nation as a whole is the Brent Spence Bridge. Not only a
vital conduit of goods and people across the Ohio River, the
bridge also connects Canada to Florida via I-75, as well as
Ohio to the western United States via I-71, and feeds traffic
and freight to Chicago via I-74 and all the way to Alabama via
I-65. The bridge affects commerce in over 60 Congressional
Districts across the central United States. Completed in 1963,
it was designed to carry 80,000 vehicles today. And it will
soon have to accommodate nearly 200,000 vehicles, despite being
functionally obsolete.
It is illustrative of projects over $400 billion in freight
crossing the Ohio River for the American economy, more than 3
percent of our gross domestic product. It is a critical
infrastructure project for the United States, and will create
tens of thousands of jobs. I urge my colleagues to ensure the
2011 transportation authorization has a program for providing a
funding mechanism for critical infrastructure.
Finally, I would like to express my tremendous appreciation
to my colleagues, Steve Chabot and Jean Schmidt, for their help
and partnership through the years, as we hope to see this
project forward to benefit our Nation.
With that, I thank you for your consideration and yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Chabot?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking Member
DeFazio and Congresswoman Napolitano, and all the other members
of the committee, for giving us the opportunity to address the
committee and testify today.
Congressman Davis, I want to take this opportunity to thank
you for your continued leadership on this issue. I look forward
to working with you.
And Congresswoman Schmidt, I also want to thank you for
your leadership. And this is a project I know we have all
worked on for many years. And even our predecessors, going back
many years, we have worked on this. And it has been done in a
bipartisan manner, and I would encourage us all to continue to
do that as we move forward on a transportation bill.
Like Congressman Davis, I am also here to support the
authorization of a program in the 2011 transportation bill to
include projects of regional and national significance. We need
to be pragmatic in our approach to this transportation bill,
ensuring that every dollar spent represents a long-term
investment that will improve the flow of commerce and create
American jobs. We must recognize that, although we face
significant budget challenges, the basic infrastructure of our
Nation must be a top priority.
In Cincinnati we have a project of regional and national
significance that I believe is the type of project Congress
needs to consider while taking up the highway bill. The Brent
Spence Bridge, as previously referred to by Congressman Davis,
is not only critical to our local economy, but, like
Congressman Davis said, it is a major commercial artery
connecting the Midwest with the South.
The annual value of freight crossing the bridge exceeds
$400 billion. That is a little over 3 percent of our national
GDP crossing one bridge. And by 2030, the value in real dollars
is expected to more than double to $800 billion, nearly a $1
trillion. The benefits of a project with that kind of freight
value are tremendous. The Brent Spence Bridge project would
save an estimated $748 million in congestion costs annually,
savings that would grow in real dollars to $1.3 billion
annually by 2030.
A 2009 study done by the Texas Transportation Institute
concluded that completing the Brent Spence Bridge project would
save 2.9 million man-hours of delay, 210,000 vehicle-hours of
delay, and 1.22 million gallons of fuel every year. Over the
next 20 years this would result in $18.9 billion in benefits
for commuters, shippers, and manufacturers.
The numbers are powerful on their own, but with freight
serving as a key determinant of our economic competitiveness in
the new global marketplace and the economy, projects like the
Brent Spence Bridge carry even greater significance. With the
price of oil well over $100 a barrel, and freight traffic
scheduled to increase by 10 percent by 2030, our ability to
efficiently move goods within our Nation's borders is critical
to keeping the price of American goods low and competitive in
the global marketplace.
It is no secret that our country faces serious economic
challenges. Our national debt, let us face it, is out of
control. And that is due, in large part, to poor decisions and
wasteful spending of taxpayers' money. Those of us in Congress
are consequently forced to make tough choices on how to wisely
invest in projects on their merits, not on their politics. We
owe it to the American people to invest only in those projects
that will produce long-term savings, keep us competitive and,
most importantly, create American jobs.
Like my friend and colleague, Congressman Davis, and like
Congresswoman Jean Schmidt, I strongly urge you to ensure that
the 2011 highway bill authorizes funding for projects of
regional and national significance, like the Brent Spence
Bridge.
Thank you for your time. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chabot. Ms. Schmidt
wants to also testify about this particular project, and then I
will go to Mr. Larsen.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you. And I want to thank Congressman
Davis and Congressman Chabot for highlighting this very
important project. Just a couple of quick things.
Ohio is one of the areas of the country where it moves
services within 500--most of the services in the United States
are moved within 500 miles of Ohio. So the I-71/I-75 corridor
is well-used. That all feeds into the Brent Spence Bridge. I
would like to add a couple of things to your facts on it.
One is, while structurally it gets about a B -, capacity-
wise it is at an F -, because there are no lanes for
breakdowns. It is wall-to-wall across the bridge. It is the
sixth most used bridge in the country. And, as highlighted
before, 3 percent of our GDP is moved across that bridge.
But more importantly, it highlights something that we have
a greater concern in the United States, and that is major
projects. How are we going to fund major projects, multimodal
projects across the United States, under the current formula
that we have now? I think, Mr. Chairman, we have to find ways
to do that, language within the transportation bill, and
funding outside of the transportation bill's scope. And toward
that end, I look forward to working with you.
And I thank the gentleman for highlighting this very
important need for the United States.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much. I think, as some of
you know, I have had so many relatives in the Cincinnati-Dayton
area throughout my life--and also, in fact, we held a Duncan
family reunion one time in Mr. Davis's district there, at the
Drawbridge Inn. But I am very familiar with this. Interstate 75
also runs through my district. I have been in both of your
districts many, many times. So it is a very important project,
and I thank you for coming to testify here today. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for the opportunity before the subcommittee to consider some of
the policy proposals that I want to put forward for the next
surface transportation bill. I look forward to working with
you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member DeFazio, to invest in our
Nation's infrastructure and create jobs as we rewrite the
Federal surface transportation legislation.
Now, as we write this next bill, it is clear that our
Nation needs a significant investment in our transportation
infrastructure to create private sector construction jobs,
invest in the repair and maintenance of our highways, roads,
bridges, and transit, and set the foundation for future
economic growth.
In the Pacific Northwest, where I am from, transportation
investment means jobs. Local private sector engineers were in
my office last week, and said that the single biggest action
Congress could take to save and create jobs in their industry
would be to pass a 6-year transportation authorization bill.
Now, the full committee chair has indicated that we should
not expect a bill that calls for more funding than the highway
trust fund can sustain. In other words, a bill that contains
less funding than the SAFETEA-LU. So, I support innovative
financing mechanisms, but I will be clear. Innovative financing
mechanisms would only be supplements to the highway trust fund,
not substitutes. It is hard to see how innovative financing
bridges the gap between current trust fund levels and the
amount that most transportation experts believe we need to
simply maintain the transportation system that we have.
If this committee is going to write a $250 billion bill, we
should all be clear on what that means: States and localities
will do less with less. Fewer private sector construction jobs
will be created. Fewer highways, roads, and buses will be
maintained. And even fewer new capacity-building projects will
be built.
On the issue of consolidation, Mr. Chairman, I support
the--consolidating Federal transportation programs, as the
Democrats first proposed in the 2009 Surface Transportation
Authorization Act. And, as well as streamlining the Federal
permitting process. These measures will not fill the funding
gap, but they are simply necessary reforms important for the
future of transportation funding.
Currently there are 108 separate Federal surface
transportation programs administered by 5 separate Federal
agencies. The current program structure is fragmented and
stovepiped, and there is little relation between our national
transportation goals and this complicated decisionmaking
process.
Then-Chairman Oberstar's Surface Transportation
Authorization Act proposed consolidating or terminating more
than 75 programs. It would have transformed the current
structure into a performance-based framework designed to
achieve specific national objectives.
The GAO recently concurred with this approach in their
March 2011 report on opportunities to reduce potential
duplication in government programs, save tax dollars, and
enhance revenue. The GAO argues that, ``This fragmented
approach impedes effective decisionmaking, and limits the
ability of decisionmakers to devise comprehensive solutions to
complex challenges.'' They concluded that ``a fundamental re-
examination and reform of the Nation's surface transportation
policies is needed.'' I urge the committee to heed the GAO's
advice.
Next I would like to discuss a top transportation priority
for my district in the reauthorization bill. Meeting these
priorities will mean jobs in the Pacific Northwest.
First, the issue of ferries. Ferries are a top priority for
my district and for the State. The Washington State Ferry
System is the largest system in the United States, and carries
over 25 million riders annually. Ferries are an integral part
of the transportation infrastructure of Washington State. They
are an extension of our highway system. They provide public
transportation to help thousands of my constituents get to work
and to return home. So I encourage this subcommittee to improve
and expand upon this investment and this form of
transportation.
In fact, next month, Senator Patty Murray and I, from
Washington State, will introduce the U.S. Ferry Systems
Investment Act of 2011. Our legislation will make a robust
investment in the Federal ferry boat program, also mandate that
half of these funds be distributed by formula, and half
through--by a discretionary basis.
Second, highway safety. My district includes U.S. Highway
2, a stretch of highway where there have been over 50 fatal
accidents since 1999. So I support the inclusion of a robust
safety program, or at least an emphasis in the next surface
transportation bill that could direct resources toward
particularly dangerous highway corridors.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, freight mobility is a priority. In
Washington State, freight systems supported over 1 million jobs
in freight-dependent industry sectors. Washington State's
transportation infrastructure, including our northern border
crossings, Interstate 5, the Burlington Santa Fe and Union
Pacific rail lines, the ports of Everett, Seattle, Tacoma, and
others, and inter-modal connectors, all of them, are critical
to supporting the movement of freight and goods that create
jobs.
Investment and freight mobility is important, because the
more freight we move, the more jobs we create. And I support
the creation and funding of a national freight transportation
program that will work with States and local governments to
invest in highway rail and port projects that eliminate choke
points and increase efficiency.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for the opportunity to
present my policy requests for the next surface transportation
authorization. I look forward to continuing to work with you
and the rest of the subcommittee as we look at how to invest in
our Nation's infrastructure to create jobs. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Larsen, for
a fine statement.
We are honored now to have Representative Garamendi. And,
Mr. Garamendi, your full statement will be placed in the
record.
And you may proceed.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, members
of the committee.
I have just listened to three presentations, and all three
of them speak to what I would like to start my policy statement
with, and that is let us make all this stuff in America. We do
have a Buy America provisions, they have been in the law for a
long time, but they are routine, they are ignored. We need very
strong make-it-in-America--because, frankly, we need to rebuild
our manufacturing base here in this Nation. And we can use our
infrastructure programs to do that.
Speaking specifically today of transportation, all well and
good. If we are going to build a bridge, it ought to be
American steel. If we are going to deal with transit systems,
they ought to be buses, trains made in America. I have
legislation that is now in the hopper, H.R. 613, Airports,
Highways, High-Speed Rail, Trains, and Transit, all of it. Let
us make it in America. If we are going to use our tax money to
buy something, we ought to use it to buy American-made
equipment. There is a provision in this that allows us to move
toward 100 percent over 3 years.
So, I will start there. Let us use our money to strengthen
the American manufacturing base. We know it can be done. The
stimulus bill did it. And now we are seeing Siemens and other
foreign countries--companies--establishing manufacturing plants
here so that they can move forward with building high-speed
rail.
Secondly, I support President Obama's $556 billion/6-year
surface reauthorization plan to modernize our country's surface
transportation infrastructure to create jobs and to invest in
our future. I like the idea of a jump start. We need jobs now.
We certainly need jobs in the future. But his $50 billion
boost? Terrific. We ought to do it, ought to be in the bill. We
ought to move forward with it.
The $8 billion in 2012 and $53 billion over 6 years to
provide 80 percent of Americans with convenient access to
passenger rail, high-speed services in the next 25 years,
bravo, ought to be in the bill, we ought to do it. The $30
billion over 6 years for the national infrastructure bank,
terrific idea. It gives us a way to leverage both public and
private money. It should be in the bill.
The next generation air transportation system, I don't know
how many years this precedes me--by at least a decade-and-a-
half--but yet it is not yet done. Let us get it done. It is
going to make air travel to the Pacific much easier for Mrs.
Napolitano and myself, and we think that is a great idea.
The $10 billion for the state of good repair, OK. But that
also reminds me of another issue, which is the state of high
denial that seems to exist within this Congress on this side
and the other side, and perhaps also in the administration.
There is no freebie here. We are going to have to find the
money to do it. So if we are going to have a state of good
repair, we have to end the state of high denial that somehow
there is going to be money falling from trees or somewhere that
is going to pay for this.
We need to be very, very serious about this, and we also
need to understand that later this fall there is no excise tax.
It terminates. And we are going to have to reauthorize the
excise tax on diesel and gasoline. And as we do that, we ought
to consider the overarching needs and set that price--set that
at a level where we can actually do the things that must be
done for America's future.
Specifically on the Bay area, the northern California San
Francisco Bay area is one of the largest transportation places
in this Nation, and it has over 5 million passengers a year on
public transportation. So as we reauthorize, we need to pay
attention to the transit systems that serve the entire Nation,
and particularly the Bay area. There is BART, there are bus
systems, there is transportation programs of all kinds,
including Amtrak with its Amtrak capital corridor the San
Joachin corridor, and the--also the peninsula.
We have three major airports: San Francisco, Oakland, San
Jose. We have ports: the Port of Oakland, the Port of West
Sacramento, Stockton, and also a couple of smaller ports in the
area. All of these need our attention, and we have to do the
money to do it. High-speed rail is much discussed. California
will build it, and it will service well into the future.
Livable communities. Yes, bicycles are really important, as
are walking and other ways of getting to the transportation
hubs.
And finally, let me just finish with five major interstate
routes: Interstate 80; 680; 580; two State routes that have
become major corridors, the 4 and the 80. All of these are
critically important, and they have to be properly integrated
into the overall structure and funding of the new surface
transportation program.
I won't go into pipeline safety, but we are all across this
Nation going to spend billions upon billions in upgrading our
pipelines. And I think all of us are aware of that.
In conclusion, we simply are going to have to build for our
future. The transportation infrastructure is critical. I thank
you for the extra 20 seconds, and I will be happy to answer any
questions.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you. Thank you very much, Mr.
Garamendi. I certainly agree with your Buy America statements.
And at some point we have got to stop rebuilding Iraq and
Afghanistan and start rebuilding the United States of America.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, why don't we do that by denying the
funding for those programs, and start ratcheting down the
funding and transfer that here?
It personally drives me crazy. We didn't get into the
program, but I represent the Delta crucial to California's
future. I cannot find a Corps of Engineer person to work on
that seriously. But I suspect if we talked about the delta of
the Euphrates River we could find all kinds of folks to work on
that. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much. Ms. Chu has
been here with us for a while, and we will go next to her, and
then we will get to Mr. Sires.
We are honored to have you, Representative Chu, and you may
begin your testimony.
Ms. Chu. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. Los Angeles is one
of the most congested and polluted counties in the Nation. And
now, more than ever, we need a transportation system that will
create jobs. That is why it is so critical that we move forward
on a surface transportation authorization.
I am here today to reiterate our region's most important
priorities, and to urge you to include these suggestions in any
draft surface transportation bill. To that end, I would like to
ask that you include in the record the Los Angeles County
Metropolitan Transportation Authority's detailed proposal that
they call America Fast Forward, also known as the 3010 Plan.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65643.037

Ms. Chu. In 2009, LA County approved a 30-year
transportation plan that aims to build 12 transit projects
connecting millions of people across the Nation's largest
county. LA County residents approved a half-cent sales tax to
build them. That's right. During a recession, residents
actually agreed to tax themselves more. Our region desperately
needs this investment, and I am so proud that Angelenos were
ready and willing to pay for it.
But our air is too polluted and our roads too congested to
wait 3 decades for a real 21st-century transportation system.
Instead, we want to do it in just 10 years. We want to leverage
our local dollars and stretch the Federal transportation
dollars coming out of the U.S. Department of Transportation's
budget. And with the Federal Government's help to augment this
serious investment in local transportation, together we can
create nearly 1 million annual private sector jobs in just a
decade.
How do we do this? By enhancing the Transportation
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act, TIFIA, through
reforming six provisions. First, increasing the annual funding
from $122 million to over $500 million, annually. Second,
increasing the maximum TIFIA share from 33 percent to 49
percent. Third, broadening eligibility to include programs-
related projects, not just one project per TIFIA loan. Fourth,
authorizing the U.S. Department of Transportation to make up-
front master credit agreements for larger projects and
programs. Fifth, to authorize the Transportation Department to
offer limited interest rate hedge for master credit agreements.
And last, to eliminate the springing lien for certain types of
loans.
But that is not all. The surface transportation bill should
also create a new class of qualified tax credit bonds called
qualified transportation improvement bonds. These qualified tax
credit bonds are taxable rate bonds issued by State, local, or
other eligible issuers. The Federal Government would subsidize
the interest cost by granting investors annual tax credits in
lieu of interest. These bonds would be authorized in the amount
of $4.5 billion per year over the next 10 years. This would
allow issuers to finance more than twice the dollar value of
capital improvements than is possible with traditional tax-
exempt bonds, stimulating greater investment and taking
pressure off of conventional Federal grant programs.
But southern California's transportation challenges are
more than just about roads and transit. The region handles more
than 40 percent of our Nation's shipping containers, three-
quarters of which leave destined for markets outside the area.
And many of these goods travel on freight rail right through my
district, creating congestion and safety hazards for my
constituents.
Now our State and communities have made significant local
investments in making local grade separation safer,
particularly through the Alameda Corridor East project in the
San Gabriel Valley. These investments allow trains to go faster
through the corridor, getting these goods out to the rest of
the Nation more quickly, and also saving lives.
But we need Federal help to finish the project. The surface
transportation bill should create a national freight
infrastructure investment program for designated freight
corridors and gateways to provide funding for freight projects.
This program should prioritize nationally significant projects
and their impact on interstate and foreign commerce. And
efficiency and environmental impact should be considered.
Port authorities and municipalities and units of local
government should be able to receive these grants and funding
projects through to completion, similar to a full-funding grant
agreement for transit projects. These changes would strengthen
long-term economic recovery by supporting the more efficient
movement of American exports and imports, and create jobs.
Now, let me be clear. This is not just about Los Angeles.
It is about making our Federal tax dollars stretch further. And
this type of a reform will encourage other areas to follow in
our footsteps. Let us make sure we get the most bang for our
buck. I urge you to include these proposals in any draft
legislation.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Ms. Chu. A very fine
testimony. Mrs. Napolitano, any statement you wish to make, or
comments?
Mrs. Napolitano. I totally agree with her assessment,
especially in the view of the fact that California has 35
million people that have to get to work, and the aging
infrastructure has not been really upgraded for many decades.
And I think it is time that we begin to really focus. Seeing as
California provides a lot of the funding for transportation, we
are a donor State, so to speak. So I agree. Thank you.
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much, Ms. Chu. Mr.
Sires?
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking Member
DeFazio, for holding this important hearing. I appreciate the
opportunity to share my policy proposals as we work together to
reauthorize the surface transportation bill.
As many of you know, my district in New Jersey is one of
the most densely populated, and is also an important
transportation hub, home to highways, commuter rail, light
rail, and the largest port on the East Coast. I believe that an
effective transportation policy should focus on ways to improve
congestion, make our transportation system more efficient, and
protect the environment and health of our constituents.
This Congress I have introduced legislation that I believe
will prove useful if incorporated into the surface
transportation bill. The first is H.R. 260, Commute LESS, which
stands for leveraging employer support and successes. This bill
was modeled after a successful program in Washington State. In
2009, Washington's commute reduction board reported that their
program removed 28,000 vehicles from the road, reduce 12,900
hours of delay, and led to savings of $9 million in congestion
costs.
Based on these successes, I believe that my legislation,
Commute LESS, can similarly work throughout the country. If
implemented, the results will be less congestion, less emission
of greenhouse gases, and ultimately, better efficiency in our
transportation system. Commute LESS would give employers the
tools necessary to provide their employees with alternative
forms of transportation, such as transit, carpooling, and
teleworking. Metropolitan planning organizations would work
with employers to receive input regarding the development of
long-range transportation plans.
Additionally, if construction plans impede the flow of
traffic for more than 120 days, or exceed $100 million, this
bill will require a mitigation plan. I believe that this bill
provides the solution necessary to expand commuting options
during a time when congestion has cost Americans $115 billion
and 34 lost hours.
I also introduced H.R. 1338, the Focusing Resources
Economic Investment and Guidance to Help Transportation Act of
2011, and believe that its broad policy proposal should be
considered in the upcoming bill. This legislation would help
achieve national objectives of bettering our communities
through reduced congestion and pollution, while also
stimulating our economy.
The Freight Act focuses on three policy ideas. The first is
the creation of a national freight transportation policy to
improve freight efficiency, operation, and security. This plan
would access the current national freight system and its
ability to achieve future objectives and goals.
Second, this bill will establish a dedicated office of
freight planning and development within the Department of
Transportation to be led by an assistant secretary of freight
planning and development. This office will be instrumental in
facilitating communications among stakeholders and different
levels of government.
Lastly, national freight infrastructure grants will be
awarded on a competitive basis to improve the efficiency of our
national transportation system. With freight, volume is
expected to increase 92 percent by 2035. It is important that
our Nation is prepared to meet these needs. And I believe the
freight policy ideas can help.
Livable communities. Livable communities are also an issue
that I feel strongly about, and I believe it belongs in the
upcoming bill. The HUD, DoT, and EPA partnership for
sustainable community has been successfully working to
integrate planning and investment among the three agencies.
Their programs are working to provide more transportation
choices and promote public health.
Additionally, Safe Routes for Schools is another program
that has had nationwide success. Safe Routes for Schools
reduces congestion while also encouraging healthy and safe
options for children. Both the partnership and Safe Routes are
important tools to reach the goals of streamlining our
transportation system.
Lastly, I must urge the committee to focus on
infrastructure and investment. Not only are investments
necessary to bring our country into the future, but investments
will bring jobs: $1 billion in infrastructure creates
approximately 35,000 jobs. The construction sector unemployment
rate is still over 20 percent, and we have thousands of people
waiting to work.
The committee has focused on finding ways to do more with
less. And I agree that this is needed. I believe that both
Commute LESS and the Freight Act can meet these goals. I also
believe that creating livable communities provides holistic
framework to ensure that our policies improve the well-being of
our constituents.
Thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking Member DeFazio, for
holding this hearing. And I look forward to a robust
reauthorization bill. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Sires.
And we are now honored to be joined by our colleague, Earl
Blumenauer from Oregon. And Congressman Blumenauer, it is an
honor to have you here with us.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must confess
that I miss the 10 years I spent with you on this committee,
and am privileged to be with you. I would identify strongly
with the elements that were mentioned by my good friend from
New Jersey, and would echo them. Because what we know is that
the Surface Transportation Act is probably our most effective
tool to be able to rebuild and renew America, to put people
back to work, and to give them tools, as my friend mentioned,
to be able to work more efficiently.
Transportation should be about giving citizens and
businesses options. People want more choices. It is
interesting, the study by the National Association of Realtors
showed that over 50 percent of Americans think we ought to
invest more in public transit and active transportation instead
of merely automatically increasing traditional road-building
infrastructure. But we know that is important, as well.
The cost of congestion to society has increased almost 500
percent in the last 30 years. Being able to work collectively
and flexibly, to be able to move passengers, and freight, and
strengthen community is what it is all about.
I was pleased to see what has happened, as was referenced,
with the unique partnership between the Department of
Transportation, HUD, and EPA. It is unparalleled. And we have
watched almost 1,500 communities make applications for the
Tiger Grants, for instance, and there are only 51 of them. We
could have increased that investment 40 times with worthy
projects. I am just pleased that my community got one, and that
I have been able to visit communities around the country where
people are putting it to work.
It gives an opportunity for people to enhance that
flexibility, which brings me to my second point, because I know
the committee has been looking at ways to streamline the
process. This is something that has occupied our time. I would
hope that we can reframe the regulatory debate beyond the rules
and regulations and the hoops that we jump through.
But what actually is the outcome? Can we make this more
performance-driven? Mrs. Napolitano has a State that has
environmental regulations that are arguably stronger than the
Federal Government. Well, when there is a big transit project,
for instance, in southern California, or a road project in
Sacramento, does it make sense to require two separate
processes, if the State process is arguably even stronger? What
is the benefit for the extra time and energy?
I think, by making this performance-driven, this is
something that people of all philosophies, all color States,
can come together. And it is something I would like to work
with the committee on. I have taken this to the White House
after the President's recent Executive order on regulation,
suggesting that we do business differently, not just look at
the good and the bad.
I also hope that we can spend more time talking about how
we finance infrastructure. One of the reasons why I grudgingly
took a leave from this committee to go to Ways and Means and go
to budget is because, frankly, you need more resources to
realize the vision. The American Society of Civil Engineers
suggests that we are $2.2 billion down for infrastructure
needs, just for the next 5 years.
You know, it is interesting. Ronald Reagan, at the height
of the work that he was doing, supported a gas tax increase. We
see our friends in the Senate with their FAA reauthorization
come together for user fees that are actually supported by the
industry that would support billions of dollars of investment.
I know this is not primarily your jurisdiction, but I would
urge that you work with us, because I will fight for you on the
revenue title on Ways and Means, and carry that to the budget
discussion.
And while we are at it, we need to be looking at the long-
term financing. Using for transportation a fee that is based on
gallons consumed locks us in a downward spiral. I come from a
State that gave you, 91 years ago, the first gas tax dedicated
for transportation, road construction. We are working to try
and eliminate the gas tax with work that we have done,
authorized by this committee before, on a vehicle-mile-traveled
fee, which has been a pilot project that has been very
successful.
I came before you last year, urging that you incorporate a
portion of legislation that I have that would expand this pilot
project to other States that would like it. Because,
ultimately, with hyper-efficient diesel trucks, with more fuel-
efficient gasoline-powered cars, with hybrids, with plug-in
hybrids, with electric cars, we are in a downward spiral that
cannot support our transportation needs, even while they put
demands on the road. I would urge that you look at 3311 from
the last session, and see if there is something that we can do
with you to expand that, so people understand the power and the
capacity.
And in the short term, I would hope that we could look
perhaps at legislation that I have to change the truck excise
tax to a fuel tax. The big hit to the transportation fund was
the collapse of truck sales, and that 12 percent excise tax did
not collect the money. I have been working with the auto
dealers, the truck manufacturers, with a range of groups, to
see if we cannot replace that excise tax, which is very
unstable, with a revenue-neutral proposal that would simply
have a small increase in the fuel tax in the interim. That
would promote the sales of equipment, it would stabilize the
highway trust fund, and I think would help position us, moving
forward.
There is no more important work for this Congress than what
you are doing with reauthorization. I know it is not easy. I
know there are lots of tugs and pushes and pulls. I will supply
a statement for the record about some other interests that I
have. But I did want to join with you to make these three
points, to pledge my support, and hope that we are able to work
with you on the long term for the things that will help us
rebuild America, make our communities more livable, and our
families safer, healthier, and more economically secure.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Blumenauer, and
you have just shown those of us who are here, through your
testimony, why you were such an outstanding member of this
committee. And I look forward to working with you on some of
those proposals, as you said, especially some of the
environmental requirements and several of the other things, as
well. You have made some very good suggestions.
Any comments, Mrs. Napolitano?
Mrs. Napolitano. No, except you forgot to mention the
bicycle paths.
Mr. Blumenauer. But I am silently advertising before you.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. [Off mic.]
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congressman Hanna.
My goal would be that we work very hard to make it not
subjective, that we identify what it is that we are trying to
achieve with a particular environmental protection.
I worked in a prior life, when I was commissioner of public
works for the city of Portland, I was part of an effort for our
region to work with our largest employer, Intel--actually, it
is the largest concentration of Intel employees anywhere in the
world--on a plant expansion. It required an air quality permit.
And there was some ambiguity about what would happen, in terms
of having bureaucrats designing what was necessary for that
plant expansion.
And we were able to work out with EPA and our State
regulatory authority, conditions where they committed to meet
the standard, but we got out of the way, in terms of what the
specifics would be. And they were able to move forward with the
project. They saved millions of dollars. And the air is just as
clean, if not cleaner. And that--so I do not want it to be
subjective. I do not want us to be in the cross-current.
I bleed green. It is not about protecting the environment
or the health. It is just getting to the point of what we are
trying to achieve, making that standard specific, and then
holding people accountable for meeting it.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you, sir. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Blumenauer. And
now I will recognize Mr. Cohen for any statement or comments
that he wishes to make.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Duncan. I appreciate
your leadership and recognition.
I have the privilege of representing Memphis, Tennessee,
America's airtropolis, in addition to being the home of Elvis,
and the unfortunate site of the assassination of Dr. King 43
years ago yesterday, where there is a great new civil rights
museum.
In Memphis we have the four R's come together: roads,
runways, rails, and river. And it makes our city distinct in
our country, as a distribution hub and transportation center.
We move more cargo through our airport--largely because of
Federal Express--than any airport in the United States, and
second only to Hong Kong in the world.
As a representative of this town, which is a transportation
town, I understand the need of functioning transportation
infrastructure to keep our Nation's economy moving. It is one
place we are lagging behind our counterparts in Asia and in
Europe.
Every evaluation of our transportation infrastructure makes
the same conclusion, that our infrastructure is crumbling, and
Congress needs to pass long-term authorization that makes a
significant investment in that infrastructure. It is not only
important for the immediate needs of our economy and our
putting our people to work with jobs, but also the long term of
keeping our economy going and competing on the world stage, as
an important trade partner and producer and distributor of
goods and products.
This point is moist poignantly made by the appropriately
titled AASHTO report, ``Rough Roads Ahead: Fix Them Now or Pay
for It Later,'' which states that one-third of the Nation's
highways are in poor or mediocre condition. I hate to think of
the structure of our bridges, which threaten lives, as well.
This report and others indicate that now is the time not to
stand pat and reduce our spending, but that we need to keep our
country and our people and our economy moving in the 21st
century. We need to move forward with investments, not stand
pat.
The Surface Transportation Authorization Act authorization
must do more than invest in our infrastructure. It needs to
provide a visionary comprehensive systemic approach to
infrastructure investment that addresses the Nation's
commercial needs. To that end, I propose two pieces of
legislation that achieve this mission by advancing the
development of airtropolis transportation systems.
I worked with Chairman Mica to advance airtropolis
transportation systems, development in the FAA Reauthorization
Act and hope to do the same in the Surface Transportation
Authorization Act.
The 21st century has been dubbed ``the fast century,'' an
era when speed and agility will determine commercial success.
And to serve that need, new urban forms are coming about,
comprising multimodal transportation networks and aviation-
intensive businesses called the airtropolis. It is developing
around the world. Paris, France, has an airtropolis concept.
They have got one in China, in addition to--a couple in China,
in Hong Kong being another.
Similar in shape to the traditional metropolis design, the
airtropolis extends from major airports. Centered around that
airport is a planned, coordinated, multimodal freight and
passenger transportation network called an airtropolis
transportation system. It involves not just the airport, which
is the center of economic activity, but trucks that come in and
bring goods, railroads that come in and bring goods, and even
river transportation moved by other forms of transportation to
the air hub, that then distributes it to the world.
Airtropolis development systems are developing across the
country in other cities besides Memphis--although Memphis is
premier--cities such Detroit and Milwaukee. But all these
cities need Federal support to compete in this international
marketplace.
To spur domestic airtropolis transportation system
development, I am introducing legislation that directs the
Secretary of Transportation to establish a grant program to
provide funding assistance to local entities for planning,
design, environmental review, and land acquisition activities
for airtropolis transportation system projects. Many
airtropolis transportation systems throughout the country are
developing slowly, because local entities lack the requisite
funding for pre-construction activities. By providing a small
influx of money in the pre-construction phase, the government
can help localities expedite project delivery, enhance U.S.
competitiveness, and create jobs.
I will introduce the Airtropolis Act of 2011, which amends
SAFETEA-LU, so that projects--assistance of the establishment
of airtropolis transportation systems are eligible to receive
funds under the projects of national and regional significance
program. This program funds projects with national economic
benefits that cannot be funded through traditional funding,
making the program an appropriate funding mechanism for
airtropolis transportation systems. Without that support and
investment, airtropolis won't take flight in the United States,
and leave our Nation grounded.
We must ensure we use innovative approaches to address
growing transportation needs of our citizens. To do so, we need
to support the President's livability agenda, by creating an
office of livability within the Department of Transportation,
and develop an extensive livability agenda.
As our Nation's population ages, gas prices climb, we have
to have more than just cars and trucks. We need to have bike
paths, we need to have walking paths. We need to have other
forms of transportation that God has given us, and that aren't
dependent on fossil fuels.
Lastly, we need to resolve how to better invest in programs
like the Intermodal Freight Transportation Institute at the
University of Memphis, which is educating transportation
engineers of our future.
It is also--the University of Memphis has great athletic
basketball teams, but not as good as the University of
Connecticut's this year. But next year we will be better.
I look forward to working with you to pass a long-term
comprehensive surface transportation authorization act to
create jobs and keep our country moving. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much, Mr. Cohen. Our next
witness will be the Honorable Rosa DeLauro, from the State of
Connecticut. Ms. DeLauro, it is an honor to have you here with
us.
Ms. DeLauro. Thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman. Go
Huskies. Thank you, Mr. Cohen. Really delighted and proud to be
here with you this morning. I want to thank Chairman Duncan,
and I want to thank the ranking member, Mr. DeFazio,
Congresswoman Napolitano. Good to be here with you. This is a
wonderful opportunity you have provided me to testify about the
national infrastructure bank.
I might add that on a recent CODEL to Afghanistan I had the
opportunity to talk about transportation infrastructure in
general with Chairman Mica. And I and my staff have discussed
the proposal at length with Representative Shuster of the
committee, as well. And he generously spent some time in
Connecticut earlier this year, looking at our high-speed rail
development in the northeast corridor. So I thank all of you
for your great leadership on this issue.
I want to commend the subcommittee for its recognition that
investment in transportation infrastructure is critical to job
creation and to economic growth. Everyone here understands that
we need to make wise investments with limited resources, and
that investments in infrastructure pay enormous dividends in
jobs and prosperity.
If you will permit me to quote you this morning, Mr.
Chairman, you said in a hearing last week that this
subcommittee ``will also be looking at innovative financing,
bonding, loan programs, and public-private partnerships are
just some of the innovative financing techniques that the
subcommittee can utilize to leverage the Nation's limited
highway trust fund dollars.''
In addition, Mr. Chairman, and again I quote, you said,
``We should consolidate duplicative Federal programs to
eliminate waste and eliminate programs that do not serve the
national need.''
Mr. Chairman, I agree with the entirety of these
statements. In fact, these hit on the exact goals and purpose
of a national infrastructure bank. To that end, I introduced
legislation that would establish a national infrastructure
bank, government-owned corporation, managed by an independent
board of directors and staffed with experts in finance and
infrastructure. It would leverage private dollars to invest
objectively in a broad range of infrastructure projects of
national and regional significance with clear economic,
environmental, and social benefits.
On the lending side, the bank would leverage private
dollars by issuing bonds that will attract interested
institutional investors with proceeds used to provide loans and
loan guarantees to projects. On the borrowing side, the private
sector can partner with the public sector--regions, States,
localities--to borrow from the bank, while adding its own
private equity.
The bank takes a diverse view of infrastructure needs. It
provides funding to projects that cross traditional
jurisdictions, and prioritizes those with additional sources of
financing that can be completed more promptly with assistance
from the bank. Authorized appropriations would capitalize the
bank, which would then lend money to projects with identifiable
and reliable revenue streams, so that loans are paid back, and
the bank becomes a self-sustaining entity.
To be clear, the purpose of a national infrastructure bank
is to supplement, not supplant current funding mechanisms. I am
a strong supporter of the robust surface transportation
reauthorization measure, as well, and believe this should be
part of that effort. The infrastructure bank concept
acknowledges what we all know, that current Federal programs
are simply unable to provide the investment needed to meet the
infrastructure investment deficit that we face.
According to the National Surface Transportation Policy and
Revenue Study Commission, $225 billion is needed a year for the
next 50 years to upgrade our surface transportation system to a
state of good repair, and create a more advanced system.
Particularly in light of our current fiscal situation, now is
the right time to move forward with this innovative finance
proposal.
Over the past month I know this committee has conducted a
series of 16 field hearings and listening sessions around the
country to gather input from States and local communities. It
is seeking input from the transportation community for the
surface transportation reauthorization. I suspect many of them
would advise that they support a national infrastructure bank.
The concept has received a wide range of support from
business, labor, and the investment communities, as well as a
bipartisan group of governors and mayors and a variety of
advocacy groups. In fact, a bipartisan counterpart to my
legislation has been introduced in the Senate by Senators John
Kerry, Kay Bailey Hutchison, Mark Warner, and Lindsey Graham.
In sum, by leveraging private dollars, streamlining and
focusing our infrastructure investment decisions, funding
projects critical to economic growth, and creating good, well-
paying jobs, a national infrastructure bank can help to meet
the goals the committee has set out for the surface
transportation reauthorization. I hope that we can come
together to craft an authorization for a national
infrastructure bank that can attract the type of bipartisan
support within the House that the proposal has enjoyed for
years outside the institution.
Republican or Democrat, we all know that transportation and
infrastructure investment creates jobs, revitalizes our
economy. I believe that the bank will help put us and help to
put America back to work.
I thank you. I look forward to working with the
subcommittee on this initiative. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mrs. Napolitano.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Ms. DeLauro. And I
agree with you. Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. I concur totally with the statement made
by our colleague, Ms. DeLauro. It is really key that we get
this bill moving.
Ms. DeLauro. OK. Thank you so much, and I appreciate the
opportunity to testify this morning.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. All right. Our next witness is the
Honorable Gene Green from Texas.
And, Mr. Green, it is a privilege to have you here with us.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and our ranking member,
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you for allowing me to testify today.
And I understand the physical challenges we face, but I also
believe we must do more to improve our Nation's transportation
system.
I represent the east side of Houston, Texas, and east
Harris County that includes both the Port of Houston and a
support system based on a movement of trucks out of the port.
Transportation funding, particularly for highways and transit,
is particularly important for my constituents, the entirety of
the greater Houston area. We have a congestion problem in
Houston. We have done a lot to reduce this congestion, but more
must be done.
We also have the largest port in the country for foreign
tonnage, and the largest petrochemical complex in our country
along the banks of the Port of Houston. In years ahead we will
face a much higher traffic volume, due to the population growth
and the expansion of the Panama Canal, which will bring more
truck traffic and economic development to the area.
In order for Houston and our port to continue to be a hub
of commerce, we must strengthen our rail and road
infrastructure. Both a successful port and growing local
economy rely on well-maintained roads and bridges. Communities
around our country must improve transportation infrastructure
in order to encourage businesses and economic development.
With a population of 6.1 million, the Houston area relies
on highway funding. Texas is a donor State. We pay more into
the highway trust fund than we receive. As a result, it is
important that percentages are maintained so that we do not
lose any more money of the money that Texas pays into the fund.
Ideally, under a new bill, our percentage would increase.
Right now is the best time to fund construction projects.
With the recent downturn in the economy, construction projects
have decreased in cost. The Texas Department of Transportation
has told me they saved as much as 20 percent on projects funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, because costs
during recession went down a great deal.
One project I am familiar with is the direct connectors on
State Highway 59 and the Beltway 8 around Houston on the north
side that is in our district was initially estimated it cost
$100 million. It ended up a total cost of $36 million.
I am concerned about the increased reliance on toll roads.
They certainly have a place in our system, and we have them in
the Houston area, but we cannot allow two different highway
systems to develop, one for the wealthy, who can afford the
daily budget drain of toll roads, and the rest of us, who
cannot. If the toll roads that are constructed are paid for by
the tolls, I believe that expands options for drivers and is
generally a good thing. However, I do not support any Federal
funds being spent on these roads. While I understand the strain
that the highway trust is experiencing, particularly with
increasing vehicle fuel efficiency, it is important we fund
important highway projects throughout the country.
We are at a critical time for our Nation, in terms of
transportation funding. We must fix the bridges, expand the
highways, and increase the capacity of our infrastructure.
Funding for new starts is important for Houston, and I hope to
be included in the authorization bill.
In--Houston is current scheduled to receive full funding
grant agreement for two light rail lines under the new starts
program this summer. I am happy that both the Federal Transit
Administration and the Department of Transportation have seen
the significance of these two projects. Houston is our only
light rail, is supported by local funds, and these projects
would actually be a partnership with the Federal Government,
which would not only stimulate job creation, but also improve
our local transportation infrastructure by providing affordable
mass transit and easing congestion on our highways.
The Houston area has, for too long, been left behind on
transit. And these two lines will serve some of the most
transit-dependent parts of our community. For that I am
thankful, and for the added commerce and economic opportunities
the light rail will bring to these communities.
Highway and transit projects are important to our
constituents so they can work, go to work and school, and they
are important to our business, so they can move commerce.
Everyone wins when you increase our investments in
transportation infrastructure.
And again, thank you for the time today, and thank the
committee for allowing Members to testify.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Green. I wish
all of our $100 million projects would come in at $36 million.
We could get a whole lot more done.
Mr. Green. I was shocked myself. In fact, that interchange
was at the corner of our district, but along with Ted Poe's and
Sheila Jackson Lee's, so all of us agreed we would stand there
and hold the same scissors as we cut them, because it was a
partnership from all three of us.
Mr. Duncan. Well, that is great. You have been an
outstanding Member of Congress. How long have you served now?
Mr. Green. I am in my tenth term, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. Tenth term. I knew it was something like that.
Mrs. Napolitano?
Mrs. Napolitano. Nothing. Just great testimony, Mr. Green.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. Our next witness is the
Honorable Mark Critz from Pennsylvania. And we are pleased,
certainly pleased to have you with us here today. And I thought
we were going to get right to you, and then a couple of others
who were scheduled before you--and you were--I was going to let
you go ahead anyway, but I saw that you graciously moved out of
their way, so I appreciate that.
But thank you, and you may begin your testimony.
Mr. Critz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to testify. And, Mrs. Napolitano, I appreciate the
opportunity. I do not have a prepared statement, and--but I
just wanted to go over some notes about something that happened
in the 2005 reauthorization of SAFETEA-LU, and sort of what
brought us to this position.
In 1991, in the Intermodal Surface Transportation
Efficiency Act, ISTEA, there was language put in that states
that have toll highways could use the toll credits from those
as matching funds for Appalachian Highway System projects. That
was going along quite well.
And to give you a little bit of background about
Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Turnpike, of course, is one of
the oldest highways in the country, and there is actually a
portion that runs between Breezewood, Pennsylvania and New
Stanton, Pennsylvania, where Route 70, a Federal highway, joins
the turnpike. And at that stage, for that 89-mile stretch, the
Federal Government bears no cost to maintain that portion of
the highway.
In fact, if you use new highway construction costs, which
are running in the $20 million to $25 million range, that 89-
mile stretch of highway saved the Federal Government quite a
bit of money in past years. But looking at it from a current
standpoint, a reasonable amount of money to consider for just
upkeep and maintenance of a stretch of highway is probably
about $1 million a mile every 5 years.
So, the 5 years since the language was changed in the
SAFETEA-LU reauthorization in 2005, the State of Pennsylvania
has actually saved the Federal Government probably
approximately $190 million in maintenance costs to that stretch
of highway.
But even going further, what the turnpike also does is that
they contribute approximately $450 million back to Pennsylvania
for other highways that are not part of the turnpike system.
So, when you talk about innovative financing, Pennsylvania has
been at the forefront of using their highway system and their
interstate dollars to supplement what the Federal Government
has been able to do.
And if you look at Pennsylvania from a geographic
standpoint, it is hard to move commerce between the northeast
population centers and the rest of the country without going
through Pennsylvania. So, even though we take a hit sometimes
because our roads are not always the least pothole-filled ones
in the country, we do have more miles of roadway than the
entire northeast New England States combined. So we do try to
maintain that link between the northeast commerce and the rest
of the country.
But what happened is that--and, as you know, Mr. Chairman--
is that--being from Tennessee and part of the Appalachian
region--is that the Appalachian highway system was developed
because a lot of our areas, rural America, are not connected to
the original interstate transportation system. And, therefore,
this system was set up so that our areas, rural America, could
be connected and hopefully produce an economic benefit to it.
So, that system was going along quite well with the addition of
the toll credits.
And I refer back to the savings that the State of
Pennsylvania, because of the turnpike, produces for the Federal
Government. These toll credits are really a reward for
Pennsylvania. It is not an expense to the Federal Government.
It is actually zero sum, and actually, probably even less than
that.
We have--and I am going to be specific, because it impacted
Pennsylvania dramatically in the past couple of years--is that
we have a section of the Appalachian highway system ready to go
to construction, and is $35 million short in its match. And
that is when the--it was discovered that the toll credits were
taken out of the match. And, unfortunately, in our trying
economic times, Pennsylvania does not have that extra $35
million to fund a $350 million construction project in
Pennsylvania.
It is completing the Route 219 in southern Somerset County,
which will connect it to 68 and, in essence, connects three
east-west corridors: Route 68, that goes through Maryland and
West Virginia; Route--the turnpike, which runs through
Pennsylvania; and then Route 22, which is in the northern part
of my district. And without this matching money, these projects
won't go forward. Obviously, it is also an economic boon. The
construction of Route 219 is going to create 2,400 to 2,600
permanent jobs, along with about 8,000 construction-related
jobs. So it has come at such a critical point to our local
economy.
But it is not just about Pennsylvania, because this toll
credit language impacts all the Appalachian region, which
includes Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. And without this, rural
Pennsylvania, rural America, is going to be left behind. And we
need your help.
So, I wanted to testify. This is so critical. And I
appreciate you taking my testimony.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Critz. I believe
that Members should try to do things for their districts. And
your predecessor was a legend in that regard. I know you worked
for him, and you are in the position of having to follow an
Adolph Rupp or a Bear Bryant, but I am sure that you will
handle it well. And certainly I appreciate your testimony here
today.
Mrs. Napolitano, do you have any questions?
Mrs. Napolitano. Not at all. No questions, but a comment
that I am looking at the corridors and their viability to be
able to not only move people, but goods movement. And certainly
when--at least from my area in California, we are almost 12
million people, just in our county alone, and that is people
that have been counted--how do we move people, not only from
the big areas, the metropolitan areas, but from the urban and
suburban, the agricultural areas, so that they too have the
same ability to have their demands met, in terms of
transportation, including safety of the roads that they travel
for their families.
So, thank you for your testimony. I appreciate that.
Mr. Critz. Thank you very much.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. The next witnesses are on
the Energy and Commerce Committee, and I understand they are
having a vote right at this moment. So we will be in recess for
just a few minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Duncan. The hearing will resume. We have had a lot of
Members here today. But we are certainly honored to have, as
our next witness, Congresswoman Nydia Velazquez, who is a long-
time friend of mine, and a really outstanding Member.
And, Ms. Velazquez, you may begin your testimony.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Chairman Duncan and Ranking
Member DeFazio, and members of the subcommittee. I welcome
today's opportunity to present policy proposals to reform the
Federal highway safety programs as the committee begins
drafting a long-term reauthorization of the Nation's surface
transportation programs.
The economic downturn and rising gas prices have made
inter-city bus service the fastest growing mode of
transportation in the country, outpacing air and rail travel
combined. The popularity of bus travel is dominated by the so-
called curbside carriers. Instead of using bus terminals, these
low-cost operators use city streets to drop off and pick up
passengers. After 40 years of declining ridership, curbside
operators have revived the bus industry, and now originate more
than 20 percent of all departures. However, this rapid growth
has led to serious safety concerns.
As you know, bus operators must follow many safety
requirements, including screening drivers for controlled
substances, limiting the number of hours drivers can operate,
and properly maintaining buses and equipment. Unfortunately,
curbside carriers operate in a gray area of the law, and
current safety measures have not prevented deadly accidents and
near misses from occurring around the country. The examples are
numerous.
Last September, four people were killed when a curbside bus
hit a bridge in Salina, New York. On March 11, 2011, a bus
driver in New Jersey was cited for a DUI, leaving passengers
stranded on the side of the highway for hours. And, of course,
there was the accident in the Bronx that killed 15 and injured
dozens, the majority of whom were my constituents. In response
to this tragedy, I requested a full NTSB investigation into the
discount busing industry, looking at the condition of buses,
driver fatigue, and safety rules enforcement. The NTSB recently
agreed to my request and will begin a 6-month investigation
immediately.
Today I would like to bring to the committee's attention
several concerns I have with the discount bus industry.
Curbside bus operations present a unique challenge to
inspectors from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration. The lack of terminal facilities seriously
hampers their ability to perform required equipment inspections
on the Nation's growing fleet. The result is poorly maintained
buses skipping inspection and putting lives in jeopardy.
Driver behavior also places lives in peril. Easily
falsified log books allow many drivers to violate the 10-hour
driving limit. Such violations place both passengers and
motorists in grave danger. Since the Bronx tragedy, numerous
instances of over-worked drivers have been reported.
Additionally, inconsistent State laws allow drivers to
continue operating even after drug and alcohol violations. Many
small trucking companies lack the resources to verify a
driver's record in multiple States, forcing companies to rely
heavily on falsified information supplied by drivers.
Establishing a national clearinghouse for drug and alcohol
violations would significantly reduce the number of dangerous
drivers on the road, and the costs of conducting required
background checks.
Unfortunately, curbside buses may continue operating even
after several failed inspections or citations for drivers being
on the road too long. The lack of authority to swiftly take
operators, drivers, and buses off the road for safety
violations has prevented the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration from fulfilling its mission to reduce accidents
on the Nation's highways.
The growth of curbside busing has placed unsustainable
pressure, not only on cities and towns, but on the Nation's
highways, as well. The tragedy in the Bronx was the latest in a
long line of accidents that highlight the need to improve
oversight of the bus industry, in order to protect passengers
and motorists.
I come here today, Mr. Chairman, to ask the committee to
address these concerns when drafting a long-term
reauthorization of the Nation's surface transportation program.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Nydia. It has always
been a pleasure to serve with you.
And, Mrs. Napolitano, do you have any comments?
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, Mr. Chair, just commenting on Ms.
Velazquez's references to the curbside operators and their
drivers not having all the necessary clearances or being--how
would I say--inhibited by alcohol or any other drug issue.
There is the commercial driver's license--the CDLIS, I
think it is called--the national clearinghouse. Is there a way
to be able to get them to--not re-review, but look at the
current status of some of your curbside operators' ability to
continue servicing, especially in a metropolitan area like New
York, to be able to understand what their findings have been,
and maybe either start placing heavier fines or be able to
control inappropriate activity that endangers the general
public and the tourism for that area? That would be one comment
that I would ask, if there has been anything moving in that
direction.
The fact remains that people want to make money. And
sometimes, if they are found to have a need to provide
additional services, they will take anybody that is available
and put them on a route.
So, I am not sure what the issue is, in so far as the
curbside. I didn't know there was curbside operators. I thought
you only had buses in New York, because I really do not pay
that much attention when I visit. But I certainly would love to
be able to help in any way I can.
Ms. Velazquez. Very good.
Mrs. Napolitano. And thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much. Our next
witness is Mr. McGovern, Honorable Jim McGovern from
Massachusetts. And certainly Mr. McGovern has been a great
leader in this Congress and for many years now, and it is an
honor, Mr. McGovern, to have you here with us. We have had a
lot of Members through here today, and we are getting down to
the----
Mr. McGovern. The final one.
Mr. Duncan [continuing]. Last couple of witnesses.
Mr. McGovern. Right.
Mr. Duncan. But we are certainly pleased to have you here
with us. You may proceed.
Mr. McGovern. Well, thank you, Chairman Duncan and
Congresswoman Napolitano. Thank you for allowing me to testify.
And than you for your patience, listening to not just me, but a
whole bunch of Members today.
As a former member of this committee, I recognize that you
are facing extraordinary budgetary challenges as you begin work
on the next highway reauthorization bill. Over the past several
years I have been a strong advocate of limiting truck size and
weight, and I plan to reintroduce my Safe Highways and
Infrastructure Preservation Act in the coming weeks, which
would extend common sense size and weight limits to the entire
national highway system.
Various groups dominated by large shippers and large
trucking companies are lobbying Congress right now to raise the
maximum weight of single tractor trailer trucks from 80,000
pounds to 97,000 pounds, and to allow longer trucks across the
highway system. Simply, bigger, heavier trucks impose huge
costs to State and local governments for road and bridge repair
and maintenance, impose tremendous safety risks to motorists.
At a time when both the Federal and State governments are
facing projected budget shortfalls for fiscal year 2012,
allowing increases to truck size or weight will exacerbate
existing transportation funding problems.
The fact of the matter is the big trucks today do not pay
their fair share for the damage they cause to our roads and our
bridges. A 2000 Federal Highway Administration study found that
a typical 80,000-pound truck pays only 80 percent of its
highway maintenance costs, and a 97,000-pound truck pays only
50 percent of its damage costs.
Bridges are particularly damaged by these super-sized rigs.
The Illinois Department of Transportation recently conducted a
cost benefit analysis of the impact on bridges in the State
associated with raising truck weights to 97,000 pounds. IDOT's
conservative estimate show that these heavier trucks will cost
the State an additional $162 million in repair and maintenance
costs for interstate bridges, alone.
In addition to the added costs, the dangerousness of bigger
trucks is well documented. In 2009, 74,000 people were injured
and 3,380 people were killed in crashes with heavy trucks.
Allowing trucks to be even heavier is a dangerous proposition.
While some proponents of big trucks argue that bigger
trucks means fewer trucks on the roads, the evidence just does
not support this claim, nor does the evidence support the
argument that bigger trucks mean a decrease in the emissions
that cause pollution. Time and time again, we have seen that
increasing truck size and weight results in more trucks on the
road, more fossil fuels burned, and more highway congestion,
not less.
As you begin drafting the next highway reauthorization
bill, I urge you not to increase truck size and weight on our
highways. In these tough budgetary times, we simply cannot
afford the cost that these dangerous mini-trains impose on our
State and our local governments. And, as I said before, we are
going to reintroduce my bill and we are going to reintroduce it
with scores and scores of safety organizations across the
country that view the increase in truck size and weight as a
safety issue, as well.
One final note. While I understand that tax issues are not
the purview of this committee, I urge you to keep in mind mass
transit as you craft your legislation. The commuter tax benefit
in the Recovery Act that allows mass transit commuters to
receive the same maximum benefit from their employers as those
who receive parking benefits was extended through December 31,
2011. I urge you to encourage the usage of mass transit as one
way to relieve traffic congestion and give commuters more
affordable transportation options.
Again, I appreciate your patience, and I appreciate the
work that is done on this committee, and I yield back my time.
Thank you.
Ms. Schmidt. [presiding.] Would you like to say something?
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes. I thank you so much for your
testimony. And you hit a subject that I have a great concern
about, and that is the increase in not only the weight, but the
size of the trailers.
And I know in California there was talk of expanding to
two--the tandem, 52-footers.
Mr. McGovern. Right.
Mrs. Napolitano. And the ability for them to navigate
around the on-ramps and off-ramps is totally bogus. They
cannot. And the fact that transportation--I can understand,
like you have said, the trucking organizations, the companies,
want to be able to transport more.
Mr. McGovern. Right.
Mrs. Napolitano. Problem in California, in many areas, is
that they were using unleaded gas coming into California,
spewing more environmental pollution in our area. Plus, one of
those rigs has an accident, it shuts down the freeways.
Mr. McGovern. Right.
Mrs. Napolitano. And a lot of the issues that have been
discussed in the California transportation committee that I sat
on for 6 years, they are very, very true, even now, that the
increase does affect the roads and the highways that we have.
Now, you talk about bridges. There is none in my area, but
let me tell you that in some of my cities the ruts are so big,
caused by the excess weight in some of those rigs, that it is
hard for sometimes the cars that are navigating. They sometimes
have problems with their undercarriage because they fall into
those ruts.
So, yes, it is a big concern. And I always hear--and you
can see the placards on some of the trucks--that they pay
heavy-duty taxes. Well, I am not sure if it is enough to be
able to keep the infrastructure safe for the rest of the
traveling public.
So, thank you very much for your testimony----
Mr. McGovern. Well, thank you----
Mrs. Napolitano [continuing]. And I would love to look at
your bill.
Mr. McGovern. Well, thank you. And you said it accurately.
They do not pay their share, in terms of what they--in terms of
the wear and tear on highways.
I will just say one final thing. There are some who are
advocating that we allow States to kind of decide this on a
piecemeal basis. I think that is a bad idea. I think it is a
bad idea, because then it ultimately will put pressure on other
States to make exemptions for bigger trucks and heavier trucks
because we have an interstate highway system. And I think that
would be a very, very bad idea.
I mean this is a safety issue, first and foremost. It is
also a cost issue. And, you know, I think if any State were to
do a cost benefit analysis of what it would mean to allow
bigger trucks and heavier trucks on their roads, they would
find that they would be having to pay a lot more money for
basic repairs of their infrastructure. This is a bad idea that
is being pushed by the big shippers right now, and I hope that
this committee, in its wisdom, when you do the highway
reauthorization bill, will state emphatically that we are
against the increase in truck sizes and weights. Thank you.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Butterfield, you are recognized.
Mr. Butterfield. Chairman Schmidt, Ranking Member
Napolitano, thank you very much for this opportunity. I am
multitasking this morning between the Energy and Commerce
Committee and your committee. I thank you.
As we all painfully remember, August 1, 2007, was a tragic
day in our country on the level of 9/11. Early that morning,
the I-35 west highway bridge in Minneapolis collapsed, leaving
13 people dead and 145 injured. The National Transportation
Safety Board determined that inadequate load capacity created
by increases in bridge weight and traffic as the likely cause.
Sadly, the bridge had been deemed structurally deficient, all
the way back to 1991. This was an avoidable tragedy we must
never see happen again.
Ensuring adequate Federal funding for inspection, necessary
upgrades, and bridge replacement is a priority for my
constituents in eastern North Carolina. As we consider
reauthorizing the surface transportation programs, I urge you,
Madam Chair, to provide adequate funding for critical
transportation projects, to ensure public safety, and create
jobs.
Specifically, I urge you to support the President's $23
billion budget request for the U.S. Department of
Transportation. The bridge program was funded at $5.3 billion
in 2010, but even more funding was needed. In 2010, nationwide,
24.3 percent of bridges were considered deficient. And out of
19,000 bridges in my State, 29 percent are rated as deficient
or obsolete. That is a chilling statistic. The North Carolina
Department of Transportation has indicated replacing those
bridges in a timely manner will be a considerable challenge.
I represent a large rural district in eastern North
Carolina. And, as you know, most deficient and obsolete bridges
are, indeed, in rural areas. The most recent Bureau of
Transportation statistics report showed that 69 percent of
deficient and obsolete bridges were in rural, local bridges.
The need for improved transportation infrastructure in my
district is very clear. Many bridges in rural eastern North
Carolina are deteriorating, and pose unacceptable safety
concerns. In numerous cases, bridge use is limited or
restricted because the infrastructure cannot support the weight
or dimensions of modern vehicles. Nearly 600 bridges in my
district are rate deficient or obsolete. That is 600 bridges.
Elizabeth City, North Carolina, the home to a U.S. Coast
Guard air station, has an obsolete bridge spanning the
Pasquotank River, set to be replaced in summer of this year.
Replacing the bridge will cost over $96 million, and my State
depends on 77 percent of those funds to come from us. The
project will improve safety for large volumes of traffic and
repair sinking roads and sidewalks.
The town of Havelock, the home of Cherry Point Marine Air
Station, has a deficient bridge spanning the Slocum Creek.
Without significant investment, the bridge cannot meet safety
requirements, and will continue to pose a threat to public
safety. Our DoT has already determined that there is an
immediate need to correct structural deficiencies in the
pilings supporting the structure, and has moved the schedule
start date for the project from 2019 to 2013. My district needs
additional funding from the Federal Government to make the
project a reality.
States and municipalities depend on Federal funding to make
necessary safety improvements, and to help restore bridges like
the two that I have mentioned. Madam Chairman, we must retain a
distinct bridge program to ensure that FHWA and States like
North Carolina continue to have flexibility to upgrade our
Nation's aging bridge infrastructure. I urge my colleagues to
support the President's budget request to adequately fund the
U.S. Department of Transportation and the distinct highway
bridge program.
Madam Chairman, Ranking Member, I want to thank you for
this time. I wanted to save my accolades to the end, to make
sure that I had enough time to make my statement, but I
appreciate your opening up your hearing and allowing us to come
by and share these comments with you. It is a very significant
issue that we are facing.
Thank you.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you very much. Do you have any comments?
Mrs. Napolitano. No comments, necessarily--or no questions,
necessarily, but comments on thanking our Members for coming in
and giving a viewpoint of their own areas, because that is key.
But I hear the same subject, the same topic, the same goal
is get it done.
Mr. Butterfield. Yes, absolutely.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you.
Mr. Butterfield. Thank you.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you. Next, Congressman Tonko from New
York. Nice to see you again this morning.
Mr. Tonko and I see each other at 7:00 Mass in the morning.
Mr. Tonko. We get our fueling.
Ms. Schmidt. We do. We get our forgiveness and our prayers
at the same time, right?
Mr. Tonko. We need them.
Ms. Schmidt. Amen.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair Schmidt and Ranking Member
Napolitano, and respected members of the committee. I want to
sincerely thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here
today.
I represent the 21st Congressional District in the State of
New York, also known as our capital region. My area is home to
the convergence of two great highway systems, Interstate 87 and
Interstate 90, also known as the Thruway and the Northway. We
are also home to the Erie Canal and Barge Canal basins--some of
the busiest freight and passenger rail tracks in the country--
the Port of Albany, multiple airports, a system of locks, dams,
and reservoirs, and much, much more.
As we work together to create long-term transportation
policy that reauthorizes the highway trust fund, there are a
few areas of interest I would particularly like to highlight.
Those would include green corridors, high-speed rail,
clustering upgrading aging urban cores, and smart transit.
However, I am here before you today to focus on one issue in
particular, that being truck parking facilities. Last session
of Congress I introduced Jason's Law, H.R. 2156.
Now, I would ask you if you could kindly picture this. A
hardworking mother with a 2-year-old son in upstate New York.
She and her husband are pregnant with twins. One late winter
morning, she says good-bye to her husband as he heads out the
door on another truck run. This particular run finds the rig
filled with milk, and the destination is South Carolina. She
has said good-bye to her husband hundreds of times before. Only
this time, he does not come back. On March 5, 2009, that is
exactly what happened to Hope Rivenburg. Her husband, Jason
Rivenburg, was foolishly murdered in South Carolina while
sleeping at an abandoned gas station along a highway. His
murderer stole a meager $7 from Jason's wallet after shooting
him in the cab of his truck.
That is why I introduced Jason's Law. This bill would
rectify the dire shortage of safe parking for trucks, and
improve the conditions at current truck parking facilities. We
must ensure that our drivers have safe rest areas with parking
for commercial motor vehicles, parking facilities next to truck
stops and travel plazas, and new facilities for parking,
including weigh-in inspection stations.
Additionally, we must improve facilities that are closed on
a seasonal basis, and improve the geometric design of
interchanges on the national highway system for better access
to commercial motor vehicle parking facilities. Small
businesses are the heart of the engine that drives our economy.
If we require our truck drivers, who are themselves small
business owners, to continue to ramp up their deliveries to
small businesses, and even major corporations, we need also to
ensure their safety.
Jason's Law, by investing in infrastructure and helping to
buttress State budget shortfalls, does just that. In these
difficult economic times, we need to continue to pay attention
to our role, to protect public and worker safety, especially
where regulations mandate their necessity. I believe that is
part of the reason that my bill garnered the bipartisan support
of 45 Members in the 111th Congress. As we move forward in the
112th Congress, I look forward to working with my new
colleagues in the majority and the distinguished members of
this committee to advance safe, stable, and reliable truck
parking facilities.
The trucking community is rightfully worried about changes
to the hours of service, ability to find and comply with
parking regulations and detention time. We are hearing from
truckers on these topics each and every day, and it is my hope
that Jason's Law will help to alleviate some of these fears and
angst.
I want to close my remarks this afternoon with these
following words, written by songwriters Barry Allen and David
Ayers in tribute to Jason. I quote, ``Jason drove that truck,
reaching for that blue collar dream. Hard-working man, making a
living driving that big machine. He loved his son, Joshua, and
Hope, his wife. But for $7 he lost his life. With nowhere to
rest in between his loads, he was shot to death on the side of
the road. Say a prayer for Jason, say a prayer for Joshua and
Hope. Say a prayer for all the truck drivers stuck out on the
road. Say a prayer, say prayer, say a prayer.''
Chairman Schmidt and Ranking Member Napolitano and
distinguished members on this committee, I would like to thank
you for letting me testify before you today, and I would only
end with this. While saying a prayer is always a good decision
and a helpful measure, I hope that I can work with each and
every one of you to ensure that enactment of Jason's Law and
make safe truck parking a reality for anyone that seeks it. And
certainly, it is a way to answer the prayers of Hope and
Jason's family and friends.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you. And I just have one question for
you. The murderer of Jason, has he been convicted yet?
Mr. Tonko. Yes, he has.
Ms. Schmidt. And what was his sentence?
Mr. Tonko. It was a number of years. I know that the family
also went--it was very difficult on his widow.
By the way, Hope delivered twins just weeks after the
murder.
Ms. Schmidt. So they will never know his father, their
father.
Mr. Tonko. No.
Ms. Schmidt. God be with that family. Do you have anything
to say?
Mrs. Napolitano. Mr. Tonko, I agree with you.
Unfortunately, the time when there is land for a lot of these
rest areas to be made available, since land has become so
expensive for a lot of our entities to provide these rest
areas, it behooves us to start looking at Federal land or State
land that can be leased, not necessarily sold, and developed
for specifically that project, especially off of freeways,
because there is right of way that is there.
So you might want to look at how we may be able to allow
the State or the county governments or others to look at what
area they are not using that can be possibly allowed to permit,
if you will, these entities, these truck drivers to be able to
rest.
Mr. Tonko. Absolutely. And I think also there is an
opportunity to work with that same concept with State lands,
because it does a partnership with private sector and public
sector, so as to encourage the safe infrastructure that Jason
so desperately needed.
He showed up at his destination early. But with some of the
changed requirements, they cause you to go and find a spot
other than that delivery point. And so he was just ahead of
schedule, and went to get rest, and the tragedy occurred.
But, you know, I firmly believe that if we, as a
government, are requiring certain demands of the trucking
industry, of the trucker, and we do that in the name of public
safety, everyone is benefitted by it, and we need to act
accordingly, and we have to be there to provide the
infrastructure to enable them to respond to the demands on
their travel schedule and on their operations.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, and just a little beyond that, I
think we need to also look at the causes for some of these
individuals to go out and commit crimes, whether or not they
are mentally stable, unstable, whether they are on drugs, and
be able to have ability to go back to the providers of those
drugs and others and slap some fines, or either--do something
to be able to look at the root cause of some of these people
taking these--how would I say--drastic measures to rob people.
Mr. Tonko. Absolutely. And having witnessed the hardship
that has befallen, and the--just the sense of loss upon this
family just compels me to work to get this done. And we have
been reaching out to Members in the majority to make it happen,
because I think it is essential.
You know, she has been under such stress and has responded
so valiantly and courageously, that it is impressive. And I
think it is a way to work through tragedy, to have his life not
be in--or his death not be in vain.
Mrs. Napolitano. Was he an independent truck driver?
Mr. Tonko. Yes, he was. And, actually, had other career
situations. But as a good, solid provider, he was filling his
winter months with this added income. So--and the place he
pulled into was definitely unsafe.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much.
Ms. Schmidt. Thank you very much. I would like to thank
each Member for your testimony today. Your contribution to
today's discussion has been very informative and helpful.
I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing
remain open for 30 days to allow additional Members to provide
policy proposals to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
[No response.]
Ms. Schmidt. Without objection, so ordered. If no other
Members have anything to add, this subcommittee stands ready to
adjourn.
[Whereupon, at 12:41 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

