- THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION'S $500 MILLION FLEECING OF AMERICA: PART TWO

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION'S
$500 MILLION FLEECING OF AMERICA: PART TWO

=======================================================================

(112-43)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 6, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-285 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

_____

Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,               Columbia
Arkansas,                        HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
Vice Chair                         MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BOB FILNER, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,      (Ex Officio)
Tennessee
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Kotz, Hon. H. David, Inspector General, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission............................................     4
Schapiro, Hon. Mary L., Chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission.....................................................     4

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Kotz, Hon. H. David..............................................    30
Schapiro, Hon. Mary L............................................    38

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Letter from Hon. Mary L. Schapiro, Chairman, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, to Hon. Jeff Denham, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, clarifying information
on p. 10, paragraphs 15-17 of this hearing, which has been
reformatted from the original transcript for publication and
attached for reference. The passage appeared in the original
transcript on page 25, lines 556 to 566, as indicated in Hon.
Schapiro's letter..............................................    47

THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION'S $500 MILLION
FLEECING OF AMERICA: PART TWO

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public
Buildings, and Emergency Management,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:17 p.m., in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The subcommittee will come to order.
First, let me thank Chairman Schapiro of the SEC for being
here today to testify on this important subject; and I would
like to welcome back Mr. Kotz, the SEC inspector general, and
thank him again for all the work his office has done in
investigating the SEC's use of leasing authority.
On June 16th, the subcommittee held a hearing regarding the
SEC's leasing of over 900,000 square feet of space at
Constitution Center in DC. We expected to get answers to some
basic questions as to how and why the SEC managed to bind the
taxpayer to more than $500 million in lease payments for space
the SEC did not even need. Sadly, we didn't get very many
answers last hearing, despite having the SEC's chief operating
officer and general counsel both testify. Few of our questions
were answered.
In the private sector, if an employee bound their company
to a contract costing over $500 million it did not need, that
company would want to know the facts to determine who all
should be held accountable and how to prevent it from happening
again.
Federal agencies should be held to an even higher standard
as, ultimately, it's the American people who pay for their
costly mistakes. While the IG who is here to testify today did
a thorough job in his investigation on this lease, our
subcommittee expected to be able to get answers directly from
Agency leadership at our last hearing.
Some of the basic questions that were raised included:
How and why did the SEC in the course of just 1 month more
than triple the size of its space requirement?
Why did the SEC believe it was appropriate to base a
procurement of a new lease on an estimated number of new
employees for which there was no approved funding?
Why did the SEC assume all of the new employees would be in
DC, when Chairman Schapiro had previously indicated nearly half
would be assigned to the regional offices?
Why didn't the COO or other officials at the SEC ask
questions regarding the increase in projected lease payments?
What facts substantiated the SEC's decision to sole-source
contract?
Why was a sole-source contract worth more than $500 million
negotiated over the course of just a couple of days?
Why didn't the lease contract include any clauses to
protect the taxpayer, such as a cancellation clause?
And why is there nothing in writing that would show a
formal internal approval of such a massive lease?
These are some of the basic questions that still have not
been answered.
I would like to say for the record that since the June
hearing Chairman Schapiro has taken steps to try and ensure
that as many of these questions as possible were answered
before this hearing today. However, information that would help
to shed more light on how this particular lease was signed
remains illusive; and it still remains unclear how or why,
Chairman Schapiro, as head of the Agency, you verbally approved
a $500 million lease based on a 10-minute unscheduled meeting.
As I mentioned at the June hearing, the IG report is
breathtaking. It is inconceivable that the SEC bound the
taxpayer to more than a half billion dollars based on back-of-
the-envelope calculations that were inflated and just simply
wrong. And it is more disturbing that such a lease was signed
without any informal internal written approval, no OMB
approval, and no congressional approval. And, on top of that,
the SEC proceeded with a sole-source contract negotiated over
the course of just a few days based on a justification document
that was backdated and altered.
As the IG noted in the last hearing, it appears someone at
the SEC saw Constitution Center and decided that that's where
they wanted the SEC to move, regardless of the cost to the
taxpayer. And sadly, as pointed out in June, we know this is
not the first time SEC has mismanaged its leasing authority.
Previous IG and GAO reports have shown that the SEC has a
history of making bad decisions when it comes to leasing.
Our subcommittee has been working on a bipartisan basis to
cut waste when it comes to our Federal buildings, even clamping
down on waste and excess building in the Federal courthouse
program. The Civilian Property Realignment Act that I
introduced earlier this year is intended to decrease the
Federal space footprint, putting more people in less space.
This legislation would also revoke the SEC's ability to make
this mistake again. And the current administration, just over a
month before the SEC signed this lease, issued a directive to
Federal agencies to reduce space.
Reducing waste and Federal real property has been and
remains a priority, and it is unclear why the SEC didn't get
it. So I hope today we get the answers.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Norton from
the District of Columbia for 5 minutes to make any opening
statements she may have.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We welcome today's witnesses to a second hearing on the May
16, 2011, report of the Securities and Exchange Commission
Office of Inspector General on a lease by the Agency of a large
office building in Washington, DC.
Last month's hearing and the IG report painted a picture of
an agency that was ill-equipped to engage in real estate
transactions and consequently developed a culture that allowed
bureaucrats to make major unsupported financial commitments;
and, as a result, serious abuses occurred that could result in
subsequent action against the employees involved, according to
the IG's May 16th report.
To directly address this problem, I've introduced H.R.
2390, a bill that would remove leasing authority from the SEC.
Today's hearing will allow SEC Chair Mary Schapiro and SEC
IG David Kotz to testify on the status of the IG report and to
learn what actions have been taken to mitigate the damages
caused by the unauthorized leasing. We also will hear what
progress has been made on holding accountable any employees for
their roles in the lease.
The SEC chair has indicated that she agrees that the SEC
should not be engaged in leasing activity. Real estate is
outside of SEC's core mission of regulating America's security
systems, protecting investors, and particularly as challenged
to issue and implement the rules and regulations of Dodd-Frank.
Apart from the lease that sparked the IG report, the SEC
has shown over the years that leasing is a function well
outside of the Agency's expertise. H.R. 2390 reflects the SEC's
chair's own counsel that the SEC should remain exclusively
focused on its core mission.
It is my understanding that the SEC chair has met with the
General Services Administrator to ask the GSA to assume the
SEC's real estate functions, as GSA does for most Federal
agencies.
The first subcommittee hearing on this lease was thorough,
covering the background and facts that lead to the IG report.
Neither the SEC nor any party has disputed the underlying facts
in the report. The SEC's corrective action plan in response to
that report concurred with all of the IG's recommendations that
indicated a commitment to executing the necessary remedial
actions. Mainly missing from last hearing were details of the
corrective action taken by the SEC. I look forward to hearing
those details today, and I thank our witnesses for testifying.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
I now call on chairman of the full committee, Mr. Mica.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you, Chairman Denham and Ranking
Member Norton, for, first of all, your diligence in pursuing
this matter and conducting these hearings at a time when we're
facing some of the worst deficits in the Nation's history and
struggling financially.
It's almost incredible to learn of an agency that spun out
of control, and it is almost incredible--half a billion dollars
in space for committing the Federal Government for 10 years to
pay for space based on what appears to be inflated staff
numbers, a space need probably violating not only the rules of
acquisition, procurement, or leasing but in violation of
competitive contracting rules, ignoring, not consulting
properly the Office of Management and Budget, violating
antideficiency regulations of entering into leases. Again, very
least, a questionable basis, but, again, it is astounding.
I hope that this hearing highlights what's taken place. We
don't need this to ever happen again.
We also are stuck with an obligation. Now we're finding
spaces are being filled--attempted to be filled. We find an
obligation of maybe $93 million in some deficiencies with the
landlord. Again, I just don't think you could paint a worse
scenario for obligating, again, taxpayer funds to any venture I
have seen.
When Mr. Denham, myself, and Ms. Norton struggle to locate
space for agencies and to relocate or acquire a space, to
consolidate, we run into all obstacles. Maybe we should figure
out how we could maybe enlist the SEC in handling some of these
things. Unfortunately, while they are able to do it quickly and
obligate substantially, it takes us years to even get small
projects under way.
So I find this, again, just an outrageous misuse of public
resources at a very difficult economic time. I am pleased you
are pursuing this. We need to make certain a law is crafted and
a regulation so that it doesn't happen again. And then, if we
are obligated to this space, certainly I have some ideas on how
it could be properly utilized; and I will work with the
subcommittee and the committee in that regard.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Today, we'll ask that our witnesses provide testimony under
oath. I would ask the witness to please stand and raise their
right hand to be sworn in under oath.
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to provide to
the subcommittee is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Thank you.
Our first and only panel will be the Honorable Mary
Schapiro, chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
and the Honorable David Kotz, inspector general, U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Since your testimony has been made part of the record, the
subcommittee would request that you limit your oral testimony
to 5 minutes.
Chairman Schapiro, you may begin.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MARY L. SCHAPIRO, CHAIRMAN, U.S.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION; AND THE HONORABLE H. DAVID
KOTZ, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION

Ms. Schapiro. Chairman Denham, Ranking Member Norton,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today regarding the SEC's lease of office space at
Constitution Center and the steps we are taking going forward.
Like the report of the Commission's Office of Inspector
General, the subcommittee's previous hearing identified
significant flaws in the SEC's leasing processes. I'm extremely
disappointed by those failures and regret that they have taken
us all away from our primary mission of protecting investors,
facilitating capital formation, and insuring stability in the
financial markets.
The fact that the SEC has not paid any rent to date for
this property and that the bulk of the space has been leased to
other tenants does not adequately address a situation that
should never have occurred. The only appropriate response by
the SEC is to resolve the remaining space issues, to correct
the deficiencies in our leasing processes by working with GSA
and OMB with respect to future space needs, and to ensure
accountability for the events surrounding this lease.
By way of background, in the spring of 2010, the SEC
correctly anticipated it would receive significant new
responsibilities under the Dodd-Frank for derivatives, hedge
fund advisors, creating credit rating agencies, and much more.
This was, of course, on top of our longstanding core
responsibilities. As a result, we believed and continue to
believe that the SEC needed additional staff to fulfill its
mission and to help further restore investor confidence in our
markets.
At the time the Agency was considering the leasing
decisions, I indicated my preference for hiring new staff in
the regions, rather than at headquarters. And, I indicated to
staff my preference that any new space in Washington be within
walking distance of our Station Place buildings to eliminate
the need for expensive shuttle services.
With respect to Commission matters in which I'm not an
expert, I provide overall policy goals and instructions and
leave it to the professional staff to execute them consistent
with my instructions. Throughout my time, I have found the
professional staff across the Agency to be extremely dedicated
to their mission and knowledgeable in their areas of expertise.
In July of 2010, staff informed me that all of our other
leasing options no longer existed, that the space at
Constitution Center was our only option, that the pricing was
advantageous, and that we had to move quickly, as there was
competition for the space. Given my previous discussions with
staff, I assumed the proposal was consistent, both with our
budget projections for future employee growth and my preference
for staff to be housed where possible in the regions. When it
subsequently became clear that the SEC would not receive the
funding necessary to implement its new responsibilities, we
took immediate steps to release the space to others and reduce
the SEC's exposure.
As chairman of the SEC, I am ultimately responsible for the
actions of the Agency. My written testimony details how we have
learned from the problems in our leasing process and how we
intend to address these issues. I would like to emphasize a few
of those items.
First, we are promptly implementing the inspector general's
recommendations and already have submitted a written corrective
action plan to the OIG.
Second, in light of the failures identified and questions
raised by OIG and the subcommittee, the SEC recognizes the
benefits of having GSA manage the Commission's future lease
acquisitions. Leasing is not part of the Commission's core
mission and as an agency we cannot allow it to impede that
mission. GSA, by contrast, has long experience and expertise in
leasing.
I recently met with the administrator of GSA and, in
addition to discussing the Constitution Center space, we
discussed ways in which GSA could assist the Commission on our
leasing efforts going forward. GSA has indicated it was open to
playing a significant role in those efforts, and our staffs are
working on it now.
After discussions with GSA, we have provided them with a
draft memorandum of understanding that would provide for GSA to
undertake all leasing activities on behalf of the SEC.
Third, the OIG report recommended that the SEC initiate
disciplinary proceedings for three individuals involved in the
Constitution Center leasing process, and we have begun that
process. The Office of General Counsel is actively reviewing
the record from the OIG investigation and, where necessary,
supplementing that investigation.
I've instructed my staff to move as quickly as the laws and
regulations permit, consistent with fundamental fairness.
I expect the disciplinary recommendations with regard to
employees identified by the IG will be made very soon. In the
meantime, the individuals identified in the IG report have been
reassigned. Their current duties do not involve leasing or any
other authority that could bind the Commission, nor do they
involve duties that relate to the expenditure of appropriated
funds.
As I said previously, the true test of an organization is
not whether things go wrong but how an organization responds to
problems and whether its leaders take such opportunities to
make necessary improvements. We are committed to doing that. I
am, of course, happy to answer any questions that you have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Chairman Schapiro.
Mr. Kotz, you may----
Mr. Kotz. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
this subcommittee. I appreciate the interest of the chairman,
the ranking member, and the other members of the subcommittee
in the SEC and the Office of Inspector General.
On June 16, 2011, I testified before this subcommittee
about a May 16, 2011, report of investigation we issued into
the circumstances surrounding the SEC's decision to lease
approximately 900,000 square feet of office space at a newly
renovated office building known as Constitution Center.
As I described in my previous testimony, we opened our
investigation on November 16, 2010, as a result of receiving
numerous written complaints concerning the SEC's decisions and
actions relating to Constitution Center.
My previous testimony described in detail our investigative
efforts, including the review of over 1.5 million emails during
the course of the investigation and the testimony or interviews
of 29 individuals with knowledge of facts or circumstances
surrounding the SEC's leasing activities.
I also testified concerning the results of our
investigation, which found that the circumstances surrounding
the SEC's entering into a lease for 900,000 square feet of
space at the Constitution Center facility in July 2010, were
part of a long history of missteps and misguided leasing
decisions by the SEC since it was granted independent leasing
authority in 1990.
We further found that, based on estimates of increased
funding, primarily to meet the anticipated requirements of the
Dodd-Frank Act, between June and July 2010, the SEC Office of
Administrative Services, OAS, conducted a deeply flawed and
unsound analysis to justify the need for the SEC to lease
900,000 square feet of space at the Constitution Center
facility. Specifically, we found that OAS grossly overestimated
by more than 300 percent the amount of space needed for the
SEC's projected expansion and used these groundless and
unsupportable figures to justify the SEC's commitment to the
expenditure of approximately $557 million over 10 years.
In my earlier testimony, I described how we found that OAS
prepared a faulty justification and approval document to
support entering into the lease for the Constitution Center
facility without full and open competition. We determined that
this justification and approval document was prepared after the
SEC had already signed the contract to lease the facility.
Further, we found that OAS backdated the justification and
approval, thereby creating the false impression that it had
been prepared only a few days after the SEC entered into the
lease, when in actuality it was not finalized until a month
later.
Our report of investigation made numerous recommendations
designed to ensure that the requisite improvements to policies
and procedures are made and that appropriate disciplinary
action is taken. Specifically, we recommended that the SEC's
chief operating officer conduct a through and comprehensive
review and assessment of all matters currently under the
purview of OAS.
We further recommended that the chief operating officer
determine the appropriate disciplinary and/or performance-based
actions to be taken for matters related to findings. We
specified that such disciplinary actions should include, at a
minimum, action up to and including dismissal against two
senior individuals and disciplinary action against a third
individual.
Finally, we recommended that the Office of Financial
Management, in consultation with the Office of General Counsel,
request a formal opinion from the Comptroller General as to
whether the Commission violated the Antideficiency Act by
failing to obligate funds for the lease.
My office is committed to following up with respect to all
the recommendations we made in our report to ensure that
appropriate changes and improvements are made in the SEC's
leasing operations as a result of our findings.
Subsequent to the issuance of our report of investigation,
my office requested and received a corrective action plan with
regard to the substantive recommendations we made. We will
monitor the planned activities carefully to ensure that the
improvements are made. We also intend to monitor the
disciplinary process to ensure the individuals we identified as
being responsible for the failures and improprieties described
in our report are held fully accountable for their actions.
In addition to these efforts, we have met with the newly
installed acting head of OAS to provide additional information
concerning the failings and deficiencies we identified in that
office. As a result of this briefing, a large renovation
project that had been initiated by the previous head of OAS has
now been discontinued.
We understand that the chief operating officer, under
Chairman Schapiro's direction, has already begun to implement
the improvements needed in the SEC's leasing functions. We are
confident that, under Chairman Schapiro leadership, the SEC
will continue to review our report and take appropriate steps
to implement our recommendations and ensure that fundamental
changes are made in the SEC's leasing operations so that the
errors and failings we found in our investigation are remedied
and not repeated in the future.
Thank you, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Kotz.
First of all, Chairman Schapiro, could you just take this
committee through your responsibilities as chairman of the SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. Certainly.
As chairman of the SEC, I have responsibility for setting
the policy direction in coordination with my four
commissioners, who are also Presidential appointees confirmed
by the Senate, for implementing the requirements of the law
through rulemaking, for administration of a large enforcement
program for dealing with violations of the Federal securities
laws by regulated entities and by others, and I have general
responsibility for the administrative functions of the Agency.
Mr. Denham. How large is the Agency?
Ms. Schapiro. We have about 3,900 employees and a budget of
about $1.2 billion.
Mr. Denham. And can you walk us through the timeline on the
lease in question?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, I would be happy to.
In mid-2010 our former executive director communicated a
need for us to secure additional space in the District of
Columbia. Under our 2010 appropriation, we were working to hire
about 550 employees; and our fiscal year 2011 request would
have supported several hundred additional employees. The day
after the lease was signed, in fact--and I will go back--the
appropriations committees actually approved a higher fiscal
year 2011 appropriation than we had sought or than the
President had sought that would have supported about 500 more
employees.
The Dodd-Frank bill, which became law on July 21st, gave
the SEC huge additional responsibilities for not only part of
the $600 trillion over-the-counter derivatives market but also
for hedge fund registration and oversight as well as additional
responsibilities with respect to credit rating agencies and
municipal advisors.
Mr. Denham. What date did you say Dodd-Frank passed?
Ms. Schapiro. Dodd-Frank became law on July 21st. So I just
use that as part of the background about how we were thinking
about leasing. It was clear in June that we would be given
significant additional--likely be given significant additional
responsibilities if Dodd-Frank passed.
Mr. Denham. So June you started having discussions,
meetings on the 2010 budget to hire 500 employees and you were
looking for space for those 500?
Ms. Schapiro. Under our 2010 appropriation we were already
working to hire those employees.
Mr. Denham. And the fiscal year 2011 budget passed and
there was an additional 500?
Ms. Schapiro. The budget didn't pass, obviously, until
much, much later. It would have supported--the request would
have supported about 380 more employees. And Dodd-Frank also
authorized a doubling of the Agency's budget between then and
2015. So it's part of what was going into the thinking of the
Agency about what our resource needs would likely be.
In any event, in June, we discussed the options for taking
additional space in Washington. I was told that there was no
additional space available in our existing headquarters
building. I made it very clear that I wanted to move as many
additional head count as we were able to out to the regional
offices where the people we regulate work and where the people
that we serve, investors, live. And that to the extent we
needed to take additional space in Washington, DC, that it
should be within walking distance of our headquarters so we
would not have to pay for an expensive shuttle system.
I understood that our need for space would be based on our
budget estimates, which were much more modest than what was
ultimately projected according to the inspector general's
report--and that was in June. And I was not told in July, when
a decision was made to go forward with Constitution Center,
that the numbers had been dramatically increased. I was not
walked through how those numbers in fact grew. It was presented
to me as an emergency situation that we take the space at
Constitution Center because all the other options we had been
looking at, I was told, had disappeared, that on a rentable-
square-foot basis, Constitution Center was a very good deal,
that we had reserved the option in taking that space to
sublease or assign that space if we were not able to use it.
And of course I assumed that the decision was fully
consistent with the wishes that I had expressed and that it was
fully consistent with our budget projections that had been
generated our Office of Financial Management. Obviously, as we
know from the inspector general's report, those numbers became
greatly inflated between the June timeframe and the July
timeframe.
Mr. Denham. I just want to establish for this committee the
actual timeline of how the lease went down and what happened
subsequently after that.
June--you said mid-2010. I'm assuming that's June you
started having meetings?
Ms. Schapiro. Probably late spring in 2010. But in June was
the first meeting where we sat down to talk about what our
budget projections were and what our options would be within
the District of Columbia and in terms of moving employees out
to the regions where we locate most of our examination and
enforcement staff, which are the two largest parts of the SEC.
Mr. Denham. The 2010 budget you established a need for how
many employees?
Ms. Schapiro. In the 2010 budget--let me give you the exact
number--550.
Mr. Denham. Out of those 550, how many were you looking at
having walking distance from the current SEC building and how
many were you looking at having in the region?
Ms. Schapiro. To the extent possible, we were going to put
the 550 in our existing headquarters space and utilize all of
that space and then some number--I'm sorry, I have to get you
an exact number--to go out to the regional offices.
Mr. Denham. I'm just trying to get a ball park and better
understand the timeline. How much space do you currently have
at your current location?
Ms. Schapiro. About 380 in DC and 170 out to the regions.
Mr. Denham. And how much space do you have currently?
Ms. Schapiro. I'm told that currently we have space, I
believe, for about 500 in Station Place in our existing
headquarters building.
Mr. Denham. So you could have accommodated the entire 380
that you wanted to keep in DC at your current location.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, but I was told in June of last year that
we had no space left in Station Place at all.
Mr. Denham. Is that where your office is?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. And when did it become apparent you were going
to need additional space beyond what you had originally
estimated under the 2010 budget, the 550 new personnel?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, as we--based on our fiscal year 2011
request--and I understand that's a request, not an
appropriation--as well as the new work that was being assigned
to the Agency under Dodd-Frank, it became clear in the late
spring that we would need--and into the summer and certainly by
the middle of the summer after Dodd-Frank passed--that we would
need significant additional resources to fulfill our
responsibilities under Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Denham. OK. Let me see if I can walk through this
timeline as I understand it.
Spring, you decided you were going to need new space under
the 2010 budget. June, you started having meetings. And then
you saw the Dodd-Frank bill starting to get rolled out in
committee--I'm paraphrasing that a little bit--saw the Dodd-
Frank bill being rolled out in committee. You had your fiscal
year 2011 request in at the time and then expanded that request
based on the Dodd-Frank legislation which was going to pass a
month later.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. And based on what you thought the Dodd-Frank
bill that was going to get passed on July 21st, based on that
bill, how many additional employees did you feel you were going
to need on top of the 550 that you already had budgeted?
Ms. Schapiro. We had originally said that we would need for
Dodd-Frank implementation over fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year
2012 800 additional positions.
Mr. Denham. That's 800 on top of the 550?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. On what date was the lease signed?
Ms. Schapiro. July 28th, I believe.
Mr. Denham. So you had your initial meeting in June. How
many meetings did you have between that initial meeting and
when the lease was signed on July 28th? How many meetings did
you have in there with staff on the staffing requirements as
well as the lease space needed for those staff?
Ms. Schapiro. We had, I believe, several meetings before
the June meeting. The June meeting was the one where we had the
detailed discussion about the different options that we have.
We were looking at 300,000 square feet at that time to
accommodate what we thought under our budget projections would
be about 1,000 in new staff over the next 2 years or so,
between 1,000 and 1,100.
And then July was when the staff came to me. The executive
director came to me with an emergency request to go forward
with Constitution Center without walking me through how the
numbers had grown and how they had in fact, according to the
inspector general's report, and I have no reason to doubt it,
been inflated rather dramatically between June and July.
Mr. Denham. So of the 550 new employees you thought you
were going to have, 380 would be in DC, which you found out
after the fact you have existing space. At the time, you didn't
think you had it, so you had your staff go out and look for
300,000 square feet for those 380 employees?
Ms. Schapiro. No, Mr. Chairman. With--550 employees were
under the fiscal year 2010 appropriation.
Mr. Denham. Uh-huh.
Ms. Schapiro. The additional staff that we projected that
we needed--we projected that we needed--were between 1,000 and
1,100, were based on the fiscal year 2011 request and 2012 to
continue to bolster our core mission responsibilities, as well
as to fulfill our Dodd-Frank implementation requirements,
operationalization requirements.
Mr. Denham. That was the additional 800 people that were
needed?
Ms. Schapiro. That's right.
Mr. Denham. You had said initially 550 were needed, before
Dodd-Frank.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, 550.
Mr. Denham. And at the time you didn't know that you had
vacant space at your current facility. So I am assuming that--
--
Ms. Schapiro. I was told that in order to accommodate any
growth for fiscal year 2011 and 2012 that we would need to take
additional space, that there was no more space available in
Station Place.
Mr. Denham. So when did your staff start looking for space?
Ms. Schapiro. In the spring of 2010.
Mr. Denham. And when did you start having meetings with
your staff on their discovery of the space?
Ms. Schapiro. In the spring of 2010, with the pivotal
meeting being the one in June.
Mr. Denham. And was Constitution Center one of those spaces
they had come back with in June?
Ms. Schapiro. It was one of several places. I believe there
were four or so options at that time.
Mr. Denham. Several options at 300,000 square feet, but as
you go to 900,000 square feet you become limited.
Ms. Schapiro. I think that's right.
And the other options, I would say, were, as the inspector
general determined, within walking distance and still available
to the Agency at the point of the July decision.
Mr. Denham. OK. Just one final question that plays back
into this timeline issue. You were also a commissioner from
1988 to 1994 when the SEC originally got its leasing authority?
Ms. Schapiro. That's correct.
Mr. Denham. And during that time when you were
commissioner, how often did you see sole-source contracts?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't recall having any involvement at all
in any of the leasing obligations of the Agency. I was not the
chairman. So the chairman would have had the operational
responsibility. I can't say I didn't have any involvement at
all, but I don't recall any involvement whatsoever in the
leasing process.
Mr. Denham. And between June and July 28th when the lease
was finalized, at what point in there did you discuss sole-
source contracts with your staff?
Ms. Schapiro. I recall the staff telling me that, because
we would qualify for using the provisions that allow for going
sole source or limited competition or whatever they described
it as, because of an urgent and justifiable need for the space.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
I will now recognize Ranking Member Norton for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, the problems with the SEC leasing, both in
this lease and in prior leases, has been made clear, but I am
concerned that there may be smoking guns with some other
agencies. There are some agencies that are experienced and that
should have leasing authority, like the DOD and the Veterans
Administration. They've long had it, probably as long as the
GSA.
Mr. Chairman, I have asked for a list of agencies that have
leasing authority. I recognize in our BRAC bill--a bill that,
as you know, I do support--that we would pull back all these
leases, but we don't have any idea whether there is a smoking
gun out there. And I'm not sure about getting bills through the
House and the Senate.
I do believe bill--based on this experience as a kind of
optic lesson that a bill to pull back authority from agencies
like the SEC could quickly get through the House and the
Senate, and I would hope that you and I could work together on
such a bill.
Could I ask you how much space is there in the building
that would still be charged to the SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. Currently--as you know, it was originally
900,000 square feet. Two-thirds of that have been taken by two
other Federal agencies, the OCC and FHFA; and they are
committed for that space. So the SEC has no responsibility for
that space.
There is 300,000 square feet left, and we are working very
closely with GSA. They have expressed real interest in taking
that space over from us. We have provided them with a draft
lease. We are working to definitize that so that the transfer
or assignment of the surplusing to GSA can be made as quickly
as possible. And they have tenants who have indicated interest
in that space for whom that space aligns well with their needs.
So we are we are working very hard to make sure----
Ms. Norton. Would that be the full space?
Ms. Schapiro. That would be the remainder of the space for
which the SEC is currently obligated, 300,000 square feet or
so.
Ms. Norton. Has SEC been charged for any of the space now
under its lease?
Ms. Schapiro. Congresswoman, we have not paid any rent on
that space and even the space that's remaining for which we may
be obligated, the 300,000 square feet, we don't believe any
rent payments would be due until the first quarter of 2013.
There are costs that have been incurred in the process of
taking this space for, I'm told, circuitry, telecom, some
architectural and construction consulting, that totals about
$415,000. But, other than that, there have been no rent
payments incurred, nor do we believe there would be any until--
--
Ms. Norton. Those are the only outlays by----
Ms. Schapiro. I'm sorry?
Ms. Norton. That's the only outlay of money by the SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, my understanding is $415,000.
There is another $127,000 for IT equipment, but that can be
redeployed elsewhere in the Agency.
Ms. Norton. Now, with GSA taking over the leasing, assuming
that MOU goes through and is approved by all concerned, who
would pay for GSA to do the work for SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. My understanding is that GSA charges a fee to
the agencies for whom--for which it administers leasing
services, and so the SEC would pay that and need to account for
it obviously in its budget. My understanding is it is typically
7 percent of the annual lease payments.
Ms. Norton. Uh-huh. The so-called corrective action plan
recommends a senior review of all the leasing deals. Would that
be carried out by the GSA now?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, we submitted a corrective action plan to
address the IG's recommendations, and we are moving ahead on
that. But on a parallel track, obviously, we are trying to
negotiate this agreement with the GSA to which, as I say, they
are quite amenable to taking over all of this responsibility
for the SEC.
We'll have to amend our corrective action plan to account
for GSA taking over responsibility for a wide range of
activities under the MOU, beginning with helping decide the
requirements for the Agency through running competition, doing
surveys, reviewing offers, negotiating offers, establishing the
competitive range, arranging for the move, any tenant
improvements that are necessary, and in fact actually awarding
the lease under GSA's----
Ms. Norton. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Could I ask if legal counsel--if either Ms. Schapiro or Mr.
Kotz can tell us whether legal counsel was ever consulted at
any time during this SEC lease process or, for that matter,
were they consulted generally?
Mr. Kotz. Yes, actually, they were. The folks from the
Office of General Counsel were consulted and were involved in
the process.
Ms. Norton. Well, how do you account--is it that they, too,
have no expertise in real estate law? Did they look at the
regulations, for example, on how much space a Federal employee
is allowed to occupy? Did they look at what the law says about
competitive bidding? What kind of counsel--are you saying
counsel approved what the Agency did?
Mr. Kotz. Yes, yes, general counsel's office was involved.
Reviewed the justification and approval, did not have any
specific issues. They did make----
Ms. Norton. Did you question counsel about its----
Mr. Kotz. Yes.
Ms. Norton. And also about its malpractice insurance?
Mr. Kotz. We definitely have concerns about how folks in
the general counsel's office dealt with this situation. Without
a doubt, it is set forth at some detail in the report. We have
concerns about their interpretation of the Antideficiency Act,
concerns about their interpretation of OMB notification,
concerns that in fact the Office of General Counsel were
involved in the editing and revising of the report subsequent
to when it was signed. In other words, it was at the end dated
for August 2nd, but for that month between the beginning of
August and the beginning of September the Office of General
Counsel was editing and revising the report.
Ms. Norton. I think it puts the Agency in a general
position when its own counsel can approve details of the kind
that any real estate agent could have read the rules and
regulations and have advised the Agency that you're going to
have a lot of problems with this lease.
Mr. Chairman, I must say if the testimony is that even
legal counsel not only approved but was involved in this
matter, that raises very serious concerns about--I say as a
member of the DC bar--about whoever is--his confidence.
But it does say to me that the notion of any agency, unless
approved by this committee, having this responsibility should
now be altogether clear. Because there is no check even in the
Agency of the kind that I must tell you the run-of-the-mill
lawyer in DC could, without ever having picked up anything but
the regulations, could have spotted violations here. So it is
very disconcerting.
Mr. Denham. Just to clarify, Mr. Kotz, are you saying that
legal counsel was not only aware of the sole-source contracts
but also aware that there were two different contracts out
there that had been altered?
Mr. Kotz. We didn't determine that legal counsel were aware
of the altering. They were certainly aware of the justification
and approval, the language in the justification approval,
edited it, and eventually consented to it going forward. But we
were not aware specifically that they knew about the fact that
it was backdated.
I would say that one of the benefits of Chairman Schapiro's
approach to hand everything over to GSA is--I would assume GSA
has its own lawyers, and so GSA lawyers would be involved in a
continuing process of advising on leases, rather than the same
lawyers who were involved in this case.
Mr. Denham. Sure. We're trying to both understand not only
the future corrective action but what happened here that went
so wrong. And if they didn't look at both contracts, which
contract did they look at?
Mr. Kotz. What happened was there was a version being sent
around that was circulated for comment. None of the Office of
General Counsel folks actually had to sign the document. So the
signature page was sort of dealt which separately. They were
dealing with the actual document, the language in the document.
Mr. Denham. Is that customary, that you have legal counsel
look at a partial document?
Mr. Kotz. Well, I don't know that legal counsel at that
point was aware the document had already been signed. I think
they assumed that the document had not been officially formally
signed.
Now they should have looked at it certainly afterwards to
see that the signature date was August 2nd, and they certainly
knew that they were revising it, making comments on it way past
August 2nd. So in that case they certainly should have been
aware.
Mr. Denham. So did legal counsel have final sign-off on the
contract?
Mr. Kotz. Yes.
Mr. Denham. And they had an opportunity to look at the
contract earlier but not a complete document?
Mr. Kotz. What we are talking about here is the
justification and approval, just to be clear. The letter
contracts they also were involved in, but the document that was
backdated was the justification and approval. But, yes, they
had legal clearance over that document as well as the actual
contract.
Mr. Denham. So are you saying then they saw the sole-source
contract--which the sole-source contract is only determined by
the date of the signature page. They saw the sole-source
contract without the signature page? How is it a sole-source
contract if it doesn't have a signature page? That's my
question.
Mr. Kotz. Right. It was a sole-source justification. It had
a signature page. The document was sent around to various
people through email requesting comments on the actual
document. But the email version that was sent around didn't
have the signatures on it. They were revising the substance of
the document. But they should have seen at the end that, once
the document was finalized, it was dated a month before they
had made comments.
Mr. Denham. In a sole-source contract, the date is probably
the most critical part, is it not?
Mr. Kotz. It is certainly a very important part, yes.
Mr. Denham. OK. So they did have an opportunity to look at
that contract, but the date was not on there.
Mr. Kotz. Right.
Mr. Denham. So you can't justify a sole-source contract
without that date.
Mr. Kotz. Right.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, I would say the justification--
the date is very troubling, particularly for counsel when you
understand his responsibility. But even more troubling are
explicit Government regulations on when a sole-source contract
can be entered into.
I've been on this committee ever since I've been in
Congress. I have never seen a sole-source contract. When people
come to us for sole source, the only thing I have seen possible
to do is, if someone wants to do a win-win, we build something
for the Federal Government; in return, the Federal Government
gets something.
You can call that a sole source if you want to, but there
is not even discussion when there is a sole-source contract. So
you would have to have such justification for it. And if the
justification was we can't find any more space, that would not
be enough justification. That would not--we can't find any
other space, that would--then they would say, you better look
in the region. They would say, you better look outside of the
Washington. But you cannot tell us there is not one other
building. You better divide them up. Because the Government
does not do sole-source contracts.
Yes, the backdating, the date raises very serious problems.
My problems start with the moment you know you are doing a
lease, you get out your little book; and the little book tells
you what the rules of the Federal Government are in doing a
lease. Once you get to sole source, then of course you have got
the biggest, reddest flag of all.
So while I see that there were multiple people involved, I
am more shocked that counsel would have had anything to do with
this matter; and it only tells me that there's nobody in the
Agency--in an agency which does not have this as its mission to
check, to see whether or not the mission is being carried out
according to law.
Ms. Schapiro, did you have something to say?
Mr. Denham. Before you respond, we're going to move to Mr.
Hanna and come back.
Mr. Hanna.
Mr. Hanna. Chairman Schapiro, I have a question that--the
space is rented out, is about to be rented out fully. The 10-
year period, $500 million--are the current tenants and the
anticipated tenant, how much of that will they cover? And,
also, what do you expect your organization and the American
public to have to pay into this that is associated with this
mistake?
Ms. Schapiro. Thank you, Congressman.
My understanding is that the two agencies that have taken
the two-thirds of space, that has already been released by the
SEC, and the SEC is now held harmless for that. We received a
release from the landlord for that space. They are paying,
actually, I think a little bit more in rent than the SEC was
going to pay. So that is covered for two-thirds of the space.
The final one-third of the space is that which we're
working with GSA to find other tenants for; and my
understanding is that GSA is optimistic that we will be able to
do that before rent is due on that space, which is not until
the first quarter of 2013. So we're not across the finish line
on this yet, but we are working extremely hard and extremely
well with GSA and their tremendous expertise and capability to
get this space entirely into the hands of tenants who can use
it and use it in the timeframe in which it is available.
Mr. Hanna. So do you have a number of dollars in your mind?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't believe--and, of course, these things
play out over time. I don't believe the SEC will ultimately be
responsible for any costs, other than those that have already--
the $415,000 I referenced earlier in response to Congresswoman
Norton, other than that.
As I said, we were released on the two-thirds space that
have already been relet to other tenants and at a higher rate
and for a longer term. So we believe, again, that we will not
be responsible for additional costs. But I certainly could not
guarantee that. It will be my goal to achieve that as best we
can, but we'll have to see over time. But our best guess is we
should be OK on that.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Chairman Schapiro, the 900,000 square feet that was under
lease, you have that broken up how now of different tenants
that are willing to take that space?
Ms. Schapiro. Two-thirds--and I can get for you the exact
amount for each of those two agencies--went to the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Housing Finance
Agency. They are two self-funded agencies. And they took two-
thirds of that space directly as a result of the SEC having the
ability to assign or sublet that space. We gave a release to
the landlord, and the landlord in turn released us so that he
could deal directly with those two agencies on that space.
Those terms of those leases are, I believe, 15 years and up to
25 years--15 for both, I'm sorry, for both of those.
Mr. Denham. And both of those two agencies have their own
leasing authority?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. Were those two agencies in competition with the
SEC in the initial bid?
Ms. Schapiro. No, I don't believe so.
Mr. Denham. What other Government agencies were? You talked
about this increased competition that forced you to go out
and----
Ms. Schapiro. I believe NASA was one, Mr. Chairman. I'm not
sure about the other. Again, I would be more than happy to get
that information.
Mr. Denham. How many, approximately, different agencies
were in competition for such a large space?
Ms. Schapiro. Two, I believe. Again, I would be happy to
confirm that for you.
Mr. Denham. So these two, the Comptroller and the Federal
Finance Agency, took 600,000 square feet, approximately?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. The other 300,000 square feet the SEC is still
on the hook for, but you----
Ms. Schapiro. We are working with the GSA in order to
surplus that or assign that space to them for them to then use
as part of their portfolio. And we are told that they have
potential tenants who have expressed an interest in the space
and for whom the timing of that space becoming available works.
Mr. Denham. Another or several Federal agencies that would
be going through GSA.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, and I don't know who those are.
Mr. Chairman, I want to make sure I was clear on the budget
questions you asked me at the beginning. For our request, our
authorization request for fiscal year 2011 and 2012 would have
supported 380 additional positions in fiscal year 2011 and 800
positions in fiscal year 2012. And I'm not sure if I got you
there the way I went through it before, but I wanted to make
sure that was clear.
After we were on the continuing resolution or it became
clear we would be on a continuing resolution, in an anomaly
request that we filed with OMB at the very end of September of
last year we reduced--we looked at 523 positions for fiscal
year 2011 and reduced the fiscal year 2012 number to 525. The
reason the fiscal year 2011 number went up from 380 to 523 was
that, in the interim, the House and Senate Appropriations
Committees had in fact approved a higher appropriation for the
SEC for fiscal year 2011 that would have supported that 523
positions--I'm sorry. It was the OMB request in September.
The reason I think it is important is that my assumption
was that the executive director's office was basing leasing
needs and decisions upon those numbers which total around 1,000
additional positions, not the 2,500 or more that they
ultimately used to justify the larger space.
Mr. Denham. The executive director Diego Ruiz.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Denham. Who is no longer with the Agency?
Ms. Schapiro. He is on terminal leave, but he has been gone
from the Agency for the last couple of months.
Mr. Denham. I want to get back to the timeline issue,
because I think that it's really important, especially as we're
assessing accountability in this matter. You went--your thought
process was April-May expanding under just normal circumstances
by 550 new employees.
Ms. Schapiro. Under our 2010 appropriation.
Mr. Denham. And you felt you needed 300,000 square feet for
a percentage of those employees because a percentage of them
was going to go out to the regions?
Ms. Schapiro. A large percentage was going to go out to the
region, but to be clear, the 300,000 was not just predicated on
needing those additional people. That would not by any means
justify an additional 300,000 square feet. The 300,000 square
feet was predicated, or should have been predicated, on an
expectation of achieving the additional employees that were
sought under the FY 2011 and 2012 request, the 1,000 or so
additional employees.
Mr. Denham. Something grossly went wrong in June. In June
you had your meeting to discuss the square footage for those
new employees under the 2010 budget, and without having a 2011
budget, just a request, because the 2011 budget didn't get
addressed until after the election; the 2012 budget, which we
had CRs on, went beyond that; and Dodd-Frank didn't pass until
July 21st. So at some point without a budget and without a
Dodd-Frank bill, we were out there negotiating a lease on
behalf of the American taxpayers for 900,000 square feet.
I'm trying to understand the timeline. How did things go so
wrong in a 1-month period when Dodd-Frank hadn't even passed? I
would understand if Dodd-Frank had passed and you said, ``Oh,
no, we're going to need a lot of new employees because the
President has signed this new bill into place, and we have a
new budget to pay for that, I've got to go out there and ramp
up.'' But this is prior to legislation, and this is prior to a
budget. I don't understand how in 1 month we could not only go
out and secure the space, but do it over a weekend and do a
sole-source contract.
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I don't disagree that this was
done in an anticipatory way that--and should not have been done
that way. I think part of what was going on is that we did try
to protect ourselves to some extent with the right to assign or
sublet the space that was built in.
I also--I also believe that we were----
Mr. Denham. Was there a cancellation clause?
Ms. Schapiro. No, there was not a cancellation clause,
just----
Mr. Denham. Because that's normally what we put into a
contract to protect the taxpayers.
Ms. Schapiro. And I think it would be a great idea,
frankly. I'm not sure that it's possible. I've been told that
such clauses are incompatible with a long-term lease such as
this, and that GSA, in fact, doesn't typically include them is
what I understand from GSA. But I will agree with you that it
would have been a very good thing to have in this lease; that
if there were not an appropriation, the SEC would not be
obligated under the contract.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Kotz, is it customary to have a--such a
clause?
Mr. Kotz. Yeah, I don't know how customary it is. I mean, I
think what happened in this instance was they didn't
specifically even request the cancellation clause. We were told
that they didn't because the landlord would never agree to it.
We also asked that they would have a clause in there that would
have the payment dependent upon appropriations. So if the
appropriation came through, they would have to pay. If the
appropriation didn't come through, they wouldn't have to pay.
But they never even raised that with the landlord. Part of the
problem was they--it wasn't a very serious negotiation. They
felt that they had no leverage because they wanted that space
so much.
So I don't know that I can say that it's customary, but I
do think that the process they went forward in that case was
such that they didn't really negotiate hard on behalf of the
SEC. They allowed whatever terms the landlord could dictate,
and the landlord certainly would have been happy not to agree
to a cancellation charge, cancellation clause because that
wouldn't have been in his interest.
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, just--I'm sorry.
Mr. Denham. My time has expired.
Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've got a few
questions. This is very concerning to me, of course. A few
issues.
It appears to me that the Agency is attempting to mitigate
the damages after the fact. Is the same Office of General
Counsel that was allegedly responsible for reviewing these
documents overseeing this mitigation process, Mr. Kotz?
Mr. Kotz. I believe the--I don't know how involved the
Office of General Counsel is in the mitigation process, but I--
it's the same. There is only one Office of General Counsel. I
don't know whether it's the same individual lawyers or not, but
it's the same office.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK.
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, if I could just add to that. If
he--in terms of the mitigation process, you mean releasing the
space to GSA and working on the memorandum of understanding to
offload all of our leasing responsibilities to them. I
personally have met with the GSA Administrator. There are staff
from the Office of the General Counsel, but also from our new
Chief Operating Officer's office deeply involved in this, and I
am personally involved in it. So we are very--and obviously GSA
is deeply committed to the process as well, so there are a
number of people who are involved in pushing these initiatives
forward.
Mr. Fleischmann. Then is it fair, Chairman, to assume then
that this lease has a sublease provision so that you can, in
fact, go ahead and sublease legally binding to other Government
agencies?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes. My understanding is that we have the
right to assign or to sublease the space, and, in fact, two-
thirds of it have, in fact, been leased to other agencies.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK. In terms of the contract, we talked--
chairman talked about a cancellation clause. Was there any form
of a liquidated damage clause? And what I mean by a liquidated
damage clause is a prearranged penalty in the contract.
Ms. Schapiro. I understand that there wasn't.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK. Going forward, so that this problem
hopefully would never occur again, what--Mr. Kotz, what has
been put in place to ensure that the next time the Agency has a
contract, a lease or something, that counsel is sat down at the
table without just perhaps just sending it out across emails,
to sit down and make sure that counsel actually sits down and
approves and advises the Agency? Has that been put in place
now?
Mr. Kotz. Well, I mean, I believe with respect to leasing,
the plan is to have all the leasing functions go to GSA. So
with respect to leasing, the Office of General Counsel wouldn't
be involved anymore, it would be GSA and their Office of
General Counsel.
Mr. Fleischmann. OK. What, then, specifically safeguards
have you sought to put in place to avoid a situation like this
happening again?
Ms. Schapiro. If I may, there are a number of things we
have done immediately in response. One is to provide the GSA
with a memorandum of understanding that would shift
responsibility for all aspects, from requirements to awarding
of leases, to the GSA on behalf of the SEC. We will not enter
into any lease without the GSA having taken care of the entire
process for us.
I have revoked the delegations of authority that existed to
the Executive Director and from the Executive Director to other
employees for the ability to enter into any leases, so those
would not be possible to go forward. We have engaged Booz Allen
and Hamilton to come in and do a complete assessment of our
entire Office of Administrative Services, including its
structure, its decisionmaking processes, its quality controls,
the level of staffing, the skills of the staff, what are our
cost-reduction opportunities, what are our process-improvement
opportunities, are we in compliance with the regulations, and
that work is ongoing as well.
As I mentioned earlier, the disciplinary process with
respect to the specific employees who are named by the IG is
well under way, and we are creating at our chief operating
officer level an executive steering committee on facilities
management oversight, so the decisionmaking cannot be made by
one person.
But, again, most importantly--and we're implementing new
policies and procedures around leasing, but most importantly,
authority has been revoked from staff to enter into any real
property leases.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, and I would also announce that
Ranking Member Norton had to go to the floor. We're going to
continue on, going back and forth through a couple of more
rounds of questioning.
I wanted to get back to the issue of typical clauses,
because it's my understanding that a cancellation clause and a
clause that's subject to appropriation are both normal and
customary, both from GSA as well as other agencies. It's also
my understanding that your staff did approach the landlord or
the building owner with these two requests, and he denied them.
Are you aware of that?
Ms. Schapiro. I am not aware of that. And, Mr. Chairman,
you are far more expert in this than I am, so if those clauses
are, in fact, typical, I would defer to your judgment on that.
My understanding had been that they weren't typical in
long-term real property leases, but they ought to be. It seems
like a reasonable way to protect the taxpayer, and, again, it's
another reason I think why the SEC and the taxpayer will be
well served by the GSA having this responsibility for this
Agency and not keeping it in house.
Mr. Denham. And you've recognized the fact that, as
chairman, you're going to oversee the core function of the SEC,
and that leasing authority should be something that goes back
to the GSA. My concern is you may not always be chairman.
future chairmen, future Presidents who appoint future chairmen,
you may have a chairman that wants to have the leasing
authority back again.
In our bill, the Civilian Realignment Properties Act, we
actually pull the leasing authority not only from the SEC, but
several other agencies. For the future, do you foresee the SEC
ever needing leasing authority back again beyond your
chairmanship?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, from my perspective, I don't
see a reason for the SEC to have that authority. There may be
reasons for other agencies that I wouldn't begin to be able to
speak to, but I don't see the need for the SEC. And frankly, I
do see a benefit for the GSA to have a larger, broader, more
flexible portfolio that they're able to obtain by having more
agencies underneath their responsibility, and it gives them the
flexibility with the space that they have to allocate it among
multiple agencies, which I think perhaps provides us, them
also, with more market power when they're negotiating leases.
So from my perspective, and from the perspective of the SEC, at
this time, as I'm chairing it, I don't see the need for the SEC
to maintain this authority.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
We will be requesting further information on the lease
itself. We will be working with GSA on that as well. We want to
make sure that the taxpayer, indeed, does not have to pay for
the cost of this lease, but I also want to follow up on the
disciplinary action.
Diego Ruiz, you said, the Executive Director, is on
terminal leave?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, that's right.
Mr. Denham. How do you define ``terminal leave''?
Ms. Schapiro. He resigned from the Agency and, I believe,
is using up accrued annual leave, as is permitted under the
Government rules, but he is not in the office. He's not in our
facility. He has no responsibility. In fact, I immediately
reassigned all of his direct reports to the new Chief Operating
Officer, and we're in the process of eliminating the Executive
Director position and combining it all under the Chief
Operating Officer.
Mr. Denham. And your Chief of Staff, I assume, sat in on a
number of these meetings. Is there any responsibility of your
Chief of Staff on this matter?
Ms. Schapiro. No, I don't believe so. I mean, my Chief of
Staff and Deputy Chief of Staff both were in some of the
meetings. They were not provided with more accurate information
than I was, unfortunately, or they would have noticed, I think,
what was going on, but I don't believe they bear any
responsibility.
Mr. Denham. And both your Chief of Staff and your Deputy
Chief of Staff are both still with you?
Ms. Schapiro. The Deputy Chief of Staff left a month or so
ago, and the Chief of Staff is still there. And let me just
add, she left completely unrelated to this issue or any other
issue.
Mr. Denham. And the five signers on the document
themselves?
Ms. Schapiro. I'm--I don't know off the top of my head who
the signers were. I mean, I focused more on the employees in
terms of those identified by the inspector general in his
report to be considered for disciplinary action, and to the
extent, as you and I have discussed, those people are still
there, the review is ongoing to follow up on the IG's report.
And in the meantime the three critical people have been
reassigned and are no longer responsible for any leasing
activity, but also are not in positions to commit or bind the
Agency in any way on any contract.
Mr. Denham. And who are the three individuals?
Ms. Schapiro. Sharon Sheehan, who is the Associate
Executive Director and the head of the Office of Administrative
Services; Mr. Branch, who is the Support Services Manager; and
Miss Sudhoff, who was the competition specialist. I believe
those were the three who were particularly highlighted by the
IG.
Mr. Denham. And, Mr. Kotz, you identified these three
people? Were these the only three people that you identified?
Mr. Kotz. Those are the three people we specifically
identified for disciplinary action in the report, yes.
Ms. Schapiro. I believe, Mr. Chairman, as you and I
discussed briefly yesterday, we will not turn a blind eye. If
there are other issues with respect to other employee conduct
that comes up in the course of this review, obviously we'll
take appropriate action.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Ruiz, was he identified as well for
disciplinary action?
Mr. Kotz. By that point he had resigned from the Agency.
Mr. Denham. He had resigned, OK.
And how about Wendy Liebl? Liebl?
Mr. Kotz. Right. She was gone also by that point.
Mr. Denham. Would you have named those two?
Mr. Kotz. Yes.
Mr. Denham. What about Kayla Gillian?
Mr. Kotz. No, we wouldn't have named her.
Mr. Denham. OK. So just those five?
Mr. Kotz. Right.
Mr. Denham. And of those five, how many more signers on the
contract?
Mr. Kotz. I believe the three people signed the contract:
Sheehan, Sudhoff, and Liebl.
Mr. Denham. And what was that?
Ms. Schapiro. Branch and Liebl as well.
Mr. Kotz. Yeah, Branch and Liebl. So those were----
Mr. Denham. So everybody you've named all signed the
contract?
Mr. Kotz. Yes. It was--just to be clear, it was a
justification and approval, not specifically a contract per se.
But, yes, it was the document that demonstrated the sole-source
nature.
Mr. Denham. Do we know when any of these or when each of
these had actually signed the contract?
Mr. Kotz. Yes. The justification and approval was--they
were all dated August 2nd. There were several that were signed
early in August. Then there was that one that Linda Sudhoff
signed on August 31st, although initially it was dated August
27th, and then the 7 was whited out so made to look like it was
August 2nd, but it was actually signed on August 31st.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. What would your--either person--what would your
expectation be in terms of the nature of disciplinary action,
and in your own words, what would you describe their
malfeasance or misconduct to be?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I think it's really important
that we let the disciplinary process go through without
commenting or prejudging the information. And as I said, I'm
very committed to us getting this completed very quickly so
that the Agency can move on with their--with the transition to
the GSA and the reorganization that will be necessary in the
Office of Administrative Services. And I just--I guess I hate
to prejudge any individual's conduct.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
I'm having a hard time understanding who else should be
held accountable on this issue, and I'm trying to understand
your thought process on this. You went from 550 people, of
which you expected a large percentage of those to be in the
regional areas. It was also--in your statement you said you
also wanted them, the ones that were going to be located in DC,
to be within walking distance of the current SEC building. Now,
this 900,000 square feet is neither in the region, nor is it
within walking distance.
How do we get to the point where we're going out to lease
this building; and, secondly, if you're in charge, and it was
your wish to have regional or within walking distance, how did
we end up with a building that was neither of those and went
from 300,000 square feet to 900,000 square feet? I mean,
ultimately if you're not the person to be held accountable, and
neither is your Chief of Staff, you were both in meetings and
both aware of these changes, and if your directive was
something else than what actually happened, I'm having a hard
time understanding----
Ms. Schapiro. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am accountable,
clearly. I will say that I was not fully aware of--I was not
aware of these changes. I was not aware and nor was I walked
through that we'd gone from 300,000 to 900,000 square feet.
I've never even seen the Constitution Center space. I did not
know that they had selected a building that was not within
walking distance of the Agency, and I certainly didn't know
that my express wish that we move as many employees as possible
to the regions was not being honored.
I assumed that the projected space needs--and I didn't
question the underlying assumptions--I assumed that they would
be routine assumptions about the number of square feet per
employee that are used throughout the Government and so forth.
I didn't question those underlying assumptions, but I assumed
that they would be in line with both our budget assumptions,
which had us somewhere between 1,000 and 1,100 people over FY
2011 and FY 2012, and that the work that was being done was
consistent with that. But I--at the end of the day, the staff
went forward and signed a contract for far more space than was
appropriate for the Agency in a location that was not ideal for
the Agency, and it's why we've worked so hard now very quickly,
frankly, after this was done to undo it.
Mr. Denham. As chair of the SEC, what is your ability to
appropriate dollars?
Ms. Schapiro. I have no ability to appropriate dollars.
Congress obviously appropriates the funds for us in accordance
with the budget that we provide to Congress, so that even when
we seek to move money----
Mr. Denham. So then what is your spending authority?
Ms. Schapiro. It is as it is outlined in the budget. So if
I could give you an example, under Dodd-Frank we're required to
create five new offices within the SEC. Four of those require
change in reporting structure, and in order for us to create
those four offices, even within the existing budget of the
Agency, we have to go to the appropriators with a reprogramming
request to ask for money to be reallocated to create those
offices that Congress told us to create. So I'm guided by the
budget.
Mr. Denham. So your spending authority ends with the
appropriation of Congress, based on what the current fiscal
year budget is?
Ms. Schapiro. That's right.
Mr. Denham. So you went from a 2010 budget, you began
negotiating the lease for the 2011 budget, which hadn't been
passed yet, and the 2012 budget, which we just passed earlier
this year, and--I mean----
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman----
Mr. Denham. You can see that this doesn't make any sense.
You committed the taxpayers to over half a billion dollars
without Dodd-Frank passing, without the 2011 budget, without
the 2012 budget. So if you're not held accountable to any
disciplinary action, nor is your Chief of Staff, I'm having a
hard time understanding why the taxpayers are on the hook for
half a billion dollars under this scenario when the spending
authority was not granted.
Do you have some other type of spending authority outside
of the budgetary process?
Ms. Schapiro. No.
Mr. Denham. Does your staff have any other type of spending
authority?
Ms. Schapiro. No. The cost for the leases were included in
our budgets for 2011, $7.2 million, and for 2012 $12.7 million
for the rental payments.
Mr. Denham. How big is your current--was your 2010 budget?
Ms. Schapiro. I believe it was $1.1 billion.
Mr. Denham. $1.1 billion. And under that $1.1 billion, the
lease payment on an annual basis would have been----
Ms. Schapiro. Well, in 2011--no rent, in fact, was due
until the first quarter of 2012, but there was an opportunity
because we have no year money to prepay, so I believe the
budgeted amounts for 2011 was $7.2 million. Now, even though
that space is gone and taken over by the other agencies, we're
still budgeting for rental costs for the last 300,000 square
feet, although, again, we hope that that space will be gone as
well. We have not paid any rent to date.
Mr. Denham. I'm getting to the point where I was with your
CEO--COO last week. I just--I don't understand--I don't
understand how you can obligate a future Congress on a large
expenditure that was not passed. We haven't passed a budget in
how many months now? How long has it been since we had a
budget? Over 2 years.
Ms. Schapiro. But I guess we--I mean, we have lots of space
now around the country that we pay rent on every year, so we
have multiyear leasing authority. We have the ability,
obviously, to enter into long-term leases. That's generally the
most cost-effective way for the Government and for the
taxpayer, and although we don't--you're right, we don't have a
budget all the time, we operate under continuing resolutions,
we do include in our budgeting what our lease payments and
lease obligations will be for the coming year. I'm not sure how
else we can go forward and lease space for our employees.
I will say that the question that was raised by the
inspector general came up very briefly here about whether we
properly exercised our independent, multiyear leasing authority
and, by doing so, only obligate the current-year obligations is
in any way a violation of the Antideficiency Act, and we have
asked GAO for an opinion on that.
Mr. Denham. I understand the need for multiyear lease.
Obviously we want to utilize multiyear lease to save taxpayers
money over a long-term period of time. But what you have done
and what your department has done, what your Agency has done,
is take a $1.1 billion budget and increase that by 20 percent
on an annual basis based on a budget that was never passed.
That's something that's very different. When you're basing your
budget--when you're going to do a long-term lease, you base it
on what your current budget analysis is. And I understand that
there are several people on here that are facing disciplinary
action that may have bumped up the numbers or guesstimated what
the numbers would be, but the ultimate sign-off authority on
such a huge number, increasing your budget by 20 percent, how
could you have known, especially when Dodd-Frank hadn't even
passed Congress yet?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, Congressman, it wasn't presented that
way. It was--the authority resided with the Executive Director
to sign the lease and to enter into the lease negotiations, and
it was presented in quite a different way, as a very good value
for--per rentable square foot, as something we needed to do
based on--it turned out not to have been based on reasonable
budget assumptions, but it was represented to me as based on
reasonable budget assumptions, and that we reserved the right
to assign or sublet the space if it was not necessary for the
SEC.
I hear your frustration, and I understand it, and frankly I
share it, and it's one reason I believe this Agency, which has
not handled this authority particularly well over a very long
period of time, shouldn't be in this business.
Mr. Denham. I wanted to go back to something you said
earlier. We were discussing the cancellation clause and
appropriation clause. I've got before me a piece of the
testimony that is included into Mr. Kotz's IG report.
The question was, OK, and did you make a recommendation,
that meeting with Chairman Schapiro, that the SEC enter into
this lease for the Constitution Center for 900,000 square feet?
Yes.
And so Mary Schapiro verbally approved that recommendation
at that meeting?
Answer: Yes.
OK. Did she ask any questions that you can recall or her
staff ask any questions that you can recall?
No, not at that--not that I can recall.
You've seen the transcripts from----
Ms. Schapiro. Yes. And, Congressman----
Mr. Denham. This is from the Executive Director, who's been
reassigned or who has resigned.
Ms. Schapiro. Right.
I understood that what we were doing in July was consistent
with what we had talked about in June. That clearly wasn't the
case. He did not walk me through how he got from 300,000 to
900,000. We did not talk about this being $500 million over 10
years. We talked about--it was presented to me as an immediate
emergency and the criticality of going forward.
Do I wish that I had stopped?
Mr. Denham. Let me stop you there. It was an immediate
emergency. Why was it an immediate emergency?
Ms. Schapiro. Because, as he explained it to me, we had no
other space options within DC, and if we were going to have any
growth at all, and based upon our expectations at that time, we
thought we would have growth, that we had to take this space,
or we would not----
Mr. Denham. Why did you expect it?
Ms. Schapiro. Because Dodd-Frank had passed. We had had
lots of favorable comments from the appropriators and others
with respect to the continued growth in our budget, we had a
lot of support for a reinvigorated and renewed SEC going
forward, and our budget requests for FY 2011 and FY 2012
suggested to us that we would need this space.
I understand that we made a terrible mistake not waiting
for an appropriation. I understand that. I think what was also
weighing heavily on people's minds at that time was that when
an appropriation does come, it takes a long time to get space
and to build it out and to have it available to house people,
and that the Agency had been criticized sometimes in the past
for not hiring people fast enough and bringing them on board.
Mr. Denham. This much criticism?
Ms. Schapiro. No. This is more than I've certainly been
used to, but I appreciate that it's constructive and important
criticism for us to hear.
Mr. Denham. We've seen the largest collapse of the real
estate industry during this time period. No 2011 budget, no
2012 budget. I'm having a hard time understanding why it was
such an emergency to go out and lease space without a budget,
going through the type of real estate collapse that we were
seeing at the time. I just don't see the emergency.
Ms. Schapiro. In retrospect, I don't either, and at the
time I relied on the expertise of others that I perhaps should
not have relied on.
Mr. Denham. I assume that you were following Dodd-Frank
very closely?
Ms. Schapiro. Oh, yes. We have responsibility for over 100
new rulemakings, 20 studies, and large new areas of
responsibility for over-the-counter derivatives, hedge funds,
credit-rating agencies, municipal advisors. We will have
thousands of new regulatees and trillions of dollars of assets
under management for which we will have responsibility.
Mr. Denham. When did Dodd-Frank pass out of the House?
Ms. Schapiro. July--oh, out of the House? It passed--it was
signed by the President on July 21st. I'm going to guess a
couple of weeks before that. I don't remember the exact date.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Hanna?
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Chairman.
With all due respect, ma'am, what do you regard your own
culpability to be in this matter?
Ms. Schapiro. I am ultimately responsible for the
operations of the Agency, and the Agency made a terrible
mistake here and entered into a lease that was not fully
justified, on a sole-source basis that was not fully justified,
and indeed was based upon inflated numbers. And I view myself
as being ultimately responsible and also responsible for
mitigating the consequences of that to the greatest extent
possible. And those are the steps that we've taken are to
mitigate it, to turn over this responsibility to the GSA, and
to offload, as we have, two-thirds of that space and the last
third in partnership with GSA as quickly as we can. My goal is
to make sure the taxpayers are not on the hook for this.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you for that. And I think you've taken
considerable steps in that direction.
Ms. Schapiro. Thank you.
Mr. Hanna. Yes, ma'am.
I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Kotz, is there any further testimony that
you would like to add to this as far as the IG?
Mr. Kotz. The only thing I would mention is there's been a
lot of discussion about justifications and approvals for no
competition, and our office is planning to conduct an audit of
additional justifications and approvals that the Agency has
entered into where there's been no competition to determine
that that was done appropriately, given the justifications that
we found----
Mr. Denham. Specifically within the SEC?
Mr. Kotz. Right.
Mr. Denham. And, Mr. Kotz, in your opinion, the five
individuals that signed the contract, that changed the dates,
or the one date that was changed and the other four that were
backdated, is that of criminal nature?
Mr. Kotz. Yes. We have actually referred that matter to the
Department of Justice Public Integrity Section. We've had
conversations with them about that matter, and we will follow
up with the Department of Justice as they see fit with respect
to any criminal liability.
Mr. Denham. And where are they in that process; do you
know?
Mr. Kotz. They've asked for the relevant documents. We've
provided them to them, and they are making determinations.
Mr. Denham. How long does that normally take?
Mr. Kotz. They told us that they would get back to us
relatively shortly. We haven't heard back from them yet, but it
shouldn't take very long. Obviously if they decide to take the
matter and bring a prosecution, that would take a significant
amount of time, but it shouldn't take very long for them to
determine whether to undertake an action.
Mr. Denham. When did you take it to the DOJ?
Mr. Kotz. In the last few weeks.
Mr. Denham. Few weeks. Is that shortly in Government terms?
Mr. Kotz. No, no, we previously sent it to DOJ in the last
few weeks.
Mr. Denham. But you said you expect to hear back from them
shortly.
Mr. Kotz. Oh, yes, yes, yes. Certainly in the next couple
weeks I would think we would hear back from them. They have
indicated to us that we would have already heard back. We
haven't heard back yet, but it should be, I would think, in the
next couple weeks, yes.
Mr. Denham. So is DOJ conducting an investigation?
Mr. Kotz. Yeah. They're looking at the information we have,
and they're going to make a determination whether they want to
then bring a criminal action or at least initiate an
investigation to bring a criminal action. We would then
cooperate with them, and then the action would go forward.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Chairman Schapiro, do you have anything else to add to the
testimony today?
Ms. Schapiro. No.
Mr. Denham. I would like to follow up one more time on the
leasing authority itself. Do you think the leasing authority
should go where?
Ms. Schapiro. To the GSA.
Mr. Denham. And in the future should the leasing authority
ever come back to the SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't believe so.
Mr. Denham. I will take that as an endorsement of our
current legislation.
Any further questions?
Thank you. Again, I would like to thank you for your
testimony today. We're going to be following up with questions
for the record, and I would ask that you provide your responses
in a timely manner to the subcommittee.
I would ask unanimous consent that the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses have
provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to them
in writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain open
for 15 days for any additional comments and information
submitted by Members or witnesses to be included in the record
of today's hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Denham. This concludes today's hearing on the SEC.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

