- CAN A CIVILIAN BRAC COMMISSION CONSOLIDATE FEDERAL OFFICE SPACE AND SAVE TAXPAYERS BILLIONS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CAN A CIVILIAN BRAC COMMISSION
CONSOLIDATE FEDERAL OFFICE SPACE
AND SAVE TAXPAYERS BILLIONS?

=======================================================================

(112-22)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 6, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-644                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

?

Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman

TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,           Columbia
Arkansas,                            HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
Vice Chair                         MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BOB FILNER, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee         (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Johnson, Hon. Martha, Administrator, U.S. General Services
Administration.................................................     5
Lepore, Brian J., Director, Defense Capabilities and Management
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office..................    28
Principi, Hon. Anthony J., Former Secretary, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, and Former Chairman, 2005 Defense Base
Realignment and Closure Commission.............................    28
Werfel, Hon. Daniel I., Controller, Office of Management and
Budget.........................................................     5
Wise, David J., Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................    28

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Norton, Hon. Eleanor Holmes, a Representative in Congress from
the District of Columbia.......................................    42

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Johnson, Hon. Martha.............................................    45
Lepore, Brian J., and Wise, David J., joint statement............    52
Principi, Hon. Anthony J.........................................    71
Werfel, Hon. Daniel I............................................    75

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5644.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5644.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5644.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5644.004

CAN A CIVILIAN BRAC COMMISSION
CONSOLIDATE FEDERAL OFFICE SPACE
AND SAVE TAXPAYERS BILLIONS?

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public
Buildings, and Emergency Management,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The subcommittee will come to order.
First, let me welcome our distinguished witnesses and thank
them for their testimony today. We carefully selected each of
you because of your past experience or current responsibilities
for managing Federal real estate on behalf of the American
people. Given our trillion-dollar deficit and skyrocketing
debt, we must examine every area of government and look for
ways to cut spending.
I first proposed a civilian BRAC commission at our
subcommittee's first hearing in February, and the President
proposed a commission in his 2012 budget. The purpose of
today's hearing is to find out if a civilian BRAC commission
can save billions of taxpayer dollars by consolidating and
realigning Federal real estate property.
In recent years, the GAO identified billions of dollars of
waste through mismanagement, overbuilding, and anoverreliance
on costly leased space to meet long-term housing needs. In
Chairman Mica's report, ``Sitting on our Assets,'' we learned
billions of dollars of taxpayer assets sit idle or even lose
taxpayer money year after year. And on a bipartisan basis, this
committee has struggled to house Federal employees in the most
cost-effective manner possible.
I believe the potential to save billions of dollars is very
real. The question is: Can a civilian BRAC commission cut
through the red tape and political turf battles to save
taxpayers money and do it quickly?
For example, if all the commission achieves is a fire sale
of worthless properties in one of the worst real estate markets
in our lifetime, then we shouldn't expect to save much money at
all. Fortunately, the administration recognizes this very same
problem. I am very pleased the President made Federal real
estate a national priority by including it in his State of the
Union Address and his budget.
Given our discussions with OMB and GSA, I am hopeful we can
agree on the goals for a commission and work together to move a
bill through Congress. To achieve $15 billion in savings, I
believe the commission will have to focus on a few goals or
principles to reform. The commission will need to first
consolidate the footprint of Federal real estate; second, house
more Federal employees in less overall space; third, reduce our
reliance on costly lease space; fourth, sell or redevelop high-
value assets that are underutilized or too valuable for housing
Federal employees; and fifth, dispose of surplus property more
quickly.
I believe a commission that uses these five principles to
guide its decision can save the $15 billion we all believe is
there. I would like to elaborate on these principles so we can
discuss them further during the question and answer period of
the hearing.
At the end of the day, the total cost to house the Federal
Government is directly proportional to how much real estate we
have hold. To save money, we will have to consolidate that
footprint. To consolidate, we must house more Federal employees
in less space. Fortunately, there are tremendous opportunities
for savings in this area.
There is just one example of GSA consolidation using three
different properties that were leased or owned and now
renovating the GSA headquarters, consolidating and giving us an
opportunity on two separate buildings.
The private sector has been increasing its utilization
rates for over a decade--and a commission can achieve the same
results in the Federal Government. Reducing expensive leased
space is another principle necessary for a successful
commission.
There is a second example. The Postal Service used a
private developer to transfer a rundown money pit with a great
location. This in turn gave $150 million in revenue and a fully
renovated building without any taxpayer money. While the
government retained ownership of this property, in other cases
selling may generate the greatest savings for the taxpayer.
Finally, we have to dispose our surplus property more
quickly. I believe these guiding principles should help inform
the development of any legislative solution, and I look forward
to discussing them with our witnesses.
Again, I want to thank each of you for being here today.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Norton from
the District of Columbia for 5 minutes to make any opening
statement she may have.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, and welcome to our witnesses. I want to thank
you, Chairman Denham, for calling today's hearing on the
administration's proposal found in section 735 of the fiscal
year 2012 budget to create an independent Civilian Property
Realignment Board tasked with making recommendations for the
realignment and consolidation of Federal real estate, much like
the Department of Defense Base Realignment and Closure, known
as BRAC.
The proposed board has the potential to be a valuable and
rational tool for providing a source of revenue for the Federal
Government to maintain existing buildings and to fund real
estate management, not to mention, of course, what this might
mean for the Federal deficit. The President's proposed board
would dispose of unneeded and underutilized real estate and
would consolidate Federal real estate functions where
appropriate.
Last year, President Obama issued a government-wide memo
that ordered agencies to reduce their real estate footprint.
This proposal before us today represents the administration's
sustained priority on addressing the management of Federal real
estate activities. I applaud the administration's efforts in
the fiscal year 2012 budget to explicitly address Federal real
estate in a comprehensive manner.
In 2003, the Federal Accounting Office placed GAO--placed
real estate management on its list of high-risk government
activities, where it remains today. Both this committee and GAO
repeatedly have registered serious concerns about the way
Federal real property has been managed. I am especially
pleased, therefore, that the current administration has
continued to build on its initial efforts to right-size the
Federal real estate portfolio by issuing a memorandum requiring
all Federal agencies to reduce their real estate footprint and
now by proposing legislation for an independent board.
Much like BRAC, the administration's proposed board would
conduct an analysis of the inventory of Federal civilian
property. The board would obtain recommendations from Federal
agencies on civilian real estate that could be sold,
transferred, consolidated, co-located, or reconfigured to
reduce the civilian real property inventory and operating costs
of the Federal Government. After performing that analysis, the
board would conduct public hearings on the recommendations of
the agency.
At a minimum, the board would submit a report on its
findings twice a year to the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget. Upon receipt of the board's
recommendations, OMB would conduct a review of the report and
would take into consideration the views and recommendations of
the Federal agencies within 25 days of receiving the board's
report. If the OMB director approves the board's
recommendation, the director would submit the recommendations
to Congress.
Conversely, as with BRAC, if OMB disapproves the board's
recommendation in whole or in part, the director would then
transmit to the board and to Congress the reason for its
disapproval. The board would then be required to transmit to
OMB a revised list of recommendations. If OMB approved the
revised recommendations, it would then transmit the
recommendations to Congress.
After OMB's transmission of its recommendations to
Congress, Congress would have 45 days to pass a joint
resolution disapproving the recommendations. If Congress fails
to pass a joint resolution, the board's recommendations would
gain legal force and agencies would commence with recommended
activities. Proceeds from sale of properties would be split
between deficit reduction and covering the costs of agencies to
dispose of the property, consolidate, relocate, and reconfigure
activities.
The administration's proposal would offer a new and more
powerful tool to identify underutilized Federal properties that
could help move agencies out of leased space and would allow
the sale of real estate where appropriate. Just as importantly,
the board would be highly instrumental in reconfiguring, co-
locating, and realigning the Federal real estate portfolio.
It is impossible to know without a rigorous inventory and
analysis whether surplus property equals valuable property in
dollars and cents or if the Federal Government is really
sitting on billions of dollars of underutilized surplus
properties for which there is a market. Now is the time to find
out, however, and to provide the country with at least one
alternative to the mindless slash-and-burn approach in use in
the House at the moment to reduce the deficit.
In contrast, an independent board to assess the real estate
needs of agencies would thoughtfully and rationally right size
the real estate portfolios of agencies that often lack the
expertise to make strategic real estate decisions.
Astonishingly, although the General Services Administration is
charged with managing and developing Federal Government
properties and leases, there are at least 23 holding agencies
currently controlling Federal real estate. Most of these
agencies have missions unrelated to property and property
consolidation.
However, according to GAO, the GSA alone holds 282 excess
or otherwise underutilized buildings that cost $93 million
annually to operate. One of the most prominent of these
properties, the priceless, historic treasure, the Old Post
Office, had to be pried loose by a bill I introduced and got
passed into law with strong bipartisan House and Senate
support.
At the same time, this subcommittee must always take the
broad view of real estate. Although I believe the Civilian
Property Realignment Board can serve an important missing role
in disposing of unneeded real estate, the administration's
proposal does not require the sale of real estate assets in a
soft market or the sale of properties that hamstring the
government's ability to house Federal employees in the future.
Expert and specialized skill is necessary to dispose of
underutilized real estate assets while avoiding selling
property the government could need in the future, leading to
long-term leasing because of haphazard disposal of
underutilized real estate.
For example, the Federal Government was wise to maintain
the St. Elizabeths property in the District of Columbia. The
government could not have foreseen the need to establish the
Department of Homeland Security. However, there has never been
enough space to consolidate agencies in the district, and St.
Elizabeths was a 176-acre federally owned property in the
Nation's Capital. Preserving the land on which the Department
of Homeland Security agencies are now being consolidated from
leased space will save the government billions upon billions of
dollars in the future.
Property that does not fit the long-term real estate needs
of the local government should be sold. However, this
subcommittee will want to be just as alert aboutredeveloping
its property to earn revenue before the government, like the
Old Post Office Building, whose request for proposals was just
issued finally last week, and Hotel Monaco, developed from the
old Tariff Building, which quickly began to provide a return
annually to the Federal Government.
The Old Post Office building is a prime example today of
taking an underutilized property that was operating at a loss
and converting it into revenue-producing property for Federal
taxpayers. Ironically, Congress had to force this change by
statute, over the objection of the Office of Management and
Budget.
For years, OMB has held on to GSA real estate because of
the absence of staff real estate expertise at OMB. If OMB is to
take on the responsibility envisioned in the administration's
proposal, I will require that OMB finally bring on its staff
expert staff with specific real estate and redevelopment and
development experience, a complete hole at OMB that has been
there through Democratic and Republican administrations, to the
great loss of taxpayers, of which the Old Post Office is only
the most prominent example.
I support the concepts contained in the administration's
proposal for a Civilian Property Realignment Board to meet the
goal of rightsizing the Federal real estate portfolio and
saving taxpayers billions of dollars. Now it is up to our
subcommittee to quickly pass bipartisan legislation that puts
this proposal to work. I look forward to the testimony of
today's witnesses to help with this task.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would like to welcome our
witnesses here today. Our first panel will be the Honorable
Daniel Werfel, Controller of the Office of Management and
Budget; and the Honorable Martha Johnson, Administrator of the
General Services Administration.
Welcome.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Since your written testimony has been part of the record,
the subcommittee will request that you limit your oral
testimony to 5 minutes.
Mr. Werfel, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE DANIEL I. WERFEL, CONTROLLER, OFFICE
OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET; AND THE HONORABLE MARTHA JOHNSON,
ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Norton, Congressman Crawford, and other members of the
subcommittee, for the invitation to discuss the President's
Civilian Property Realignment Act proposal with you today.
Each year, the Federal Government wastes taxpayer dollars
on thousands of unneeded or underutilized government
properties. We need to take immediate steps to take advantage
of the many opportunities that have already been identified to
date and simultaneously move forward on additional and more
transformational possibilities.
For this reason, the President advanced a bold new approach
in the fiscal year 2012 budget to right-size the Federal real
estate inventory. The President's proposal would create an
independent board to achieve long-term and sustainable
reductions in real estate-related operating costs and energy
use, convert unneeded real estate into reductions in the
Federal deficit, and adapt the government's real property to
the 21st century.
As part of the Accountable Government Initiative, President
Obama has consistently made real property reform a priority.
Last June, the President issued a memorandum entitled
``Disposing of Unneeded Federal Real Estate'' and ordered
agency leaders to take aggressive action to reduce their real
estate footprints. Agencies have made good progress,
identifying $1.7 billion toward meeting the $3 billion savings
goal by the end of fiscal year 2012.
However, our work with agencies on real estate has made it
apparent that even larger savings opportunities lie within our
grasp but cannot be implemented with the traditional tools
available for managing our real property assets.
There are three basic barriers that have prevented more
significant transformations of Federal real estate and thus
have prevented more significant savings: Red tape, financial
disincentives, and politics. The President's proposal builds
off the best practices of a proven approach, the Department of
Defense's Base Realignment and Closure program, or BRAC, to
address and overcome each such barrier.
Specifically, for properties identified by the board as
candidates for realignment, the board will push through red
tape by eliminating the one-size-fits-all approach to the
process that exists in the Federal inventory today; leverage
proceeds and other savings as a way to incentivize agencies to
initiate changes to their real estate that have a positive
return on investment for the taxpayer, while still dedicating a
substantial amount of savings for deficit reduction; and third,
find resolutions to competing stakeholder interests that can
stymie or progress.
The last point merits further emphasis. Proposals by the
Federal Government to vacate or sell real estate affect
numerous stakeholder interests. These competing interests
create a powerful disincentive against progress. Like BRAC, the
envisioned board would overcome this challenge by bundling its
recommendations as a package that succeed or fail together.
Furthermore, like BRAC, Congress would have 45 days to consider
the recommendations, with no ability to line-item veto a
property in the package. Instead, Congress' sole option would
be either to endorse or reject the whole package.
The President's budget for 2012 includes the initial
legislation for standing up this board and this process.
Shortly, the administration will submit for congressional
consideration a fuller, more detailed legislative proposal that
builds on the language in the President's budget.
The status quo in our real estate inventory is particularly
unacceptable today when we have a pressing need to rein in our
spending and reduce our deficits. By using the best practices
from the BRAC model to address this issue, we can leverage our
portfolio to improve services to the taxpayer, reduce the
government's energy footprint, and reduce the deficit.
It is time for a bold new step. I invite you to support the
Civilian Property Realignment Act and help bring about a
transformation of real property management in the government
today.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. I look forward to
answering your questions.
Mr. Crawford. [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Werfel.
Administrator Johnson, you may proceed.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Denham,
Ranking Member Norton, Congressman Crawford, and members of the
subcommittee. I am honored to join you today.
In the President's fiscal year 2012 budget the
administration announced an effort to accelerate the disposal
and consolidation of the Federal Government's civilian
properties. This initiative anticipates working with Congress
to optimize asset utilization, increase disposals of unneeded
assets, and streamline the disposal process to help the
government realize billions of dollars in savings.
I appreciate the opportunity today to discuss GSA asset
management and our role in property disposition government
wide. Through our experiences and expertise with the disposal
process, we hope to assist in forming a successful civilian
property initiative that helps the government meet our
responsibilities to taxpayers to spend every dollar
effectively.
GSA has a large real estate portfolio. Yet the broader
Federal Government portfolio is even more extensive. GSA
manages the Federal Real Property Profile, which is the
government's database of owned and leased assets. Of the total
government 429,000 building assets, GSA controls approximately
9,000. Less than 3 percent of GSA's portfolio has been
classified as under or non-utilized.
Since 2002, GSA has disposed of over 200 GSA properties,
totalling more than 9.5 million square feet. These properties
represent 5 percent of our own portfolio and eliminated $484
million in anticipated repair needs. GSA works diligently to
identify unneeded assets for disposal, yet it is important to
note that not all properties labeled as underutilized are
available for sale. In fact, most of GSA's underutilized
properties are not candidates for disposition. More than half
of these properties are either undergoing major modernizations
or being backfilled with tenants from leased space or are being
reassigned to agencies with new requirements.
GSA works aggressively to renovate and renew assets to
achieve greater utilization. Of the 14,000 assets categorized
as excess in the FRPP, 138 are GSA excess assets, 114 of which
are now in the disposal process. In the last 10 years, GSA has
disposed of over 3,300 government-wide assets valued at $8.5
billion; 260 of these assets were GSA-owned.
The disposal process begins when a Federal agency
determines that it no longer has a mission need for an asset
and reports the property as excess. A property reported as
excess, however, may not necessarily be slated for disposal,
since some may be demolished or have costly or time-consuming
cleanup requirements. If there is no valid need for the
property within the Federal Government after 30-day period, it
is considered surplus and offered to other public organizations
such as State, county, and city governments and not-for-profit
organizations. These local entities can acquire the property
through a negotiated sale at fair market value or through a
public benefit conveyance for specific uses, including homeless
assistance, historic monuments, educational purposes, and law
enforcement needs.
GSA conducts a public sale if there is no public benefit or
negotiated sale. Dispositions must also comply with a variety
of environmental and historic preservation requirements, which
can require considerable time and funding.
The disposal process is an iterative and deliberate process
with a number of statutory requirements that seek to strike a
balance between social and economic policy objectives. This
process, I must note, can be time-consuming, as it involves
many stakeholders, associated political interests, community
expectations, environmental factors, and regulatory reviews.
These variables often manifest themselves in competing
interests, creating inefficiencies and driving increased time
and cost.
The administration is interested in legislation that will
increase the number of assets available for disposal and
expedite the disposal process. The President's proposed
Civilian Property Realignment Act will help Federal agencies
accomplish this goal while the improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of Federal disposals and saving taxpayer funds.
I appreciate the leadership of both the chairman and the
ranking member on this matter and your sincere interest in
moving this issue forward. Thank you for the opportunity to be
with you today. I welcome your questions.
Mr. Denham. [presiding.] Thank you, Administrator Johnson.
At this time, I would like to yield the first 5 minutes of
questioning to Vice Chairman Crawford, as he has scheduling
challenges this morning.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you, Administrator Werfel, for being here.
I have a quick question for you. I understand the
administration believes there are $15 billion in potential
savings. I am curious, how did you arrive at that number? Is
that a realistic number? And what is the timeline on those
savings?
Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Congressman.
The President set out a target last year in a memo in June
for the government to eliminate $3 billion in real estate or
essentially save $3 billion by taking critical steps. We
started working with agencies toward those goals and looking
for different opportunities to realign real estate.
It is during that work with each agency that we recognized
that there were bolder, broader and more aggressive savings
opportunities that were potentially available but not
achievable in today's current legal and regulatory and
political environment. And so we started doing some more
research into those opportunities to size them up.
And what we saw were essentially two types of opportunities
emerging. One was the potential sale of very high-value assets,
a limited number of high-value assets that the United States
Government owns across the country that, for a variety of
different reasons, in particular and probably most pressing,
the competing stakeholder interests that would be involved in
surfacing these assets and moving forward to vacate them, that
if sold, they would generate a very high return on investment.
Obviously, we would have to take into account real estate
market realities. But even in today's real estate market it, is
our belief that some of these assets would generate a very high
rate of return if pushed through to sale.
The other opportunity that emerged, in addition to the
limited number of high-value assets, are consolidations of
numerous--actually, thousands of field offices around the
country. We have agencies today that have offices, for example,
in every county in America, which does not, we believe, reflect
the way benefits and services are delivered in the post-
Internet or in the 21st century. And so to begin to consolidate
some of these thousands of properties into a more rational
approach, even though they are small in each individual case,
once you start consolidating them more aggressively, you get an
aggregate savings amount that we think would be substantial.
So we looked at these two opportunities and started to map
them out and figure out what we thought was achievable in the
short term. And we believe that $15 billion in savings is
achievable within the first 3 years that the board that we
envision is up and running and be able to make recommendations
to Congress.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you.
The BRAC process started with the Defense Department
developing criteria and standards and applying them to its
properties in order to develop recommendations for the
commission. In the case of a civilian BRAC, who would you
recommend develop the criteria and standards that would be
applied to Federal properties across the government?
Mr. Werfel. I think there can be some broad criteria. One
of the things mentioned in GAO's testimony is their suggestion
that as we approach a civilian BRAC, we think about some of the
criteria. We have taken that point to heart and are looking at
that as we get ready to submit our more detailed legislative
proposal on this. The proposal that is in the budget is more of
a summary version. And we are working on a detailed version.
Some of those proposals I think are at a very high level.
Obviously, the importance around making sure that we are
maximizing the return for the taxpayer in terms of deficit
reduction; that we are thinking about the impact on the local
community; that we are thinking about ensuring that as our real
estate real realigns, we are maximizing how that supports
agency mission. There are environmental considerations. So I
think that there are some general frameworks that we can work
through.
I think that the board itself, its mission and what it is
going to be charged with, is to apply and balance those various
factors as they look at these different realignment
opportunities. So I think our vision would be to set out
working together between the President and Congress a high-
level set of parameters that push for the interests that I just
described, in particular always looking out for the taxpayer
before anything else. And then the board would apply those on a
case by case basis and figure out what the optimal outcome is
in each real estate opportunity.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, sir.
I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Crawford.
Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Before I get to the property questions, I would like to ask
Administrator Johnson about the current effect or the effect on
GSA if H.R. 1 were passed. The reason I ask that question is
that for the entire period of my service in the Congress, GSA
has had huge understaffing problems, loss of expertise because
expertise is very valuable in the private sector. What would
the effect of H.R. 1 be on the GSA appropriation?
Ms. Johnson. Thank you for the question.
I can summarize sort of estimates about it. First of all,
it would basically demolish our capital program this year, so
we would not be able to pursue the projects that are underway,
and significantly that would include work on the St. Elizabeths
headquarters for DHS, and some other projects; putting in
jeopardy the Coast Guard's ability to move into--finish and
move into their new headquarters.
We estimate there would be approximately 16,000 jobs that
would be lost as a result of this. It all depends upon the
length of the way it calculates out, but there could be a point
at which we would also be unable to meet some of the
obligations in our leases.
The other piece that particularly concerns me is around our
open government and our electronic government work, so that we
wouldn't be able to share the huge amount of data that we are
currently putting up in the same way because we would not have
funding to continue much of that.
Ms. Norton. May I ask you, Administrator Johnson, this
committee has always pressed GSA to get as many agencies out of
leased space into owned space. How will the Civilian Property
Realignment Board--or will it assist the agency in meeting this
mandate? Has it thus far in the properties you have sold? You
say that 9.5 million square feet of property has been sold. Has
it helped at all with this budget-saving issue?
Ms. Johnson. Frankly, the GSA would be quite delighted if
our balance of leasing were less. We would welcome the
rebalancing of our portfolio much more towards owned space,
simply because that returns revenue into the building fund and
allows us into the future to be able to fund the portfolio and
the maintenance and repair and new construction. So the formula
is such that I can say that I would be delighted if we can
figure out more ways of moving out of leases and into owned.
Ms. Norton. You are not into at the moment realigning or
using space for the purpose of getting people in owned space,
but you are disposing of property at the moment.
Ms. Johnson. When we are disposing of property, I think we
are rightsizing our owned inventory. I don't think that the
properties that move into disposal are ones that--first of all,
we assess whether or not there are opportunities across the
Federal community to use that space. So there is a first
tranche of work.
Ms. Norton. So you don't think those properties are useful
to the Federal Government at all.
Ms. Johnson. If they are moving through disposal, that is
already a question that has been answered.
Ms. Norton. The properties that will be in this process
will be such properties.
Ms. Johnson. I would assume so. They fit the criteria and
that there would be no use for them across the government. Yes.
Ms. Norton. Let me ask you both; this is a very soft
market. Suppose the BRAC Commission says, here, Congress, here
is some property, dispose of them and you will get X amount of
dollars. Anybody with any real estate expertise will say you
will get twice that amount if you just wait a little while for
the market to come back.
Will this commission be required to dispose of properties
in a soft market, rendering less benefit to market concerns?
Mr. Werfel. Congressman, I certainly know the board would
not be required to sell off any set of assets.
Ms. Norton. They would do the selling, right? It is they
who would do the selling?
Mr. Werfel. Well, here is how we envision it working: First
of all, there would be an independent entity that would develop
its own set of recommendations. We wouldn't say to the board,
you must sell a certain number of assets. The board, I think--
and I think the strength of this proposal and its success
hinges tremendously on the quality and the talent of people
that we can place on the board and staff them with--will have
to make strategic judgments about the best decisions on behalf
of the taxpayer. And in some cases, I think they will find
situations in which assets are ready to be sold, are no longer
needed, and will have a comfort level that even in today's real
estate market the return price that they are getting is a fair
one and it is in the best interest of them to move forward.
In some cases, I think you are right. They will make a
judgement, a strategic judgment based on their real estate
expertise that it might not be the right time, given the market
realities of a certain location, for them to sell.
Ms. Norton. We probably don't want to sell properties at a
loss. Or say somebody who didn't know what they were doing
reaped less for the Federal Government than if they had waited
a year.
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely. That is going to be incumbent upon
the board to make those smart recommendations in terms of where
and what sequence to approach these realignment opportunities.
But to answer your question in terms of whether the board does
the selling, once the board recommendations are through
Congress, it would return back to GSA and the Federal agencies
to implement those recommendations. So if there is a building
within GSA's inventory that the board and through the
congressional process is now authorized for direct sale to
market, GSA would take on the responsibility to sell that
asset.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Before I start my questions, Mr. Werfel, I just
wanted to follow up on Mr. Crawford's question on the $15
billion, is that new revenue, scored new revenue, or does that
also include lease termination and other consolidation?
Mr. Werfel. It combines not just proceeds but also
operating cost savings as well. So if we were to eliminate a
footprint of buildings and the associated operating costs, we
would include that in the $15 billion.
Mr. Denham. I know this is still--we are still dealing with
rough estimates at this point, but how much of that is broken
down just into liquidation of properties that are no longer
needed?
Mr. Werfel. Very roughly, I would say somewhere between $9
billion and $12 billion is the proceeds and the remainder are
other efficiencies.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Included in the President's budget, there is a sketch of
the administration's proposal. When do you expect to actually
have the overall comprehensive language complete?
Mr. Werfel. I think by the end of this month, and we will
be able to submit it.
Mr. Denham. The private sector has been far ahead of the
Federal Government in the efficient use of space and creating
value out of failed assets. Do you believe there should be
experts in private real estate development on a BRAC-like
commission, and what type of composition do you see making up
the entire commission?
Mr. Werfel. I think there are absolutely--I think there are
probably three primary skill sets that we want to make sure are
represented on the board. Commercial real estate would be one
of them. Government management, so that we can understand how
the changing--so we can have expertise that understands how the
changing real estatefootprint intersects and impacts government
mission. And the third I think is community development, so
that we have expertise and understanding that when the Federal
Government does leave a space or change its presence in a given
locality, what the right approach is to make sure that the
impact on the community is a positive one.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
It is critical to establish key principles. So we have
chatted about that briefly. But the five areas that I outlined
in my opening testimony, I would just like to highlight each
principle that I think is key and see if you agree with each of
these being as part of the process. Consolidating the footprint
of Federal real estate. Do you think that is one of the key
principles?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely.
Mr. Denham. House more Federal employees in less overall
space.
Mr. Werfel. Yes.
Mr. Denham. Reduce our reliance on costly lease space.
Mr. Werfel. Agree.
Mr. Denham. Sell or develop or redevelop high-value assets
that are underutilized or too valuable for housing Federal
employees.
Mr. Werfel. Agreed.
Mr. Denham. And dispose of surplus property much quicker
than we have done in the past.
Mr. Werfel. Agreed. Those are very good principles.
Mr. Denham. Do you have others that you would include in
this?
Mr. Werfel. I think an important one--I think you hit most
of them. I think we really are looking at energy efficiency. I
think that is embedded in what you are saying. But I think it
might be worth emphasizing that in particular, the real estate
transformations that we are looking to achieve have multiple
benefits, not only housing more people in one location, but a
benefit of that as implied is energy efficiency, which results
in both positive environmentaloutcomes and operating cost
outcomes.
I don't know, Martha, if you have anything.
Ms. Johnson. I think that is a very important aspect of
this, and a growing one and one that has a high value to it.
Mr. Denham. And in energy efficiency, you are including the
tenant improvements that would need to be made to any of our
buildings and use that as part of our criteria of long-term
planning. It is either going to be so expensive to renovate a
50- or 100-year-old piece of property or better to sell off.
Mr. Werfel. That is correct.
Mr. Denham. I would just add one more, which I include
embedded into those five principles as well, is a justification
process; really, understanding what we are doing for the
taxpayers, justifying each building based on similar principles
that we have in the real estate market.
Ms. Johnson. Yes. I would include transparency in that so
everyone can understand this as much as possible.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Oftentimes, we make things way too
difficult. Thank you.
Right now, we have space utilization all over the map.
Space for employees can vary from 200 square feet per person to
over a thousand, without any consideration of actual need or
mission. How do we get more people in less space, standardized
space utilization, and promote things like hoteling?
Ms. Johnson. One of my favorite subjects. Frankly, it is a
many-pronged approach. I think we are at a time when work is
changing, and how we deliver on our missions is changing
tremendously and it is about capturing that cross hatch.
There is no question that the old rules about how much
space you needed to do your job are changing as people pick up
and move a great deal, need to be face-to-face with their
customers, or their grantees or whatever, and not necessarily
be sitting in a cubicle or, in the old industrial model, on an
assembly line.
So we are in a whole different world of work. I think that
there are a number of things, and GSA is eager and delighted to
be playing a strong role, and we need to promote hoteling,
telework, virtual work notions, and the performance management
that is associated with this. These are culture changes as much
as they are technology and policy changes; how to shift the
workforce so that it is comfortable with moving around and not
always reporting to duty in the same old way.
I think a large effort around consolidating and dealing
with excess property and so on sends another signal into the
system that we want to move away from traditionally thinking
about work places as just space. Space is not the only thing we
need to secure for people. We need to secure them technology
and other types of work environments.
So hoteling specifically, we have terrific software. We are
practicing with it in our own building. It is the kind of thing
you come in and you sign up for a cubicle or space for as much
time as you need and that then is reserved for you.
We are also doing some things like using our smart cards to
be sure we know who has come in and out of the building, so we
know actually how many people are trafficking in a building.
You might have a private office that is X number of square
feet, but if you are never there, it is not being utilized; it
is just showing your status and rank. So we are trying to
gather that kind of data so we really understand the work
patterns in agencies. These are dramatically changing. We have
seen in the private sector just in the last 10 years really
shift, and I think we are beginning to catch that wind, too.
Mr. Denham. Is there a specific modeling that you are going
after. Secondly, a brief response, since we are short on time
here; how do we incorporate these into the commission's
decisions or into the commission'sdecisionmaking process?
Ms. Johnson. I think it is appropriate to challenge
agencies around virtual work, around building the technology to
support it and to encourage the changing of personnel policies
that seem to be sometimes tightening the sense of what the work
space is.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
At this time, we will start our second round of
questioning. I will start with Ranking Member Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Chairman Denham.
I mentioned in my opening statement how concerned I was at
the way in which OMB regards real estate and lack of expertise,
frankly, in the agency on real estate and development, shown
time and again to this subcommittee and our full committee. The
reason, of course, is that OMB views real estate more as a
liability than an asset with value that can be extracted to the
benefit of the Federal Government.
The most poignant--outrageous even--example is the way
scoring is done. Scoring is done for real estate in the very
same way it is done for commodities. It makes the private
sector wonder if the Federal Government knows what it is doing.
And it puts GSA at a severe disadvantage.
I have a hard time understanding--and you both have got to
make me, if you can, understand how OMB, as presently
configured, with its present staff, could evaluate the
recommendations of an agency, the civilian board, composed of
real experts, all of whom have some kind of--will have some
kind, as you have testified, of important experience related to
its mission, how could the present OMB be the evaluator, given
its track record? I don't even want to cite the one I cited in
my testimony where, instead of looking at the cost benefit the
way--you don't even have to be in the real estate business to
do. First, OMB insisted upon keeping the Old Post Office
because there were a handful of Federal agencies located there
that could easily be tucked into any number of buildings. Then,
when it ran out of that excuse, it wanted to sell a historic
property, against Federal law. Then it just sat on it and
ignored the mandate of this committee. That is the extent of
its expertise. It was wasting Federal Government money. We were
pumping about $6 million into this building just to keep it
alive and breathing.
Now you come before us--or maybe you don't; OMB will
perhaps in the next panel--and say, make us the experts
evaluating what the civilian board of experts recommended. I
would like you to justify that proposal, if you can.
Mr. Werfel. Well, Congresswoman, just to clarify that, I am
representing the Office of Management and Budget today at this
hearing. So we are here on the first panel.
Ms. Norton. Well, by all means, speak up.
Mr. Werfel. I will. I certainly will. There is a lot in
your question. Let me start with the question about OMB
expertise. I think it is important--and let me point out that I
am a 14-year veteran at OMB, so I have been through a lot.
Ms. Norton. I certainly hope you are not the one that held
up the Old Post Office. If so, hold up your hand, so I can
identify you for the public.
Mr. Werfel. I did not have any personal involvement in the
Old Post Office. I would point out that I am not sure that I
would agree on the record until I could go back and confirm
with my staff.
Ms. Norton. Well, I am sure that on a bipartisan--you go
back on the record and tell the record this, that the
chairman--the full chairman of this committee at his first
hearing compelled all of us--it was actually Chairman Denham's
hearing. But the Old Post Office was of such concern to the
full chairman that he took all of us to the annex, freezing
annex, of the Old Post Office building for a hearing, where on
the record--and I am amazed you don't know about it if you come
here to testify today. On the record. You have to go back and
check that up. On the record, the agency, GSA had to come
before us--they who had nothing to do with holding up the Old
Post Office--and testify. This I must tell you was a total
insult to Congress.
You know why, Mr. Werfel? Because Congress passed a bill 3
years ago and told them to do it. And you have got to go back
and check? You ought to go back and check before you come
before this committee. Take our word for it.
The chairman was there, and I was there. Those are the
facts. If those are the facts, that you held up the Old Post
Office 3 years after we passed the bill, that you score real
estate in the very same way that you score pencils, why should
we give OMB the authority to supervise or evaluate what a board
of experts recommends with respect to real estate owned by the
Federal Government?
Mr. Werfel. Congresswoman, if you allow me the opportunity,
I think I can address each of your points.
First, I would like to start with OMB's expertise, since
you raised the issue. I think it is a mistake to assume that
OMB analyzes issues in a vacuum, with just OMB staff involved.
The benefit of OMB--and it's our position in government--is we
partner very closely----
Ms. Norton. Will you use GSA's expertise? GSA is your real
estate expert. Does your proposal contemplate using GSA's real
estate expert, the only expertise in the Federal Government, to
advise when you are doing the evaluation?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely. We have a partnership with GSA that
is ongoing and that has been involved in certain--in real
estate policy for decades.
Ms. Norton. Do you think that it would be advisable for
staff to be brought on in addition to assist in this way? The
reason I have to ask that is because you ignored GSA entirely
when they put the dollars and cents before you about the Old
Post Office. Frankly, Mr. Werfel, it was a complete outrage
because there was a complete and total precedent, the Tariff
Building, which in literally just a few years began to turn a
profit for the government.
We had GSA before us time and time again and their answer
was, well, it is at the OMB; it is at the OMB. Ultimately, we
are sure you are the culprits because a statute had to be
passed. And we have heard back some of the OMB's rationale for
not moving ahead to make the highest and best use of real
estate; for example, that you had agencies with less than 50
employees there and therefore you couldn't rehabilitate the Old
Post Office in order to reap a benefit for the taxpayers.
I know I am over my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I think the time has expired.
I would ask for a response. I would just remind this
committee that we plan on being very involved in establishing
the criteria with the administration in making sure that we see
eye-to-eye as we move forward on this.
But the whole reason of setting a new commission up is to
make sure that the travesty that has happened here over years
of--over decades of a property sitting vacant and having to
spend over $6 million a year in costs annually and the fact
that it took a bill coming out of Congress to get GSA to move,
we want to take these types of challenges out of the process
and go to a commission.
If you could do a quick response.
Mr. Werfel. I appreciate the opportunity to respond. And
there are just a couple of points I want to make sure that are
stated on the record. First of all, it is my firm belief that
the decisionmaking process and the analytics that are done at
OMB on a daily basis have extreme integrity. And the notion
that we would ignore directions from Congress or do anything
that wasn't in the best interest of the taxpayer is completely
inconsistent with every experience I have had at the Office of
Management and Budget.
From an external view, I am sure there can be frustrations.
And I understand those frustrations. And you voicing those
frustrations is an important part of us improving our work on
behalf of the President and on behalf of citizens.
But I want to make sure that I state clearly that any
analysis that has gone on in OMB on any issue, in particular
real estate or other management issues, is done with a
tremendous dedication to public service and the right public
policy outcomes.
Regarding how we would conduct ourselves with respect to
the Civilian Property Realignment Board, I think one of the key
points that I want to reemphasize is that we would closely
partner with a broad base of expertise we have in the
government today, that being GSA; it also being dedicated
professionals throughout the government, other agencies,
whether they be the Defense Department, the State Department,
the Department of Homeland Security, and I could go on, to
evaluate the proposals that the board would set forward in the
same way that Congress will evaluate them.
The way the process works is the Director of OMB will
review those proposals and, just like Congress, will have the
ability to say yes or no to the entire slate and not line-item
veto. We will leverage expertise from around government in the
best way we know how to evaluate whether those proposals will
go forward. So I just want to be clear that OMB alone will not
be analyzing the activities of the board. It will be a
partnership across the Federal Government.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
I wanted to just ask some questions relating back to my
time in the State Senate dealing with the same issue. The
critics--most vocal critics of any commission, any BRAC
commission, have always said, why are you going to have a fire
sale in a bad real estate market? My goal has never been to
have a fire sale; it is actually to get the greatest value for
our properties. How do we ensure we do that?
Mr. Werfel. I think you are right, Congressman. I think a
fire sale is certainly something to be avoided. I think the
tension here is that in the one regard where it is hard to
speculate what the real estate market is going to look like. It
may be that in certain situations 5 or 10 years from now, if we
wait, we are going to get a worse price than if we sell today.
That is always the possibility.
Mr. Denham. You do have some properties that, regardless of
whether we are at the highest market or lowest market, are so
unique or the location is such that it is always going to be in
demand.
Mr. Werfel. That is true. I believe that there are assets
within the Federal inventory that can be sold in 2011, and it
is the right decision for the taxpayer, setting aside potential
speculation that the real estate market may change just because
there are certain segments of the U.S. economy and the
geography where the real estate market is still somewhat strong
and there is still a possibility for positive return on
investment and significant benefit. One of the key points here
that the board is going to weigh is that the proceeds from the
sales not only are important to cut the deficit, but they also
will be used to position the government to avail ourselves of
further opportunities. I mentioned earlier that one of the
barriers to success here is the financial disincentives that
exist.
It sometimes costs a little bit of money to open up the
door to a lot of savings. And that little bit of money, well,
it is all depending on your perspective, but a modest amount of
money has been often not within our reach or grasp.
So we may see the board make a decision that says look, we
might not be getting top dollar for this asset today but we
need the proceeds in order to open up the door to a broader set
and a different set of real estate opportunities that will take
place over the next 3, 5, 7 years. Again, it is the board's
determination to make these challenging decisions, and we
believe that having a board like the BRAC Commission will put
us in a much better position to move through these issues and
start making real progress.
Mr. Denham. Now one of the biggest challenges that I have
always seen faced when we look at all of our properties or
liquidation of properties or even a BRAC Commission is actually
getting the right data, making sure every agency is complying
with your requests so that there aren't properties that are out
there hiding or agencies that are hoarding properties.
How do you expect to make sure that we always have up-to-
date property lists, as well as evaluations from every
department?
Mr. Werfel. We have a process that exists today. In fact, I
was happy to see that GAO commented favorably on the progress
we have made in their testimony regarding the Federal
inventory. And we started at a place prior to 2003 where our
inventory was spotty and incomplete, and now we have a detailed
tracking of just about every constructed or separate asset that
the Federal Government owns or leases, and GAO is now--and they
will testify in the next panel, but in their testimony they
indicate that they have seen a dramatic--an improvement in the
reliability of that information such that they now feel they
can rely on that inventory.
But more work is needed, and we are looking to refine that
inventory each and every day. You mentioned utilization before.
You know, right now our utilization is captured on a very
binary, is it under utilized or is it fully utilized. And we
are moving more towards a specific quantifiable metric of how
much it is utilized and that is going to help us and help the
board make smarter decisions going forward.
Mr. Denham. And you have possession of that list today?
Mr. Werfel. The list is maintained by GSA, yes.
Mr. Denham. We have asked for that informally several
times. We would like to make a formal request today as a
committee that we receive that list. It is my understanding
this list or a similar list was given to the Senate--2 months
ago? Quite awhile ago, and this committee continues to wait. So
we would make that formal request to you today.
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely. And any real estate information
from the inventory that has been provided to your colleagues in
the Senate we absolutely commit we will provide to you in short
order.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And it should be more up to date
according to your testimony, that we should be able to get the
new and improved list, whatever that may be?
Mr. Werfel. That is correct. The asset information that we
provided to the Senate--and just to clarify, they asked for
information regarding our excess asset list and we can
certainly provide that. I think at the time we provided it, it
was 2009 data. We should be able to provide you the 2010 data.
Mr. Denham. We are not just looking for excess or surplus,
we would like to see an inclusive list, the same list that we
are going to be asking our new commission to look at and
evaluate, we would like to evaluate that as well.
Mr. Werfel. And Congressman, on that let me just comment
that that list has not been provided to the Senate. And the
reason is, is because there are security issues associated with
the entire footprint of the Federal assets inventory. Right now
that information is maintained in a system by GSA that has a
lot of controls and IT security surrounding it. And the reason
is, is because our colleagues at the Defense Department and the
Department of Homeland Security have identified certain
security risks associated with the public disclosure of the
entire Federal real estate footprint.
Mr. Denham. DOD properties or other properties?
Mr. Werfel. All properties, including energy properties
that might involve nuclear activities or other things like
that. So you have got some sensitivity in some portions of our
inventory. That is not to say that we don't want to work with
you to make sure that you have the information you need to do
your job as chair of the subcommittee, it is just an important
element that we need to work through with you.
Mr. Denham. I would assume you would be able to segregate
that list from top secret properties versus properties that
were open for public review?
Mr. Werfel. It is something we certainly need to work with
you on.
Mr. Denham. And then I would also assume that this
committee with our top secret clearance would be able to
evaluate at least in an informal process all the properties as
well.
Mr. Werfel. I think that is something we can work towards a
logistical solution on. I will say that the number of
properties provided to the Senate so far number 80,000. So we
will get you that list. It will be a good starting point, but
certainly we understand your concerns and we want to work with
you towards a solution.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. We are aware of course that when we say
properties everybody may see dollars and cents dancing in their
heads. But GSA owns warehouses, it owns of course commercial
space, it owns laboratories. Of the properties that you have
sold, would you give us some sense of what kinds of properties
these are? Are these commercial office space properties that
somebody is going to perhaps use for that purpose? Are these
warehouses? When you say ``properties'' that word can hide a
lot when it comes to funds. Were you able to get the amount of
money you wanted? Any amount looks good to us, but did you
evaluate how much you thought the property should bring against
how much it brought? Those are the kinds of questions I have.
Ms. Johnson. Certainly by the time we get to the point of
entering a negotiated public sale we are very clear on what the
value of that asset is and what would be a reasonable
negotiation to get to. And there is a whole range of property,
it is office buildings, warehouses, it is also tracts of land.
And there is an individual and a localized market for many of
these things, although, yes, government property at times is
unique and has some special aspects to it that are also part of
the valuation. So I can give you a more detailed list of the
breakdown of what we have disposed of in the last X number of
years.
Ms. Norton. That would be very, very helpful. You know, how
much of this is land, the places where it is located. I
mentioned St. Elizabeths. You know, there might have been
people who got up and said why don't we just get rid of that?
It certainly was a blight on the District of Columbia. That
would have been the most foolish decision we ever made.
Ms. Johnson. Right.
Ms. Norton. As you say, it covers so many different kinds
of properties that I am afraid Congress just sees examples of
the office buildings up here and thinks of how good they look
and just see dollars and cents just flowing in to bring down
the deficit. I think we ought to get a realistic sense of what
these properties are and whether you got full dollar for the
properties based on your own negotiation.
Ms. Johnson. Certainly, and it goes to my point about
transparency. I think the more people can see what kind of
portfolio we have they can really appreciate what we are
talking about in real terms, whether it is proceeds or whether
it is operating expenses.
Ms. Norton. Understanding the locations would be
interesting as well. Properties in land scarce places like big
cities might be very different from properties located in a
rural area that was once very much more populated than it is
today, for example?
Ms. Johnson. Yes. You are always threading that needle
whether or not it is a fire sale and whether or not in that
local real estate market there is going to be a tipping that
you will do in that market because of size or the impact.
Ms. Norton. What would you do in that case?
Ms. Johnson. Well, I think we have to evaluate each of
those and be very, very careful to include the community,
include all the public interest groups that are registering
questions and concerns, and that is part of where this process
can get.
Ms. Norton. So if the Federal Government were to sell a
piece of property in an area it could affect real estate values
throughout the area?
Ms. Johnson. I think often--I think the number is we have
over 1 million square feet in over 40 cities. So you think
about the impact and the size of our footprint, yes, we do need
to be very sensitive to that. And it is about communicating, it
is about transparencies, holding the open town meetings or
whatever so people know what is going on and get their
questions answered.
Ms. Norton. A final question on the Old Post Office. Ms.
Johnson, when the GSA released its request for expression of
interest 3 years ago, this was after the statute had passed,
then all work stopped. So the people had spent a lot of money
offering expressions of interest, and GSA simply was silent and
didn't move.
In light of that experience, very disappointing experience,
I am going to have to ask you what assurances you can give this
committee that once the solicitation period for the RFP on the
Old Post Office is complete that GSA will be allowed to proceed
in the development of the Old Post Office and how long you
think that will take.
I am also asking Mr. Werfel whether OMB is now out of it
and hands off of the process that has proceeded at GSA. So
first I want to ask Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. The RFP was issued in the middle of March and
we are expecting responses, the deadline is in July. So we are
looking at a couple months where people are putting together
their proposals. And we will--I am quite committed. I have been
hearing about the Old Post Office for a long time. I would be
delighted if we could move forward on this, and I will
certainly be encouraging our people to be expeditious in
assessing what those proposals are and working with the various
partners to keep on moving.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Werfel, does OMB have anything to say now
that a process, a statutory process, is under way? Again people
are being required to spend private capital in order to
compete. Does OMB have anything further to say about this
competitive process under way at the GSA?
Mr. Werfel. Well, I am certainly pleased it has started and
the fact the RFP started has issued I think is an important
obvious milestone that we are moving ahead. I think OMB's role
going forward just to work and partner with GSA to make sure
that the process unfolds in a way that the best interest of the
taxpayer is met and whatever outcome happens for the property.
Those are the types of things that we will work with----
Ms. Norton. What role would you have, Mr. Werfel? These
people have to decide under statutory process that even--that
is kept virtually under lock and key who wins the proposal
based on competitive criteria. As I have indicated to you and
you have not been able to demonstrate otherwise, this is not
OMB's strong suit. So I want to know the exact nature of your
partnering on an issue where you have not been a very good
guardian of the taxpayers' money in partnering on properties
like the Old Post Office.
Mr. Werfel. We have certainly hit a point in the process
right now where you are in a competitive procurement and it is
important at that point to OMB to distance ourselves from the
specific agency decisionmaking process. But again, I think that
as a global matter to the extent GSA requests any advice or
consultation with OMB on the process going forward within
bounds and making sure we are not involved in a particular
procurement, we would assist. You know, the specifics of our
partnership are we each bring different expertise to the table
and together we hopefully come out with the right public policy
outcome in each case.
Ms. Norton. This is the table where the statute does not
contemplate your attendance. If this committee were to find out
that you were interfering with statutory competitive processes,
OMB is who would be in trouble. And I warn you because OMB has
had a record, has been disgraceful.
Mr. Chairman, I want to say it has been so disgraceful that
I will not support any legislation without certain kinds of
guarantees in it. First of all, Mr. Werfel, I do not, in
response to your response to me, question the good faith of
OMB. I don't question your hard work. I question OMB's good
judgment and I question OMB's expertise in real estate. And
there is nobody who has served on this committee for any period
of time who would not have many examples that document that.
In light of that, I will not support any legislation that
does not require OMB to have expert staff in real estate, not
only, Mr. Chairman, because of the new civilian board that is
contemplated, but because this committee I have seen for 20
years hindered in carrying out the taxpayers' work because of
the OMB, who is supposed to be the guardian of the taxpayer. So
if all the administration is asking me to do is to give to OMB,
the ranking member will not support that legislation without
some part of a legislation that requires OMB to bring on board
staff with expert and development expertise, not only because
of its intervention in--required intervention in the civilian
board, but because of the way OMB has handled real estate
throughout my 20 years of service on this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And we share a bipartisan view of
that and we will make sure there is a guarantee in this bill as
it moves forward. We certainly want your support on that.
I do have a few questions regarding the financing of this.
In your testimony you talk about the net proceeds and how it
will offset the up front costs. In the 2012 budget I think it
scored at $8 billion to set the Commission itself up. Can you
explain in greater detail how that offset would be funded
directly back to having an overall fund--the administration's
proposal on the impact of GSA's fund?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely, Congressman. I believe the total
appropriation that we are seeking to get the board up and
running is $87 million. A great significant portion of that is
to fund certain capital investment----
Mr. Denham. 87 or 8.7?
Mr. Werfel. 87, $87 million. Let me explain that a great
majority of that again is to finance relocation costs or other
types of real estate transformations that are needed in the
short term to trigger that first set of savings opportunities,
because once you trigger that first set of savings
opportunities, the fund becomes self-financing going forward
and that is at least our vision.
So let's say you were to in the first set of
recommendations expend 40 million of the dollars in order to
pay for the associated costs of doing the first set of
recommendations. Let's say those first set of recommendations
yield back $3 billion in proceeds. So you have just spent $40
million to establish a revenue back to the Federal Government
of billions of dollars. Sixty percent of those go right to
deficit reduction, 40 percent come back to the board for the
fund. And now they are moving forward with a fund that is going
to enable them to do even more broader transformations that
enable an even larger footprint of savings, and that is the
vision. So we hope this is a one-time appropriation.
Mr. Denham. Is there a cap on that fund?
Mr. Werfel. I am not aware there is a cap on the fund.
Mr. Denham. But obviously at 40 percent you could see----
Mr. Werfel. Yes. At 40 percent it is a minimum of 60
percent back to deficit reduction. The board at their
discretion could change that. And then Congress moving forward
of course, as we have experienced with this, could change the
percentage as well.
Mr. Denham. And the DOD used an accounting system called
COBRA to evaluate the cost and savings to assist in developing
its recommendations to the BRAC Commission. Do you believe
COBRA is the best system or do you have another system that you
would be recommending for the accounting aspect of this?
Mr. Werfel. I think we would look at COBRA as a starting
point. But we might need to make adjustments to the system
given the civilian footprint has just different parameters
associated with it. So we would start there, but we would look
potentially at modifications.
Mr. Denham. And on the lease side of things obviously there
are a number of glaring examples of leases that are at least
questionable, others that are just an outright waste. One of
them I would like to highlight is last year the Securities and
Exchange Council signed a 10-year lease for 900,000 square feet
of prime office space here in DC that it did not need.
Unfortunately, our committee has seen similar types of bad
decisions by other agencies that have managed to get
independent leasing authority apart from GSA. We could get a
bill passed and go through this process only to see those
efforts undermined by future agency decisions.
How would the administration's proposal affect future
decisions in Federal agencies and making sure there is not an
agency out there doing some type of rogue lease that puts
taxpayers accountable for hundreds of thousands or millions of
dollars?
Mr. Werfel. I think you have got to fight the war on two
fronts. I think first of all working with GSA we need to make
sure that we are putting up the appropriate roadblocks to
agencies entering into costly and noneconomically smart leases.
I also think that the board activities would----
Mr. Denham. Are you saying redefine GSA's authority so that
all leasing authority goes under GSA?
Mr. Werfel. No.
Mr. Denham. Because that is part of the challenge now is
you have agencies out there doing their own thing----
Mr. Werfel. I am not suggesting that as a particular
proposal. What I am suggesting is that GSA can play--and Martha
can speak to this--can play an important role. As agencies come
to them for GSA to serve as their leasing agent, that GSA can
push back and make sure that we are only moving forward on
lease arrangements that make economical sense.
Ms. Johnson. Can I just add, one of the things that I hope
I can establish during my tenure at GSA is ever increasing
respect for our capabilities and our expertise so that agencies
turn to us because they know that we can provide the support
and the expertise that they need. There is clearly a dispersed
authority and we would like to be sure that we are playing as
strong and as competent a role and sending the message that
they don't need to do it themselves. The agencies really,
although they could, I think they need to focus on their
mission and let us take up some of that work. I don't want that
mandated, but I would like it to be a result of our competence
and visibility and our expertise.
Mr. Denham. If it is not mandated, how do you make sure
that this type of lease doesn't happen again in the future?
Ms. Johnson. Well, I obviously can't make sure, but I have
to say in the long run we went down that mandated road for a
long time. I think GSA is better if we have to fight to show
that we are good. And I believe that we should be out there
demonstrating our competence and taking pride in our
accomplishments. And I need to be out, we all need to be out
sharing with the rest of the government what we can do for
them.
Mr. Denham. Obviously transparency is a very important
issue, but accountability is just as important. I think this
committee would be looking in the future to go to one person.
If there is this type of lease outs there, and we are wasting
billions of dollars of taxpayers' money, I want to go to one
person to say how did this happen. And if you do not have the
authority, and maybe GSA is not the property agency, but I
would like to see one agency that is held accountable to all of
these leases. Not creating another level of bureaucracy, just
the accountability. Maybe it is final signoff, maybe its
helping to harness our buying power. But if have you an agency
that is able to go out and secure 900,000 square feet of prime
office space here in DC on not a 1-year lease or 6-month, but
on a 10-year lease without having--I would think a lease that
big would warrant the President knowing or having some type of
signoff on it. That is a big lease without having any
justification behind it.
Ms. Johnson. I understand that our Office of Governmentwide
Policy has some capability to be a bit of--to be sure that the
processes are being followed and manage a lot of the reporting.
So perhaps that could be one way to consider how you get a
single picture on things. I think it is very complex to think
about--I believe it is complex to think about agencies--to
think about it all coming in in a mandated way into GSA. I just
believe that that would put us into that monopolistic role, and
I don't think you ultimately get the kind of down the road
respect and performance that you need to get by having the pull
and push among the agencies to understand it is the best place
to go.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I think we need a better
understanding between us, and I look forward to working with
you on that as we develop the criteria for this commission.
Ms. Johnson. I would be delighted, thank you.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Hanna, do you have any questions this
morning?
Mr. Hanna. What do you think the fundamental flaw is behind
a decision process like that? How does it happen that we could
rent 900,000 square feet for 10 years? What anecdotal ideas,
information do you have?
Ms. Johnson. I believe that there is a--that expertise is
spread rather broadly and not concentrated as it needs to be.
This goes to the whole acquisition workforce. We have a lot of
contracting people all over the government, and it needs to be
a much tighter community and better woven together. I think our
expertise is dispersed, that we have expertise in GSA and it is
one of the few concentrations of it and the kind of level that
we have is I think is a real asset for the government. And I
think that is something that if I were in management in another
agency I would say why am I doing this? Why don't I turn to
them? And I want to be sure that they know that they can.
Mr. Hanna. Do you have any idea of how widespread something
like this might be? 900,000 square feet is a glaring example
but it isn't necessarily a theme. Have you seen it other places
in your tenure?
Ms. Johnson. I believe our governmentwide policy people
could probably give me a little bit of perspective on that, and
I would be happy to share it with you for the record.
Mr. Hanna. I would appreciate that. Thank you.
Ms. Johnson. Certainly.
Mr. Hanna. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Norton. This will be our final
round of questions.
Ms. Norton. The chairman has asked a very important
question essentially when he brought up the SEC bill debacle.
He was asking whether or not the Federal Government mandate
that the GSA manage all lease space, whether that mandate,
which is a matter of Federal law--I am asking staff to find me
the words, particularly in light of your answer, Ms. Johnson.
If you have to compete for what the statute says, I would like
to know how many agencies like SEC have their own authority to
lease space?
Ms. Johnson. Not all that many. I understand it is a couple
of the financial agencies and it is by law. I can get you the
list.
Ms. Norton. Yeah, I will tell you why it is by law,
probably because somebody put it in appropriations, probably
some Senator that they should go out and do. They probably were
frankly working for some developer, and that is not in the
taxpayers' interest.
Let me say to you, Mr. Werfel, you would have thought that
the OMB would have been on top of this one and if you want to
intervene into business of agencies which are in the leasing
business. I would want to know how in the world SEC over a
weekend could have on a sole source basis leased almost 1
million I think--900,000 square feet in the most expensive
property in the District of Columbia? It is a property, by the
way, that many of us see as the kind of property that would be
useful for the increasing need of the Federal Government for
secured properties. This is a brand new rehabilitated space
where the developer rehabilitated it specifically because the
developer saw that the Federal Government increasingly wants
absolutely secure space for some agencies.
Now the last time I looked, Mr. Werfel, Arcadia was much
interested in SEC, but because they have independent authority
they went out and leased almost 1 million square feet only
because they have no expertise. And they did it on a sole
source basis, which is in violation of Federal law. I don't
know why if OMB wants to do something it isn't putting its
considerable expertise, whatever it is, and I certainly would
think it would fall into this category to see to it that
agencies don't in fact engage in this manner.
As I understand it, they have gone around the city and
found 600,000--there are agencies that they believe will be
able to use 600,000 feet. They don't know anything about this,
and I want to know if Ms. Johnson is helping. And they still
have on their hands at least 200,000 square feet.
So I need to ask both of you what you know about the SEC
lease, because the taxpayers of the United States of America
are paying for this lease every moment that you do not find
some real use for it or find somebody else to use it. What do
you know about what is happening with this? I guess since you
are out of it, Ms. Johnson, and would like to compete for it, I
guess the answer goes to Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Werfel. Well, I stated in response to your earlier
question, and before I get to the full answer I just want to
restate because I think it is important to specify that OMB
does not get involved in particular procurement activity, it is
very important that we stay independent from that and allow
that process to move forward.
Congresswoman, I share your frustration and one of the
reasons why the President is proposing a major change to how we
deal with real estate is because you will be able to find
throughout government instances of inefficient and poor lease
decisions that are made.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Werfel, would you support and, Ms. Johnson,
would you support the notion that in light of the consolidation
going on and the President's mandate that one agency should be
responsible for all leasing in the Federal Government?
Mr. Werfel. I think I would consider that as an option to
evaluate against other options to address the problem.
Ms. Norton. What would be another option? The public
building statute--GSA was set up in 1949, in 1959 Congress came
to the conclusion that special expertise was necessary to
manage the properties of the United States of America. That
mandate included all civilian properties. As you indicate, the
only exceptions have been because somebody slipped something
into an appropriation. Now you are evaluating and realigning
how you deal with real estate. In light of that mandate of the
President of the United States, should we not go back to the
mandate of the public building statute in the first place that
says unmistakably that one agency shall manage leasing and
development of Federal properties? Would you at least--can we
at least get a bottom line agreement on that from you in light
of the President's mandate for consolidation and realignment?
Mr. Werfel. Again, I think that there are important policy
implications to consider before we would----
Ms. Norton. Name some. I am open.
Mr. Werfel. I will, I will. If you will indulge me, let me
just draw an analogy that there has been in debate, for
example, in another part of government around debt collection,
whether Treasury should collect all the debt on behalf of all
the Federal agencies and the agencies shouldn't collect their
own debt. We don't have that model. We have one in which
agencies can collect their own debt. And in the nineties and
the 2000s some agencies got to be better than Treasury at
collecting debt. And Treasury raised its game as a result and
now is better for it and may be now positioned to consolidate
all the debt collection activity.
Ms. Norton. No, no. Do you know anything about real estate,
Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. I believe I do.
Mr. Denham. We are out of time here.
Ms. Norton. Just let me indicate this, perhaps collecting
money is something that agencies have proved they are adept at.
I have cited to you the SEC case which is emblematic, it seems
to me, of what happens when you give an agency that does not
have specific expertise a very weighty taxpayer function.
Ms. Johnson, would you at least be willing if this
committee mandated it to manage all the real estate leasing and
for that matter development of Federal properties?
Ms. Johnson. I have no problem with assuming the authority
for that. I would believe that there would be cases where our
designating that authority into the hands of an agency would be
a responsible move. I would take the example of the Forest
Service where they have minor leases that they need to be
negotiating all the time and they are right there on top of it.
And if we deem them to have the appropriate staff, and so on, I
would like not to preclude the possibility for some of those
kinds of flexibilities. I just believe that having only one
agent essentially handling all leasing is not necessarily the--
--
Ms. Norton. I tell you what, Ms. Johnson, you are
contradicting the statute itself.
Mr. Chairman, I believe this is an opportunity, the
President says he wants to consolidate and he wants to realign.
We can't just say to the President, OK, we will do what you
want to do. We have got to put into this bucket the committee's
own experience. The committee's own experience has been, Ms.
Johnson, that when an agency whose mandate is something
unrelated to property management the taxpayers are at risk.
They are given authority to do something they don't know how to
do, that the taxpayers are at risk. And again, I am not going
to support legislation that simply leaves OMB and GSA exactly
where they were and expect a different result.
I just want to lay that on the record. I have been thrilled
to see this proposal come from the President. I can only hope
that his agents are prepared to carry out the full intent of
that proposal. If you are not, I think the only way to do it in
light of the SEC debacle, Mr. Chairman, is to mandate it.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Out of the sake of time we would ask
for written response on that. But this is certainly an area we
plan to dive much deeper in, whether that is something that is
included in this bill or within follow-up hearings through this
committee, but the leasing authority we believe there are a
number of things that can be done, whether putting a cap on it
so that--you know, I think the current cap is just under $3
million for the properties that we do or the agencies we do see
come through this committee. There is no reason that we
couldn't have a cap on all properties. What has happened with
SEC is atrocious, and certainly the sole source contract, as
Ms. Norton has brought up, but the fact it was done I believe
over a weekend, it was certainly a very, very quick process.
You don't ever see government move that quick, especially done
on a weekend away from this committee.
So specifically what I would like to see on the SEC portion
of this is where the current investigation is right now. I want
to know if anybody has been fired over this.
And then lastly, what are we doing with the space now? Are
we stuck in the contract? Are we going to utilize that for
other areas? Are we getting rid of our leases in the process?
But I would hope that we would be able to get that
information without having to do a hearing on it as well. I
know a number of committee members have an extensive amount of
questions as it pertains to the SEC, but it certainly relates
to the overall recommendations of what this committee will have
on future legislation.
Ms. Johnson, would you care to comment before I go to my
final question?
Ms. Johnson. No, I am fine.
Mr. Denham. And just finally, we have appreciated your
willingness to work with us on this, your testimony, but as
mentioned, we are also looking at drafting legislation, both
myself as well as the committee. We would like to work with you
to ensure that the criteria we are combining together and
working in a bipartisan fashion. Just want to reemphasize again
are you willing to work with us on that legislation, Mr.
Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. We will look forward to hopefully
getting that--we talked somewhat about a timeline. We would
like to expedite that timeline and certainly reap the $15
billion-plus in savings to help us out in this budget process.
Thank you for your testimony today.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Werfel. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. We are going to stay strict to the 5-minute
timeline as we are starting to get very late in the process. We
certainly have a lot to talk about. We could talk all day on
doing a better job with our properties and liquidation as well
as leases. But at this time I would like to invite Mr. David
Wise, Director of Physical Infrastructure Team, U.S. Government
Accountability Office, who is here today, along with Mr. Brian
Lepore, Director of Defense Capabilities and Management Issues
at GAO, and the Honorable Anthony Principi, former Secretary,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and former Chairman of the
2005 Defense Base Realignment and Closure Commission.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Since your testimony has been made part of the record the
subcommittee would ask you to limit your testimony to 5
minutes, your oral testimony.
Mr. Wise.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID J. WISE, DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; ACCOMPANIED BY
BRIAN J. LEPORE, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE CAPABILITIES AND MANAGEMENT
ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND THE HON.
ANTHONY J. PRINCIPI, FORMER SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS AND FORMER CHAIRMAN, 2005 DEFENSE BASE
REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE COMMISSION

Mr. Wise. Chairman Denham, Ranking Member Norton and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on our work related to excess and underutilized
Federal real property held by Federal agencies as well as our
work with the BRAC process. My testimony will focus on the
civilian sector while my colleague Brian Lepore's testimony
will focus on the military side.
My testimony today will discuss, (1), obstacles to
effectively managing Federal real property and, (2), actions
the government has taken and a framework proposed in the
President's 2012 budget to overcome those obstacles.
As we previously testified before the subcommittee, the
Federal Government occupies more owned and leased buildings
than it needs. In fiscal year 2009, 24 landholding agencies,
including DOD, reported 45,190 underutilized buildings, with a
total of 341 million square feet, or 1,830 more buildings than
they reported the previous fiscal year. These underutilized
buildings cost $1.66 billion annually to operate and are
potentially valuable.
We designated the management of Federal real property as a
high-risk area in January 2003 in part because of excess and
underutilized property. That year we found that the Federal
Government faced a number of obstacles to effectively manage
its real property. These included the lack of strategic focus,
the lack of reliable real property data, legal limitations such
as public conveyance, environmental requirements and
stakeholder influence, such as local governments, advocacy
groups and the private sector.
Since that time the government has also made significant
progress. For example, the land holding agencies have
established asset management plans, standardized real property
data reporting and adopted various performance measures to
track progress. In our 2011 high-risk report we found
significant improvement in this area. Consequently, we removed
the data element of real property management from the high-risk
list.
In 2007, we recommended that OMB assist agencies by
developing an action plan to address the key problems
associated with decisions related to unneeded Federal real
property, including stakeholder influences. OMB agreed with the
recommendation but has yet to implement it. However, the
administration's recently proposed framework, the Civilian
Property Realignment Act, CPRA, is somewhat responsive to this
recommendation in that it addresses both legal limitations and
stakeholder influences in real property decisionmaking.
According to the proposal, the purpose of CPRA would be in
part to streamline the current legal framework for disposing of
unneeded civilian real property. The proposal itself, however,
does not describe how the streamlining would be accomplished.
Regarding stakeholder influences, CPRA would create an
independent board to recommend Federal properties for disposal
or consolidation after receiving recommendations from civilian
landholding agencies. Grouping all disposal and consolidation
decisions into one list that Congress would vote on in its
entirety could help mitigate local stakeholder influences. In
addition, CPRA would also help to reduce the government's
overreliance on leasing by recommending that the government
consolidate operations from leased space to owned space were
efficient.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my testimony. After Mr.
Lepore's testimony, we will be happy to answer the
subcommittee's questions. Thank you.
Mr. Lepore. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Norton, and
members of the committee, I am delighted to be here today to
present to you some of our observations on the Base Realignment
and Closure, or BRAC, process. This may help you as you
consider the Civilian Property Realignment Board proposal.
My testimony today is based on the work that we are doing
monitoring implementation of the BRAC process and reporting on
the BRAC process.
Now to the first of my two points, the major elements of
BRAC. DOD begins the process by developing closure and
realignment recommendations and submitting them to the
independent BRAC Commission. The Commission can approve,
modify, reject or add to the recommendations. The Commission
held hearings, voted on each recommendation, and reported to
the President. The President could disapprove the Commission's
report and send it back to the Commission for revision or
approve all of the recommendations in whole and send them to
Congress. He did the latter.
Next, Congress had 45 days to enact a joint resolution of
disapproval or all of the recommendations would become binding.
They are all binding. In authorizing the round, Congress
required DOD to implement the recommendations within 6 years
from the date of submission to the Congress. The key similarity
between BRAC and the Civilian Property Realignment Board
proposal is the all or nothing approach after the Commission's
report to the President.
Now to my second point, DOD's key steps to develop the
recommendations. DOD established the round's goals promoting
jointness in transformation, reducing excess infrastructure and
saving money. DOD proposed and Congress approved the criteria
that was used to develop those recommendations. DOD used the
cost of base realignment actions, or COBRA, model to estimate
cost and savings and provide a common way to compare candidate
recommendations. And finally, DOD developed a common analytical
framework and organizational structure to better ensure
consistent application of the criteria in developing the
recommendations.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared remarks and we
would be happy to answer any questions that you or the other
members of the subcommittee may have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Principi.
Mr. Principi. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Holmes Norton, and members of the committee. I welcome your
invitation to comment on the question of whether a civilian
BRAC Commission can consolidate the office space and save
taxpayers billions of dollars. The simple answer is yes, if
structured properly.
The most important underlying question is whether the
administration and the legislative branches can afford not to
execute a civilian BRAC to relieve itself of costly and
unneeded infrastructure in order to achieve badly needed cost
savings to the Federal budget. I commend the administration for
their proposal to establish a BRAC-like process for Federal
civilian infrastructure, and I commend GAO for identifying over
45,000 Federal buildings that are underutilized and for their
indispensable support of the 2005 BRAC Commission that I
chaired.
As we have all learned, the process does not come without
pain at the Federal level in deciding what to close or
consolidate at the congressional level and fielding constituent
concerns and at the local community level. There will be tough
choices in tough times.
My comments today will be addressed from my experience as
former Chair of the 2005 BRAC Commission and former Secretary
of Veterans Affairs.
I think it would be helpful to briefly review why a BRAC
process was even necessary. Prior to 1988, the Secretary of
Defense for the most part implemented his own base closure
program with minimal consultation with the military departments
or the Congress. In 1988, the DOD budget declined for 3
straight years and was predicted to decline further. To ensure
that scarce DOD resources would be devoted to more pressing
operational missions and investments needed rather than
maintain its unneeded facilities, Secretary of Defense Frank
Carlucci chartered the Defense Commission on BRAC that Congress
enacted into law.
In 1988, that provided the statutory basis for this one-
time approach. The Secretary of Defense appointed the
Commission, the Commission reported to him, most hearings and
votes were closed, and there was little public information
about how the Commission arrived at its recommendations.
There were many critics of the 1988 BRAC who decried the
lack of transparency and independence of the Commission and
felt the closure list unfairly targeted facilities located in
congressional districts of Members out of favor with the
administration.
It was not until 1990 that Congress passed the Defense Base
Closure and Realignment Act, when Secretary of Defense Cheney
unilaterally proposed closing 35 bases and realigning 20
others. That act brought transparency to the process and
independence to the Commission. Consequently, there were BRAC
Commissions in 1991, 1993, 1995, and 2005 that have withstood
the test of time, effectiveness, and cost savings.
BRAC is a major undertaking, to be sure, but if done right
it can be as open, deliberative, inclusive and nonpartisan a
process as I have seen in my professional career. I strived to
make it so in 2005. I can assure you that it was not an easy
process.
On May 13, 2005, the BRAC Commission received a total of
190 recommendations from DOD that would in effect close or
realign 837 military activities nationwide. Not only would the
recommendations double in number from the previous BRAC round,
but they were greater than all previous BRACs combined. We had
4 months to complete our mission. Over the course of those 4
months, our commissioners and staff made 182 visits to 173
military installations. We conducted 20 regional hearings and
another 20 to legislative and deliberative hearings as well as
hundreds of meetings with community representatives and elected
officials, and then prepared a 338-page report of our findings
and recommendations to reach the President and Congress. In my
view, the lessons learned from this can be applied to other
Federal agencies with unneeded infrastructure.
Turning to the current administration's proposal to
establish a BRAC-like process, I strongly endorse the proposed
Civilian Property Realignment Act and would suggest several
changes for your consideration. In reviewing the
administration's proposed legislation, I find the purpose
clear. In particular, I find myself in agreement with the
purpose to enable Federal agencies to retain and reinvest
savings and sale proceeds. In my view, this will provide an
incentive to these agencies to identify costly or unneeded
facilities.
Secondly, the act would create a seven-person Civilian
Property Realignment Board to assess the recommendations
submitted by the Federal agencies. In addition to the need to
clearly spell out the qualifications for appointment to the
board, I would strongly recommend that to ensure the board's
independence the President appoint five members, including its
chairman, while the majority and minority leaders of both
Houses of Congress appoint a member. This would raise a total
board to nine people. I also suggest that a commission be
established in lieu of a board and that all commissioners be
confirmed by the Senate to ensure independence and that they
are nonpartisan.
Third, the act proposes that all proceedings, information
and deliberations of the board shall be open upon request to
the chairman and ranking member of the several Senate and House
subcommittees. Again, in the interest of transparency, I would
propose for your consideration that all proceedings, all
information, as well as board deliberations not classified be
made concurrently public, as was done by the BRAC Commission.
The 2005 BRAC Commission also maintained an Internet Web site
for this purpose.
Fourth, I give pause to the proposal that the board report
its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to the Director
of OMB. The proposed act also proposes authority for the
Director of OMB to manage the process, including the authority
to approve or disapprove the Commission's recommendations.
Accountability and authority, in my view, should rest with the
President. The Commission should have the qualifications to
undertake their work, and they should be supported by an
eminently qualified professional staff.
Fifth, I notice the absence of any proposed criteria that
would govern the deliberations of the board. Such criteria are
critical. They should be promulgated in the Federal Register
for comment and included in the act enacted by Congress. The
board would be bound by these criteria in making their
recommendations to the President and Congress.
Sixth, one of the real lessons learned from the 2005 BRAC
was a need for an effective accounting tool to estimate the
true cost savings and true cost for each recommended closure
and realignment. The Department of Defense, as you know,
utilized the COBRA model to project costs and savings and net
present value. In the case of the 2005 BRAC, transformation,
and not cost savings, was the key driver in the Secretary's
recommendations to the Commission.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Holmes Norton,
for the opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Principi.
Following the last round of questions for the previous
committee, this subcommittee is very interested in making a
better and more efficient use of Federal leases. As such, we
would like to know more about how DOD dealt with leases in the
last round of BRAC and what do you think should be done under
this Commission?
Mr. Principi. Well, the Secretary of Defense had proposed
in the 2005 BRAC that a significant amount of lease space be
vacated and those offices consolidated on military bases, and I
think that is a viable option for Federal civilian buildings as
well.
To just give you one example, Mr. Chairman, since 1967, I
am going now to my days as Secretary of Veterans Affairs. Since
1967 the VA had a VA benefits regional office in downtown
Atlanta. It was privately owned space leased by the General
Services Administration. We, the VA, decided in 1999 to move
that benefits office to the grounds of the VA Medical Center to
collocate that benefits office on the grounds, unused vacant
space adjacent to the VA Medical Center, providing one-stop
shopping for the veterans who needed health care and needed
benefits. We were able to save 50 percent of the cost that we
were paying in leased space in downtown Atlanta, with
additional parking for veterans and staff, furnishings, IT
equipment, the entire framework needed to maintain a regional
office.
So I think it can be done. It has been done at the VA, and
I think would work in civilian office space.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Wise, ending a lease, we were
just talking about the SEC, ending a lease has the same outcome
as disposing of a government-owned property. Do the same
obstacles apply?
Mr. Wise. Mr. Chairman, in a word, no. We have found over
the years that the Federal Government often leases buildings
for longer term needs when ownership would have really been
more cost effective in the long run. One way that it is
possible to rebalance the ownership-lease mix would be to allow
the less efficient leases expire and consolidate Federal
workers onto federally owned facilities. I think some of that
came out in the earlier testimony on these cases.
None of the screening, disposal, or environmental
requirements would apply. So it makes it much, much easier. As
long as the different Federal elements can be combined within
this space and local issues are taken into consideration, then
the impacts would also be minimized and the Federal Government
should be able to move forward with a more cost effective
arrangement.
Mr. Denham. What would you say have been the biggest
hurdles in selling and disposing of properties themselves?
Mr. Wise. There are a number of hurdles that go into
selling a property. Those include the need for considering
public conveyances, the environmental impact statements which
can take a very long time, the requirements to offer to
advocacy groups like the homeless and historical preservation
and then sometimes private sector considerations come into
play. Thus, there are quite a few hurdles that go into being
able to move towards sales of properties under the current
arrangements.
Mr. Denham. And does GSA's database capture all the
potentially unneeded properties in GSA's portfolio?
Mr. Wise. We don't think so, but quite frankly, we really
haven't formally evaluated the extent to which property
utilization is correctly covered in GSA's database. But if you
recall in our last hearing (where the temperature was a little
low), the Old Post Office was one of the buildings not covered
in the utilization field. This can occur with mixed use
buildings. We have done some previous work with the Postal
Service and found that there were quite a few facilities not
fully visible regarding the utilization field. However, we do
have a request that we are going to be staffing in the next
couple of months to take a look at the overall utilization and
leasing arrangements. We will cover that area much more
thoroughly in the next year.
Mr. Denham. In your testimony you said the BRAC included
independent oversight by GAO. Does the civilian board as
proposed in the President's fiscal year budget include
opportunities for independent oversight and should that be at
GAO?
Mr. Wise. I think it is up to the Congress to decide who it
should be, but I think in general an independent commission
lends credibility to the entire process. The current proposal,
at least the version that we saw in the President's 2012 budget
proposal, doesn't say anything about independent oversight. Mr.
Werfel mentioned there is going to be a much longer, more
detailed proposal coming at the end of the month, so perhaps it
will be covered there. But from what we saw in the short
proposal that was in the President's budget, such oversight was
not discussed.
Mr. Denham. And GAO's position? Obviously played
independent oversight. Not your recommendation, but do you
think GAO could perform the same type of oversight, if asked by
Congress, that it did under BRAC?
Mr. Wise. I think Brian can explain what GAO did in its
role in BRAC oversight.
Mr. LePore. Mr. Chairman, the 1990 BRAC statute and the
2001 amendment to that actually specifies several roles for
GAO. The first one is that the Comptroller General is required
to provide assistance to the Commission at their request. The
idea is we develop an agreement and actually detail staff. We
did that in BRAC 2005. We sent six of our senior analysts and
analysts to provide assistance to the Commission and the
Commission staff as they considered the recommendation.
The statute also required that we review the DOD force
structure plan and infrastructure inventory. You may know that
the statute required DOD to develop a projection, if you will,
of what its force structure would look like over the next 20
years, and that was in fact part of the criteria that was used
in developing the recommendations. We were required to comment
on that, and we did that.
Thirdly, we were mandated to review the process that DOD
used in developing its recommendations, and we did that and
reported on July 1, 2005, that DOD had used a logical,
reasoned, and well-documented process.
Subsequent to that, there is one more. The House Committee
Report accompanying the Armed Services Committee's 2008 Defense
Authorization Act mandated that we monitor implementation of
the recommendations and report annually on implementation along
with a lessons learned report. We have just begun that lessons
learned report effort right now and we will be reporting that
later this year.
So GAO actually has had several roles in assisting with the
BRAC process.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
quote from Mr. Principi. Mr. Principi, I just want to note for
the record your enormous expertise in this area, not only you
have been Chairman of BRAC, you have been a Cabinet official
who had the authority to lease and develop--by the way, that
authority was given by the Congress of the United States, your
Veterans Affairs post, and of course you have been on the
Senate staff. So you have really had a bundle of experience
that could be useful to us, and therefore I took particular
notice--perhaps you heard my own concern about OMB's expertise.
I took particular notice, and I am going to quote from your
testimony, I give pause, you said, on page 4, to the proposal
that the board report its findings, conclusions, and
recommendations to the Director of OMB. The proposed act also
proposes authority for the Director of OMB to manage the
process, including the authority to approve or disapprove the
Commission's recommendations.
You give pause clearly because you have issues with that
kind of direct authority by OMB, which is essentially final,
because OMB, I guess, makes a recommendations to the President.
And you seem to want the President himself to have final
authority. I wish you would explain your views on how this new
BRAC process should work with respect to OMB.
Mr. Principi. Yes, Madam Ranking Member, again, the 2005
BRAC round that I chaired made our recommendations directly to
the President, where I believe certainly the final authority in
the Executive branch should lie. That is not to say that the
President cannot look to his Cabinet officials to weigh in on
the recommendations before he makes a final decision. And
ultimately it should rest up here with the Congress to make
that final decision.
I would also echo that I think GAO played, again, an
indispensable role in supporting BRAC and I think they would
play an indispensable role in supporting this process. They are
independent. They have the expertise. And if they don't have
the expertise, they would gain that expertise by bringing on
the right people.
And, very importantly, Congresswoman Holmes Norton, I think
you have to take great pains to ensure that you have the right
makeup on the Commission. I was blessed as Chairman to have
eight wonderful commissioners around me who had the requisite
expertise on military matters that could really make decisions,
supported by a strong executive director who brought on
expertise in military infrastructure matters. I think that is
the most important criteria to ensure that the right decisions
are made with oversight by GAO and go to the President.
With all due respect to OMB, I just don't think they are
the right agency to have the final approval authority.
Ms. Norton. And it should be with the President himself?
Mr. Principi. Absolutely.
Ms. Norton. Then he could call upon the expertise or GSA or
anybody else that he thought might be able to help him.
Mr. Principi. I absolutely believe that.
Ms. Norton. Essentially, this gives OMB two bites at the
apple. It is OMB that you rely on; obviously, the President
isn't sitting down there by himself. So it is exclusively
relying on OMB. It seems to be a pretty circular process.
Mr. Lepore testified about detailees--I believe it was you,
Mr. Lepore--from GAO to BRAC. Would you recommend--of course,
at GAO you do have people with infrastructure experience, with
budgetary experience, with real estate experience. Would you
recommend such detailees to be used in this process to OMB, to
the President, or elsewhere?
Mr. Lepore. Let me try to answer your question this way. I
think the key contribution that the GAO staff made to the
Commission was the people we assigned had the right background
to do analytical work. We are very good at developing
analytical frameworks for analyzing processes and what we call
methodologies. We also took great care as we selected the
individuals--and here is why. We actually knew what the
recommendations from DOD to the Commission were at the time we
were making the choices and we were able to select from our
staff those individuals who had substantive expertise as well
as a strong analytical framework.
Let me give you a specific example with respect to some of
the medical recommendations. We actually assigned someone from
our health care team as one of the staff members that we sent
to Mr. Principi and his colleagues on the Commission. The point
being here that we carefully chose those staff who had a good
subject matter knowledge to address the specifics of the
recommendations as well as were strong analytically, which
really all GAO staff are.
Ms. Norton. Couldn't be more important here.
Yes, Mr. Principi.
Mr. Principi. I would like to add one point, and that is
the BRAC Commission had the authority--we had the authority to
add bases to the list that were not recommended by the
Secretary. I think that is very, very important that the
civilian BRAC process commission have that same authority. It
required a super majority vote to add a base to the list that
the Secretary of Defense did not recommend. But we were able to
identify bases where there was encroachment around a flight
line that impacted the training of our young naval aviators. We
added that base to the list. And I think it had an impact on
changes that were made.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, my time is up, but Mr. Principi
has said that the Secretary, DOD Secretary, who obviously
managed larger agencies, but let's say four agencies--here
there are 23 agencies that would be involved. So if the
Secretary--if the board could recommend bases beyond the
Secretary, then it would seem that this board ought to be able
to recommend properties beyond those that the 23 agencies had
OKed.
Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Principi, diving straight back
into that same type of question, the Secretary gave the list--
the Secretary drove a lot of the issues. Obviously, the
Secretary had a vested interest in making sure that the BRAC
Commission was successful, where you may have had independent
bases or base commanders that had a difference of opinion. Here
in this case we don't have a Secretary that would oversee all
of the agencies, and you can see that it has been difficult for
us to obtain lists and information.
Can you describe the process that you went through in not
only gaining the lists and the information but actually making
sure that it was accurate?
Mr. Principi. Well, it was really spelled out in statute.
We had clear criteria by which to measure whether the
recommendations were correct, and we did thorough analysis. We
visited all of the military bases under consideration for
closures or realignment. We had the support of GAO oversight,
we had commissioners who had the requisite expertise. And I
think those combination of things, I believe, allowed us to
make the appropriate decisions. They may not have been right in
every case, but I think as long as the Congress spells out the
criteria by which agencies have to submit recommendations to
the Commission, clear criteria by which the Commission assesses
those recommendations, and makes a final decision and reports
it to the President, gives the President a reasonable but
limited period of time to either disagree, send it back to the
Commission, send it on to Congress, I think, for the most part
you will come out with the right decisions. So that is the
process I would suggest you follow.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. How about as far as ensuring that
the information, the lists, are accurate coming from each
different agency? Did you have any pushback from any of the
various bases that you dealt with on not wanting to provide all
information necessary to accomplish the Commission's criteria?
Mr. Principi. Well, we did. And in some cases, information
that was submitted, data that was submitted by military bases,
the base commander to the Pentagon came to the Commission far
different than the base commander reported. So we had instances
where information that went to the Pentagon didn't come out as
it should have. We were receiving different data from the
Pentagon. But we were able to assess that by our visits to
military bases, having those discussions, and trying to
identify as much as we could about the base.
Again, we had the analytical work of GAO, we had a very,
very professional staff who had been on previous BRAC rounds,
and I might also add that we had a very limited period of time,
but it held our feet to the fire. This thing did not drag out
like many commissions do month after month, year after year. We
have had a finite period of time. Either we had our
recommendations on the President's desk by a certain date or
all of our work was terminated. It was all for naught.
So I have would suggest that you put very different
timelines on getting this information to the President and
getting it to the Congress for an up-or-down vote on the
recommendations or it will go on for year after year and you
will have accomplished very little, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Was there any repercussions to inaccurate
information if a base was giving information to the Pentagon
different from what they were giving you?
Mr. Principi. Well, certainly did our best to make sure
that that information was conveyed to the higher levels at the
Department of Defense, but we also tried to protect the base
commanders who provided us with that information. It was a very
delicate balance, Mr. Chairman. But we did our best to make
sure that the Defense Department knew that they were passing on
inadequate and different information to us than we had learned
in the field.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Finally, the same question I had for
the last panel, what type of expertise do you feel is important
to be on the Commission?
Mr. Principi. Real estate people who have requisite
knowledge in real estate-related matters, financing-related
backgrounds, Federal infrastructure, I think former senior
executives with the Federal Government in various different
capacities, but certainly individuals who have a strong
background in real estate development, financing, and leasing,
who could bring that expertise to the Commission.
Mr. Denham. And are you still working with the BRAC
Commission now?
Mr. Principi. Other than testifying periodically.
Mr. Denham. You know what my next question is, don't you?
Would you be initiated in serving on this new commission?
Mr. Principi. My problem is----
Mr. Denham. You are on the record.
Mr. Principi. The problem is I don't know how to say no to
public service, so I guess I would. I am sure there are other
more eminently qualified individuals than myself, Mr. Chairman,
but thank you very much.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. I wouldn't be so sure about that, Mr. Principi.
We really need people who have been around the mulberry bush a
few times.
Mr. Denham. The correct response would have been I am going
to check with my spouse first.
Ms. Norton. I would like to combine what I am gleaning from
the testimony of Mr. Wise and Mr. Lepore with what I know about
the Veterans Affairs Department. I was interested that your
testimony indicated that the new board could help with one of
this committee's long-term concerns, the overreliance on
leasing, by recommending the consolidation of operations. Well,
the President has set about the consolidation process already,
and I certainly can see some possibilities there. But I know
that Mr. Principi in fact had an authority that if GSA has it,
it rarely uses it--its enhanced lease authority.
The Veterans Affairs Department is one of those agencies
that for very good reasons has its own independent authority.
When you consider the number of buildings and operations that
are under your jurisdiction--and that is an example where
Congress just slipped something in and said this is what we
want for the Veterans Administration. How you have done leasing
or how you have done property management has saved the
taxpayers billions upon billions of dollars.
Let me give you an example and ask our other two panel
members if they believe that somehow getting better use of such
authority would help to get more of our agencies into owned
space.
The Veterans Administration has, among other things,
enhanced lease authority. So that means that the Veterans
Administration can do a ground lease where that means that
somebody in the private sector can then put that up. Somehow or
another, you don't run into the scoring problems that the GSA
runs into. So I am sure you must do a lot less leasing than the
GSA does now. In fact, it has tipped. It now does more leasing
than it has owned space.
And I want to know from Mr. Wise and Mr. Lepore, while we
are at it, whether we shouldn't see to it that GSA--and, again,
it may have, it certainly seldom uses; I don't know how to make
sure it does--but that it uses enhanced lease authority as well
so that the Federal Government is not leasing for 10-, 15-, 20-
year terms.
Mr. Lepore. Congresswoman Norton, as you know, the
Department of Defense does have enhanced use leasing authority.
What DOD will typically do in these circumstances--and there
aren't a lot of the enhanced use leases. That typically refers
to a very large, long-term lease, very complicated negotiated
deal, if you will, between a developer and the installation.
But typically what they will do on an installation is they may
identify land that is not excess to their needs, because the
statute requires it cannot be excess to their needs if they are
going to do an enhanced lease, and then will negotiate with a
developer to develop some facility--an office building,
hypothetically. The developer gets a 50-year ground lease. The
developer builds the building, subleases the office space, if
that is what it is, to a tenant, and the installation gets back
some agreed-to consideration. It could be cash or it can be in-
kind consideration. And that is all negotiated upfront. But it
is an opportunity for the installation to effectively get a
kind of return on investment, if you will, on land that is not
excess to their needs permanently but is not used for the
period of time of that lease.
Ms. Norton. So this board is going to have to decide
whether or not the Federal Government could reap some benefit
or revenue from this land or whether it should simply sell it
off. One of the things they are likely to do is to say, Well,
look at what it would take for GSA to use the property. If it
doesn't have enhanced lease authority, what it would take looks
like it might be a steep mile to climb and you end up selling
off properties that you could be earning revenue from forever.
Mr. Principi, what I am asking both of you, as long as we
are looking at the collocation, this consolidation, whether or
not we should not also be looking at what it takes to make sure
that the government is making the highest and best use of its
land before it decides it has to sell it off so somebody else
can make the highest and best use, simply because our
procedures don't afford GSA that opportunity.
Mr. Principi. I certainly agree with you, Congresswoman
Norton. That is what I tried to do as Secretary, was to
leverage the equity that we had in our land. Large VA medical
center campuses, lots of unused land. Why pay very high lease
rates in downtown, separated from the VA Medical Center, so
veterans had to go to both places. And whether it be a local
development authority in the city or county or private
developer, come on, build us what we need. We will get reduced
lease rates because it is our land and then at the end of the
lease term the building would convey back to the VA. In many
cases, it worked very, very well for the VA. I assume it could
work for other agencies of government, but certainly in our
case it did. I believe in DOD it can as well.
Ms. Norton. Of course, here we are dealing with essentially
property that is usually managed by GSA. I just cite to you the
example of the headquarters building of the Department of
Transportation, where we build an entirely new, huge building
for the Department of Transportation. I think they are on a 15-
year lease because GSA has but apparently for some reason
doesn't use enhanced lease authority, where you could,
obviously, since you are never going to move your headquarters
if you just built a new one, could have used it. That is the
kind of waste that I see. As long as you are dealing with how
you manage your property, seems to me you have got to use this
opportunity to deal with the whole thing.
I want to ask all of you about the differences between DOD
BRAC and this BRAC. DOD BRAC happens every few years. You know
what those properties are. You apparently have got a critical
mass and then you do a BRAC. Now, is that going to be
sufficient for a civilian BRAC? Would there need to be some
ongoing process, given the number of properties that may come
and go when you have such a huge landowner as the United States
Government itself?
Mr. Denham. For the sake of time I would ask for a brief
response.
Mr. Lepore. Certainly, I will try to be brief. As you know,
there were four rounds of BRAC prior to the 2005 round. I think
one of the things we saw after the first round in 1988, there
were three that occurred in alternating years--1991, 1993, and
1995. The idea was there was a recognition that there were a
significant number of installations that DOD felt were excess
to its needs, its determination. But there was a recommendation
that to try to swallow them all at once was probably not going
to be doable or feasible. And so the 1990 statute that
authorized those next three rounds put them in alternating
years, and it effectively created a cycle, if you will, that
allowed for the selection of I will call it a reasonable number
of installations that could be considered for closure or
realignment without putting so much before the Commission at
any one time or any one Commission that it couldn't get it all
done.
So it created a manageable process, if you will, to allow
DOD to convey, dispose of and ultimately convey a large number
of installations it deemed excess to its needs. But was that
rolling cycle that helped to make that possible.
Ms. Norton. I just think that is a very important point to
make. You can put too much on the Commission.
I have one last question. I think it is Mr. Principi who
said in his testimony there are real lessons to be learned from
the 2005 BRAC on the need for an effective tool to estimate the
true cost savings and true costs of each recommended closure
and realignment. And I tell you there are folks here who
believe that there are gazillions of dollars just waiting out
there to go to market. I have got to ask you, what lessons are
you talking about? Do we know what the cost savings were, what
the cost was, what revenue was brought in from the last BRAC?
Do any of you know that?
Mr. Principi. I think it is critically important. You have
to have a good cost savings model.
Ms. Norton. When you say that real lessons learned, did you
learn that some of these properties did not have true savings
or provided true costs for the government that you were not
aware of?
Mr. Principi. Yes, it did. Inflationary costs. There is a
6-year period from the date the decision is made to close or
realign a base to the time it has to be implemented--in our
case, 2011. You have a lot of inflation that goes on. That
wasn't accurately reflected in the analysis. As well as
personnel costs. A significant percentage of the proposed
savings came from reductions in military personnel. Along with
GAO, we found that that was not the case. Military personnel
were being transferred to other bases; they weren't being
reduced from end strength. And that dropped the cost savings
very dramatically, Congresswoman Norton. So I think those kind
of refinements have to be made to the model to be effective on
the civilian side as well.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, that was my last question, but I
certainly hope we recommend the lessons from BRAC--we have had
three or four BRACs; we have had at least three since I have
been in Congress--that before any statute is drawn, we have
some experience from BRAC as to whether or not there is any
savings or whether or not we have estimated costs so that we
don't go blindly into this where there is real experience on
the table for us to learn from.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Principi. I am sorry to interrupt. Following up on Mr.
Lepore's statement about the process and having a civil BRAC
every 2 years, I urge you to consider maintaining a core group
of civil BRAC experts so that when a new BRAC round begins, you
don't have to go out and find that staff. You have a good core
staff that could then be augmented so that that civil BRAC can
get going right away without having to ramp up from zero base.
Mr. Denham. Almost sounded like you were volunteering in
your final statement.
I would like to thank this panel as well as the previous
panel. We will be not only submitting a list of questions but
looking for your assistance in defining a clear criteria. This
will be different from the DOD BRAC. And we will have to have
not only a strong, clear criteria up front, but this committee
will definitely be looking for a guarantee that we have quick
and efficient disposal of properties. So we would ask for your
help as we are finalizing our legislation over the next few
weeks, and look forward to your accessibility.
If there are no further questions, I would ask unanimous
consent that the record of today's hearing remain open until
such time as our witnesses have provided answers to any
questions that may be submitted to them in writing and
unanimous consent that the record remain open for 15 days for
any additional comments and information submitted by Members or
witnesses to be included in the record of today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to thank our witnesses again for their
testimony today.
If no other Members have anything to add, the subcommittee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

