- CREATING JOBS AND INCREASING U.S. EXPORTS BY ENHANCING THE MARINE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CREATING JOBS AND INCREASING U.S. EXPORTS
BY ENHANCING THE
MARINE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM

=======================================================================

(112-36)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 14, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-919 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

(ii)

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana,        NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
Vice Chair                           (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Cox, Joseph J., President and CEO, Chamber of Shipping of America     4
Matsuda, Hon. David T., Administrator, Maritime Administration...     4
Mohr, John M., Executive Director, Port of Everett, Washington...     4
Roberts, Michael G., Senior Vice President and General Counsel,
Crowley Maritime Corporation, on behalf of American Maritime
Partnership....................................................     4
Tellez, Augustin, Executive Vice President, Seafarers
International Union............................................     4

PREPARED STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY MEMBER OF CONGRESS

Hirono, Hon. Mazie K., of Hawaii.................................    28

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Cox, Joseph J....................................................    30
Matsuda, Hon. David T............................................    35
Mohr, John M.....................................................    42
Roberts, Michael G...............................................    53
Tellez, Augustin.................................................    61

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CREATING JOBS AND INCREASING
U.S. EXPORTS BY ENHANCING THE
MARINE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank LoBiondo
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. The subcommittee will come to order.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to review the current
condition of the Maritime Transportation System, as well as to
examine ways to improve the system to create jobs to improve
the flow of commerce and increase U.S. exports.
Last month, the subcommittee met to examine the Coast
Guard's rulemaking process in an attempt to reduce burdensome
regulations that stifle commerce and job creation. Today's
hearing is a logical extension of that effort, as we will step
back and examine the system as a whole for similar
efficiencies.
The MTS is a vast resource that facilitates our robust
maritime commerce. It consists of waterways, ports and
intermodal landside connections that allow for movement of
passengers and cargo on the water. The MTS includes nearly
360,000 miles of navigable channels, railways, and highways, as
well as 238 locks and 3,700 marine terminals.
The commerce which moves on the MTS fuels the economy.
Approximately 99 percent of the volume of overseas trades
enters or leaves the United States by water. The movement of
cargo and associated activities on the Marine Transportation
System adds more than $649 billion annually to the U.S. gross
domestic product, sustains more than 13 million jobs, and
contributes over $212 billion in annual Federal, State, and
local taxes.
Domestic shipping alone is responsible for over half a
million American jobs and a $100 billion in annual economic
output. As such, ongoing maintenance and improvement of the MTS
is essential to any effort to create jobs and expand exports.
In July of 2008, the Cabinet level Committee on the Marine
Transportation System released its ``National Strategy for the
Maritime Transportation System: A Framework for Action,'' which
identifies current challenges to marine transportation and
several actions to address these challenges. I look forward to
hearing about the progress on those actions.
Similarly, I hope that our witnesses will touch on ways to
revitalize our marine highways. These rivers, canals and
coastal routes are the most economical, environmentally
sustainable, and safest mode of commercial freight
transportation. I look forward to hearing about efforts to
support and enhance the marine highways programs.
As our economy struggles to recover, every agency in the
Federal Government must seek ways to promote growth. That means
exploring ways to create jobs, increase exports, and save
taxpayers money. A robust Marine Transportation System can
potentially accomplish all three.
However, as we focus our efforts on ways to maximize the
system's potential, it is imperative that the policies we
develop promote the transportation of goods on American ships,
built in American shipyards, and operated by American mariners.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today. I look
forward to hearing their testimony.
And now I would like to yield to Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for holding this morning's hearing on how the
Maritime Transportation System, our Nation's network of ports,
marine terminals, navigable waterways, vessels, and intermodal
rail and highway connections, can do more to create jobs, boost
exports, and stimulate economic growth.
For the maritime industries and workers in my district, few
issues are as important so I am particularly pleased to welcome
John Mohr here today, the executive director from the Port of
Everett, my home town, to this morning's hearing.
It is one of the goals of my office to implement a forward-
thinking plan for long-term economic growth, Mr. Chairman, that
works for all of us through the investment and the skills and
knowledge of our people, support for innovation and
infrastructure, all in order to maintain our economic
leadership in the world.
Last week at home, I spoke at a rail summit held by one of
our county executives. The summit made it clear that rail and
freight infrastructure is critical to our long-term economic
growth. My office has established an export assistance program
that connects local small manufacturers with people and
resources they need to export their goods and create jobs.
In order to remain competitive in a global economy,
improving domestic infrastructure as well is a sound strategy
to promote growth and efficiency, support increased
manufacturing, feed the American market and serve as an export
platform for manufactured goods around the world. Our economic
prosperity is closely tied to and heavily dependent upon
international trade. Since approximately 99 percent by volume
of this overseas trade is moved by water, it underscores how
pivotal the Maritime Transportation System is to our goal of
supply chains and consequently to our economic and national
security.
You have noted the numbers with regard to waterborne cargo,
Mr. Chairman, that contributes $649 billion annually to the
U.S. gross domestic product and more than 13 million jobs. An
announcement last week from the Commerce Department reaffirmed
these numbers. New trade figures for U.S. exports of goods and
services for April revealed a 1.3-percent increase from March
to a record $175.6 billion, still with a trade deficit but
causing the trade deficit to decline by 6.7 percent from the
preceding month.
However, because of much of the system's infrastructure is
aging and constrained by capacity limitations, this projection
raises the fundamental question: Will the MTS be able to meet
these new demands and continue to provide a seamless,
integrated multimodal transportation system.
In response to the 2004 Ocean Action Plan, the Committee on
the Marine Transportation System did release in 2008 a national
strategy that offered 34 recommendations to maintain and
enhance the MTS, especially the system's capacity, safety and
security, environmental stewardship, resilience and
reliability, and long-term financing.
In general, progress towards fulfilling the national
strategy is incomplete at best. Certainly efforts by this
Administration to establish a pilot program for marine highways
and to designate the marine highway corridors and grants
awarded under the Recovery Act to fund MTS infrastructure
investments have been positive steps, but they don't seem to be
enough and much more needs to be done.
Unfortunately, the prospects don't seem to be very good
under present Federal budget constraints for finding new
resources to maintain necessary infrastructure investments to
maintain, enhance and expand the system to meet its future
challenges. Nevertheless, we must find a way forward.
With this in mind, I look forward to hearing the
recommendations from our witnesses on how we might creatively
and constructively address the needs of the Marine
Transportation System. I will learn how we might leverage
greater public and private investments to improve the
efficiency and reliability of the system and how we can utilize
the system to drive job creation and revitalize our maritime
industries.
The overarching reality is that our economic future and the
Maritime Transportation System are closely intertwined. To
think that our economy can fully recover and grow if we fail to
invest in this critical infrastructure is both unrealistic and
shortsighted. We must summon the world to invest in this system
or we risk choking off the very conduit that makes our economy
hum, that drives job creation and that ensures the U.S. market
remains pre-eminent in global trade. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
And Rick, thank you for suggesting this hearing.
Our witnesses today include the Honorable David Matsuda,
administrator of the Maritime Administration; Mr. Joseph Cox,
president of the Chamber of Shipping of America; Mr. Michael
Roberts, testifying on behalf of the American Maritime
Partnership; Mr. Augustin Tellez, executive vice president of
the Seafarers International Union; and John Mohr, executive
director of the Port of Everett in Washington. We thank you all
for being here.
Oh, excuse me. Do you have an opening statement?
Mr. Cravaack. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. That is what I get for
being late.
Mr. LoBiondo. That is what you get for being late.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you Mr. Larsen for holding this important hearing
today.
I would like to welcome our witnesses as well to our panel.
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from today's witnesses
about ways to create jobs through enhancing our Nation's
Maritime Transportation System.
As a representative from Duluth, Minnesota, I understand
the critical importance of the maritime transportation to our
State and our Great Lakes region. Accordingly, I am very
interested to hear how our Nation can further utilize maritime
transportation by removing barriers, like double taxation under
the Harbor Maintenance Tax.
As a new Member of the House, I was disturbed to find how
Congress has failed to use all of the harbor maintenance tax
revenues for their intended use; namely, the dredging of our
harbors and our channels. Presently, the harbor maintenance
trust fund is running a $5 billion surplus. At a time when our
Nation's vessels are unable to carry full loads because of
inadequate channel and harbor depths, it is imperative that we
better utilize the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund to increase
transportation productivity.
Again, I look forward to your testimony. And I thank you
for being here today.
And I yield back, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Matsuda, the floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE DAVID T. MATSUDA, ADMINISTRATOR,
MARITIME ADMINISTRATION; JOSEPH J. COX, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
CHAMBER OF SHIPPING OF AMERICA; MICHAEL G. ROBERTS, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, CROWLEY MARITIME CORPORATION, ON
BEHALF OF AMERICAN MARITIME PARTNERSHIP; AUGUSTIN TELLEZ,
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, SEAFARERS INTERNATIONAL UNION; AND
JOHN M. MOHR, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PORT OF EVERETT, WASHINGTON

Mr. Matsuda. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking
Member Larsen, members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for inviting me here to testify on behalf of U.S.
Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood. Before I begin, I would
like to pass along my condolences to Congressman Cummings. He
and his family are certainly within our thoughts and prayers at
the Maritime Administration.
With the subcommittee's permission, I would like to submit
my written testimony for the record and summarize it briefly.
Now, let me take the opportunity to speak to you about the
Marine Transportation System and its role in creating jobs and
increasing exports.
The Marine Transportation System supports millions of jobs,
facilitates trade, moves people and goods in a safe, cost-
effective, and efficient manner and allows our Nation to be
competitive in the global marketplace.
As the members of the subcommittee know, export markets are
fundamental to our manufacturing and agricultural industries.
And as a result of sustained efforts, exports have rebounded to
near 2008 levels within the first year of President Obama's
National Export Initiative. With the understanding that the
export initiative's success is indelibly linked to the
transportation industry, the Maritime Administration continues
to execute a number of initiatives and grants to promote the
continued growth of American exports.
As one example, I am pleased to report that I recently
approved the Federal financing of a $290 million export project
at a shipyard in Panama City, Florida. I recall the
subcommittee's interest in this project when I was last before
you. This project will result in 300 new shipbuilding jobs as
workers construct five new off-shore supply vessels for service
in Brazilian waters.
Another way we are supporting export goals is by developing
America's marine highway. The comprehensive report on marine
highways sent to this committee in April can now be found on
the Maritime Administration Web site. As the chairman alluded
to, this DOT initiative promotes the use of waterways to move
freight, providing shippers with a transportation alternative
that reduces oil consumption and greenhouse gas emissions and
reduces the wear and tear on our surface infrastructure.
The department has also made targeted investments in our
Nation's port and rail lines for the first time ever through
the TIGER grant program. Created in the Recovery Act, TIGER
plays a critical role in creating jobs and supporting the
National Export Initiative. It has been a tremendous success.
As I describe the broad reach and range of these and other
programs described in my written testimony and their role in
our economic success, please note that these results would not
have been possible without the partnership of many other
agencies.
The Committee on the Marine Transportation System chaired
by Secretary LaHood brings various agency representatives
together to facilitate the improvement of the U.S. supply chain
through policy coordination, and we are working with our
Federal maritime partners, the Coast Guard, the Army Corps,
NOAA, a total of 27 agencies, continuing to build on these
efforts.
Much is changing in the maritime industry and may increase
export opportunities. Larger ships, more calls on America's
ports, and potential shifts in trade lanes due to expansion of
the Panama Canal, as well as other factors, will all change the
way in which we ship goods. In May, Agriculture Secretary Tom
Vilsack reported that farm exports reached an all-time high of
$75 billion during the first half of fiscal year 2011. In fact,
every dollar in exports generates $1.31 in economic activity.
At the same time, we are focused on improving our U.S.-flag
fleet's international competitiveness. That is why we are
studying the various impediments to the use of the U.S.-flag
registry, and we are expecting the study to be completed the
summer of 2011. We are also focusing on cargo opportunities for
U.S. carriers both at home and abroad. And by partnering with
agencies like the Department of Energy, we will continue to
strengthen these opportunities.
As I hope you can see, we are fully committed to utilizing
the Marine Transportation System to increase our exports and
support our domestic maritime industry. We believe that while
it is critical to our economy today, it has the potential to
create even greater economic growth tomorrow.
At this time, I am pleased to take any questions you have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Cox.
Mr. Cox. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo and Ranking Member
Larsen. I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
With your permission, Chair, I will submit my testimony and
just make a few comments relative to it here.
Marine Transportation System, as I look at this, gentlemen,
I wonder if our Marine Transportation System as we describe it
shares an equal status with our rail and road brethren, and I
do think that is an important question that we in this Nation
are going to have to face if we are going to move cargo and
people in the future.
In the past, the Maritime Administration was engaged in
something called the Marine Transportation System National
Advisory Council. We participated in that. We did not have a
high degree of confidence in what came out of that. We would
hope that the new Committee on Marine Transportation System
does a better job than we did in the past.
I am pleased to say that as president of the Chamber of
Shipping of America, I am also chairman of the Marine Highways
Cooperative, a public-private partnership among the Government,
Maritime Administration, that is, and the private sector. And I
should say that the private sector does fund at this point a
little bit more than half the money that goes into the
cooperative. It is a very modest budget, Mr. Chairman, but at
the same time, we are dedicated to educating our own community
about the benefits of what we call short sea shipping.
And as I speak, we are putting on our Web site a calculator
which shippers, the marine community, those who desire to have
an investment in the maritime industry, and others can plug in
the numbers into that system, which would include road and rail
modes of transport, to see what is the most beneficial choice.
We think one of the more useful aspects of it is carbon.
We know carbon currently doesn't have a price tag
associated with it. I don't want to get started with the
politics of carbon. But at the same time, I think the public is
becoming aware of the issue and so carbon is going to be an
important consideration, we think, among the retailers of
America. And this tool will enable them to utilize that when
they make their decisions relative to transportation logistics.
And Chairman, I am going to talk quickly about the harbor
maintenance tax. Sir, you are not the Ways and Means Committee,
I understand that. But the harbor maintenance tax is a major
psychological impediment, in my opinion, to the furtherance of
a review of short sea shipping, and there could be arguments as
to whether it should be or not, but I think those arguments can
be had behind doors. I think in the eyes of the industry, the
taxation, if you will, a double taxation on shipping cargo
through short sea shipping modes is simply something that is
inappropriate and ditto, Mr. Cravaack. Thank you for your
earlier comments.
Sir, I am going to talk quickly about business expectations
because no one invests in anything in this country without an
expectation of what they are going to have to face in the
future relative to their cost structure. And I think that two
items spring to mind. There may be others.
But the first one in the maritime industry is ballast water
and controls. We have a regrettable situation now where we do
not have that necessary ingredient for us to consider what our
investments are in shipping because the investment in ballast
water technology controls is not an inconsequential one. So a
decision in this area is certainly very important to the
industry. And we need a uniform national standard.
Now, I don't know how strict it can or can't be, but it
should be as strict as technology permits with upgrading
available as technology becomes more available. I think that we
owe it to ourselves as a Nation to have a single uniform
national standard.
The second area is national ocean policy. There is a
deliberation among the Administration where they have called
the agencies together to involve a consideration of national
ocean policy. This is geospatial planning, marine spacial
planning. We are very concerned with whether or not that is
operating to the full effect of what would be to the benefit of
our sector of the usage of the oceans. And we certainly invite
any oversight that the legislature might want to engage in with
respect to the national ocean policy.
Chairman, I don't make any public comments unless I make
this comment, and that is about piracy. Piracy is active. It is
in place. It is a growing phenomenon in the Indian Ocean. Our
seafarers are exposed. Other seafarers are exposed, and I
believe, sir, that the U.S. should take and should continue to
take a leading role in combatting piracy.
And in conclusion, sir, our thoughts and prayers are also
with Mr. Cummings and family during these difficult times.
Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Roberts.
Mr. Roberts. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Larsen,
members of the subcommittee.
My name is Mike Roberts. I work for Crowley Maritime. I am
here today as a representative for the American Maritime
Partnership, or the AMP. Thank you for holding this hearing and
inviting us to testify.
With your permission, I would like to offer brief comments
and ask my written testimony be included in the record.
Let me first briefly introduce the American Maritime
Partnership. We believe it is the largest maritime coalition
ever formed. It includes companies that build ships in U.S.
shipyards using union labor and non-union labor. It includes
companies that operate U.S.-flag ships using union and non-
union labor. It includes virtually all labor unions touching
the maritime industry, other transportation industry
stakeholders, defense groups, such as the Navy League of the
United States. It is a very large and comprehensive
organization.
We came together in 1995 around the simple proposition that
the American domestic maritime industry should stay American;
that the vessels should be built in the United States; that
they should be owned, controlled, and crewed by American
citizens; that those vessels should be fully subject to the
laws of this country and not the laws of Liberia or the
Marshall Islands or any other country that may be chosen by the
ship's owner.
They always have been true-blue American vessels, and
nothing we have seen suggests that should change.
This structure supports half a million American jobs, a
$100 billion in economic activity, as your opening comments
noted, and at the same time, provides our military, the
seafarers, the ships, the shipyards they need to get support to
our troops around the world.
Domestic shipping is the mainstay of the American maritime
industry. This is partly because international shipping is
overwhelmingly dominated by foreign--low cost--foreign--lowest
cost foreign ships. While there are always ways to make
American ships more competitive, the gap between American
living standards on the one hand and lowest cost foreign
shipping on the other is too large so that the only realistic
way American ships with fully American crews can stay involved
in international trade is through promotional programs like the
Maritime Security Program.
Those programs should be expanded, perhaps radically
expanded, to assure there is a broad enough base of American
skills and assets in this indispensably important industry.
Simply put, America needs to have American sailing commercial
vessels and Naval vessels all over the world.
And as we draw down our budgets and look for smarter, more
cost-effective ways to achieve national security goals, the MSP
and other programs are proven performers that should serve as a
model for other public-private partnerships.
Viewed in that context, the very notion that we should
allow foreign workers to take over our domestic maritime
industry ought be a nonstarter. And thanks to your leadership
and the leadership of others on this committee, we have not
faced the kind of existential threats that initially brought us
together.
Your support for the Jones Act is vitally important to
maintaining a strong domestic maritime industry. It encourages
private sector investment and keeps jobs in American hands.
Our industry has faced serious concerns but more of a
technical nature. It is possible for clever lawyers to define
the cabotage laws out of existence without many people
recognizing it. It is possible to create exceptions to the laws
that are so broad or so frequent or so unjustified that those
of us who invest in U.S. shipping begin to wonder whether that
is a very smart business strategy.
The fact that we genuinely believe in the American maritime
industry, that we are willing to risk literally billions of
dollars building ships in American shipyards, providing tens of
thousands of jobs to American workers in the shipyards and on
the vessel, that is a good start. But it is vitally important
that those who make and enforce the rules support those
decisions.
Again, we appreciate support from this committee and from
the Administration in helping making sure that these very real
threats are properly addressed.
In terms of what the Government can do to help create jobs
and grow the American maritime industry, our message is fairly
simple. Our Government needs to pay more attention to this
committee and the opportunities that this committee pursues. We
desperately need to modernize our maritime infrastructure, our
rivers, and harbors. Money has always been the issue. We can
provide jobs to Americans instead of handouts. We can transform
our infrastructure at a fraction of what it would have cost 5
years ago. We can take the money we are borrowing from our
children and make an investment that would actually pay
dividends to our children.
We know that that is an agenda that you have promoted, and
we want you to know that we wholeheartedly support you in that
endeavor.
And I will end at this point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Tellez.
Mr. Tellez. Good morning and happy Flag Day, Chairman
LoBiondo, Mr. Larsen, and the rest of the members of the
committee. On behalf of the Seafarers International Union of
North America and our fellow maritime unions, the master mates
and pilots, marine engineers, and American maritime officers, I
thank you for conducting this hearing, for the opportunity to
testify, and for your continued support for the U.S. Merchant
Marine. On their behalf also, I would like to offer our
collective condolences to Congressman Cummings and his family
for his tragic loss.
As the organizations that represent merchant mariners, we
have a deep interest in our Nation's economy and national
security. Our organizations are focused on jobs, increasing the
size of our U.S.-Flag Merchant Marine and seeking opportunities
for workers across America to obtain good-paying, secure
American jobs that keep our economy moving forward. And we will
do our best to make sure that Mike Roberts is proud to state
that he is 100 percent union the next time he testifies.
We strongly support the National Export Initiative and will
work with Congress and the Administration to ensure its
success. Doubling exports is an ambitious goal, but we believe
it is an achievable one. However, in order for us to meet that
goal, we must ensure that the American maritime industry
remains strong both at home and abroad. We must ensure that our
ports and infrastructure can handle the additional capacity
needed to meet these goals.
We must defend programs that support the Merchant Marine,
like the Jones Act, the Maritime Security Program and cargo
preference. We must innovate and expand our capacity by
developing our coastwise trade through America's Marine
Highways Program. We must reform the harbor maintenance tax,
expand the tonnage tax, and create a national regulatory regime
for vessel discharge. Only by supporting our existing programs,
reducing the regulatory burden on the industry, and seeking
opportunities to expand the industry will we be able to create
jobs and increase U.S. exports.
Congress and the Administration must support the Jones Act
and our cargo preference laws. Both have been under
considerable attack recently, and losing either one of them
would destroy the United States Merchant Marine. The Jones Act
ensures we have the domestic job base in peacetime that we need
to support our troops in wartime. And our cargo preference laws
provide the cargo we need to keep our ships moving.
Put simply, the maritime industry's lifeblood is cargo. It
is what creates jobs, and it is what will help continue our
Nation's economic recovery. Though we cannot just simply defend
the Jones Act and our laws, we must actively work to expand the
industry. We must redevelop and recreate our coastwise trade
industry.
Europe has already discovered that using feeder vessels to
move cargo between ports is an economical and fast way of
getting goods and people from place to place. They have done
it, and their model will work well here in America. It is time
for America to redevelop our coastwise trade. It will not only
create thousands of jobs, but by utilizing the latest
technologies offers an opportunity to provide an effective
green solution to the dangerous overcrowding of our highways
and infrastructure and the serious issues this situation
represents.
We hope Congress will work with the industry to make the
Marine Highways Program a reality.
We also need to defend our cargo preference laws and ensure
that they are being enforced. The efforts of some to cut PL 480
Food for Peace Program, if successful, will harm many of our
ships operators beyond repair. We must not allow that to
happen, and lax enforcement of the programs in place has
resulted in many preference cargoes being shipped on foreign
vessels, which also hurts our operators and our mariners. We
need strong enforcement of the cargo preference laws.
In terms of enhancing the Maritime Transportation System, a
simple means of doing so is regulatory reform, not only to help
the ship operator but the mariner as well. Today, mariners have
to jump through dozens of hoops just to enter the industry, and
that is a deterrent to attracting new mariners. When a mariner
goes for her physical of drug screening, they need to bring
roughly a 100 pages worth of supporting documentation for
review. Hundreds of pages of documentation, and that is before
they apply for a TWIC, a Merchant Mariner credential and an
STDW certificate and whatever else may be required for the job.
We need to seriously consider how to make it easier for
potential mariners to enter our industry.
In conclusion, maritime labor believes the best way to
enhance our Maritime Transportation System and create jobs is
to protect our existing programs, expand the ones that work
well, redevelop our coastwise trade, and ensure that our
existing laws are enforced. Doing so will keep America
competitive, put mariners to work, and allow us to help us meet
the goals of the National Export Initiative.
I thank the committee for allowing me to testify today. And
I will be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Mohr.
Mr. Mohr. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and distinguished
members of the subcommittee. My name is John Mohr, I am the
executive director of the Port of Everett in Washington State.
I have submitted my written testimony and will briefly
summarize my remarks.
It is my pleasure to be here today to discuss how Federal
policies can help Washington State ports and ports throughout
our great country create jobs and facilitate increased U.S.
exports. From our earliest history, the United States has been
an exporting country, adding strength to our economy.
Worldwide, countries have learned from our example and have in
some ways have gone us one better.
In a country as large as the United States, public ports
are critical gateways for international trade and drivers of
economic activity. American seaports are responsible for $3.2
trillion in annual trade value and support nearly 13.3 million
family wage jobs. U.S. customs collections from waterborne
commerce or waterborne cargo imports also provide tens of
billion of dollars a year to the Federal Government.
In fiscal 2008, Customs duties from waterborne cargo
contributed $24.1 billion to the Federal Government. In
Washington State, one of four jobs is tied to trade, making
Washington State the most trade-dependent in the United States.
Everett is home to the Boeing company's largest
manufacturing facility. The port serves a critical function in
support of our Nation's manufacturing and construction base,
especially in the aerospace industry. The Port of Everett
handles all of the oversize oceangoing parts for Boeing 747,
767 and 777 airplanes. Given that Boeing is the Nation's number
one exporter by value, it is not surprising that in 2010 the
Port of Everett Customs District was attributed with more than
$9.2 billion in exports, according to the U.S. Customs Report.
Naturally, we support the National Export Initiative to
double exports over the next 5 years. However, to accomplish
this goal, we will need major investments in our freight
transportation system nationwide. In the U.S., ports have
tended to be viewed more as a private industry so State and
Federal governments have limited their participation in
promoting and investing in port facilities.
For an alternative example of promoting international trade
activity, let me focus on the Canadian challenge. In 2006,
Canada kicked off its Asia Pacific Gateway and Corridor
Initiative with a commitment to invest nearly $1 billion to
make British Columbia ports a viable alternative for U.S.-bound
cargo. Other Western Hemisphere countries, governments are also
investing in their ports, such as Brazil, Panama, Colombia, and
Mexico.
With this background, we believe there are four steps the
U.S. Government can that would enhance our Maritime
Transportation System so it can achieve a doubling of U.S.
exports while increasing our competitiveness with Canadian and
Mexican ports.
First, the U.S. Government can help streamline permit
requirements to expedite the construction of port facilities.
In Washington State, it can take up to 10 years to build a new
terminal facility and up to 25 years to deepen a shipping
channel, depending on State and Federal regulatory requirements
and related litigation. These delays result in high costs to
U.S. exporters and cargo opportunities lost to our foreign
competitors.
Quite simply, regulatory agencies must look for ways to
partner with project sponsors to successfully build a terminal
and deepen channels instead of simply saying ``no.''
Second, the Federal Government must continue to invest in
port infrastructure. The TIGER program is the first Federal
program that I am aware of that allows ports to propose
waterside projects for funding consideration. The program was
so popular that U.S. DOT received $1.6 billion of grant
requests from the ports in the first round. We support the
effort to support a permanent and adequately funded port
infrastructure grant program in the upcoming Surface
Transportation Reauthorization Bill.
Third, the Federal Government should change the current
harbor maintenance tax system. The Federal Government should
ensure equal treatment by taxing all U.S.-bound cargoes with an
exemption for cargoes arriving by the marine highway but
including cargoes that arrive by rail.
We also support the effort to make sure that all funds
collected through the HMT are spent on harbor maintenance. If
all of the HMT taxes that were collected each year were
reinvested in harbor maintenance, an additional half billion
dollars would have been invested in U.S. port infrastructure in
2010 alone.
Finally, the Port of Everett supports a high-speed rail
corridor modeled after the Canadian Asian-Pacific gateway to
increase the speed at which U.S. manufacturers and farmers can
export their products overseas. In 2009, the Great Northern
Corridor, which serves ports in Washington and Oregon among
other regions, moved over 124 million tons of freight.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, to double our exports, U.S.
ports need Federal Government help to increase capacity and to
keep ports competitive by reducing our permitting burden,
modifying the harbor maintenance tax to increase revenues and
to establish a level playing field, and finally, investing in
port and high-speed rail infrastructure.
The time for a passive Federal role is behind us. We need
the Federal Government to make the policy changes necessary to
ensure that the U.S. Marine Transportation System, including
rail, road connectors and the marine highway, is efficient,
effective and competitive.
Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
We will go to Mr. Larsen first for questions.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And not surprisingly, my first questions are for Mr. Mohr
from Everett, Port of Everett.
Could you just again compare maybe briefly historically the
Canadian Government's model of investment in their port
infrastructure, rail infrastructure, to how we have done it in
the U.S. and then where that puts us sort of in relative
development terms.
Mr. Mohr. Up until the early 2000s, the Canadian system was
much like the U.S. In fact, they provided much less support to
their facilities than we did in the U.S. With the initiation of
the Pacific Gateway, they made the determination that they
would bring together all of their faculties to improve their
marine terminals, improve their rail connections and actually
make strategic purchases of U.S. Rail to be able to extend
their cargoes down into the U.S. from Canada.
As a result, the majority of the containerized cargo growth
on the West Coast since these improvements began being made in
Vancouver and in Prince Rupert has been in the Canadian area.
The recognition that a continuous system of freight
movement that is modern and efficient can be competitive with
the U.S. was a real revelation in Canada. It is my
understanding that there is a similar port being considered in
the northeast in Nova Scotia that would also then compete with
our northeast ports to provide higher speed cargo and rail
access movements into the U.S. and, frankly, out of the U.S. in
terms of our exports.
But there is a distinct advantage currently in moving
cargo. Much of the cargo that comes in through Prince Rupert
does not pay a harbor maintenance tax, therefore my reference
to equally taxing all of the rail cargoes that come in. And in
talking actually with leaders in Mexico, and although they are
in real disarray right now, there is a similar plan in Mexico
to bring cargoes in through Mexico and then into the Southwest
via rail.
Mr. Larsen. So with regards to financing infrastructure
investment in ports, what are your alternatives?
Mr. Mohr. Currently the financing in terms of
infrastructure of ports, really our only opportunities are
through private investment, through port-generated investment
and to eliminate the harbor maintenance tax. There is no
specific connection at this point between the ports and rail,
that rail is--the rail services of course, the track beds are
owned by the private rail, and there is real confusion once
that rail gets off the main line and then is moved into the
ports in terms of how that is best and most efficiently
handled.
Mr. Larsen. And the role of the TIGER grants?
Mr. Mohr. TIGER grants did provide a real funding source
for ports in the United States. Mr. Matsuda mentioned the
investment that was made in the shipyard in Florida. There are
a number of other investments that have been made through the
TIGER program to improve port infrastructure. This is the first
program that I am aware of, and I believe I am correct, the
first program where actual infrastructure investments have been
funded through Federal grant programs.
Mr. Larsen. My questions have focused on infrastructure,
and I am going to continue that for Mr. Matsuda, and I will
have questions about other aspects that have been brought up by
other members of the panel on the second round.
But Mr. Matsuda, the CBO has estimated the U.S. needs to
spend about $20 billion more a year just to maintain its
infrastructure at current and, I would say, inadequate levels.
Do you know how U.S. investment in the Marine Transportation
System compares to other nations and is adequate to the CMTS?
Have you considered that question?
Mr. Matsuda. I can tell you they have not considered that
question, but it is something we can certainly take to have the
committee take a look at.
The other countries have different geography, different
needs. We certainly would like to think that the needs of the
Maritime Transportation System here in the U.S. fit within a
broader range of investments within the National Transportation
System. I think the TIGER program is one that clearly
demonstrates that because you have got port projects that are
eligible to be competing against rail projects or transit
projects or road projects and that the port projects seem to
compete very well.
Mr. Larsen. The economist last week did a report about U.S.
investment and transport and water infrastructure overall and
showed that as a percentage of GDP, it has fallen in the U.S.
since--in the last 40 years or so, but doesn't really break it
out by particular aspects of infrastructure.
Meanwhile, Europe as a continent is about 5 percent of GDP,
and China is about 9 percent of GDP; 9 percent of their GDP is
invested in infrastructure.
So just to give us comparisons of where we stand relative
to the other areas of the world, but getting that number
regarding Marine Transportation System would be especially
helpful. And I would appreciate it if you could take a look at
that.
And finally, just for Mr. Matsuda, and I will turn it back
over, I understand that the Department of Transportation
intends to develop a national trade policy. We have legislation
that has been introduced by, I believe, Mrs. Richardson, which
I am a cosponsor of, to develop a national freight policy and
try to see what we can do to include that in a final surface
transportation bill. Is that in fact--is that a fact that the
department intends to develop a national freight policy, and
how would you estimate that policy would help create jobs and
increase exports and answer the questions that we are asking
today?
Mr. Matsuda. I think that having a more coordinated freight
policy would help on a number of levels. Currently, the
Administration is examining those types of activities that can
bring Federal agencies closer together to look at--for
instance, let me give you a specific example, and this is one
where the Committee on Marine Transportation System is actually
working together to solve the problem for a particular project.
And it is a railroad bridge in Iowa.
This is a privately funded bridge by a railroad that would
very much help alleviate a bottleneck in the supply chain.
Given the various permitting requirements and the Federal
agencies that are involved, the committee has provided a place
where we can come together and actually help accelerate the
process for clearing the permitting of this bridge. And I think
it is a good example, one spurred by the Deputy Secretary at
the department to really show how we can help improve and
facilitate supply chain effectiveness.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will wait for a
second round.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Matsuda, the National Strategy for Marine
Transportation System, what is the status of the work plan that
you developed as a result of the National Strategy for this
Marine Transportation System.
Mr. Matsuda. Well, it continues as we are trying to tackle
it. As you know, we have limited ability with limited funds.
There is no specific funding provided for the committee. All of
it is basically taken from individual agencies. So we are
trying to make as best progress as we can on the strategy.
Mr. LoBiondo. So the strategy calls for 34 different
actions. Can you tell us how many have been completed or
implemented, and how many do you plan to complete prior to
2013?
Mr. Matsuda. I can give you a full report card on that. I
would have to follow up with my staff.
Mr. LoBiondo. Do you have any examples of specific actions
taken as a result of the National Strategy for the Marine
Transportation System?
Mr. Matsuda. Again, I will have to follow up with you as
far as specific examples of what the committee has
accomplished.
Mr. LoBiondo. Can you tell us how often the Cabinet level
committee meets?
Mr. Matsuda. I can tell you the Cabinet level committee
does not meet very regularly. I believe the last meeting was
2007. But there is a coordinating board that meets, and that is
made up of more agencies that come to the table that get more
hands-on opportunities to deal with the direct issues involved.
And that is quarterly meeting.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
MARAD set the rules for the use of capital construction
fund at a privately held tax-deferred ship construction finance
account plan. Does the capital construction fund--it is limited
to construction or acquisition activities only as it stands now
is my understanding. Would MARAD support the extension of the
program to cover long-term lease payments or vessel repair
projects?
Mr. Matsuda. That is something we are evaluating because it
could have the potential to stimulate shipbuilding in the U.S.,
but the Administration does not have a position on it at this
time.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
Mr. Cox, shipping is one of the most highly regulated
industries in the world. Vessel operators comply with a whole
host of big, long 9 yards that you have got to comply with all
kinds of State, Federal, international regulations. Has the
industry identified current or emerging Federal regulations
that may be duplicative, outdated or overly burdensome that we
could focus on and try to get relief with?
Mr. Roberts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I referred in
my testimony to this ballast water issue that we have before
us. I think that would be a rather critical one for our
Government to solve on a national basis. I think with respect
to--we say a lot of things about the degree to which this
industry is regulated, but I must tell you that we comply with
all of those regulations, and I think all of our people are
trained to comply with those regulations. And I think the vast
majority have a very good intent.
And I think that over the years, we have been able to fine
tune our compliance with the requirements so that we are
operating, in my opinion, sir, probably the most safe and
environmentally protective industry that we possibly can for
the American people.
So when you say, what is a duplication, I think that
currently my main concern that I would talk to my members about
is that the States are becoming more active in areas where they
in turn are duplicating what we feel are Federal jurisdictional
requirements. And I think that we are trying to get the message
out to them but perhaps the message to you and this committee
is that in the maritime industry, there is a need for a
national uniformity with respect to regulations and
requirements. And to the degree to which there isn't--to which
there is duplication of effort among the various States, I am
not saying they have a negative intent. They have a positive
intent. But at the same time, it is not beneficial for the
industry to go from port to port, region to region and be faced
with various different requirements that they have to meet. The
captain of the ship, then, the gentleman is not engaged then in
navigating his vessel to the utmost. He is engaged in trying to
make sure that he is in total compliance and therefore not
putting himself at personal danger of being arrested for being
in noncompliance with some requirement.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Robert. On the Jones Act, the Jones Act
requires merchandise and passengers moving between two points
in the United States to be carried only on U.S.-flagged, U.S.-
crewed, U.S.-owned, and U.S.-built vessels, something I
strongly support. In your opinion, do you feel the Jones Act is
being adequately enforced?
Mr. Roberts. Thank you, Mr. LoBiondo.
I think, as Joe put it, by and large, people comply with
the law, and we see--we don't have major issues most of the
time. Where we do have exceptions, where we have compliance
problems, the agencies have not uniformly responded forcefully,
as forcefully as we would like. And it is, as I mentioned in my
testimony, it is very concerning to make the kinds of billion-
dollar investments that we are making based on an assumption
about what the law requires and to see exceptions come through.
So we believe it is very important to have enforcement. And
generally we are getting good enforcement, but there are
exceptions that we have to be vigilant about.
Mr. LoBiondo. Well, I thank you for that.
I will speak for myself and I think for at least some
members of the committee. I feel very strongly about this. I
hear rumors from time to time about ideas or suggestions that
can be advanced either legislatively or otherwise that would
dramatically change or weaken the Jones Act. I can assure you
that as chair of this committee, I'll do everything in my power
not to allow that to happen.
One more question for you, Mr. Roberts, on the shipbuilding
programs, the capital construction fund that we have talked
about. Do you believe the shipbuilding industry supports the
expansion of the program to cover long-term lease payments or
vessel repair projects.
Mr. Roberts. Yes, sir. Generally speaking, I believe we do
support that proposal.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Hirono.
Ms. Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for your strong support of the Jones Act.
Like you, I am a strong supporter of that Act and I just want
to note for the record that in Hawaii, Jones Act shippers
provide--Jones Act activities, I should say, provide for 23,000
jobs just in Hawaii and approximately $1.1 billion in wages and
benefits to Hawaii's economy.
And a number of you have testified as to the impact of the
Jones Act in terms of job creation, 40,000 Jones vessels,
500,000 jobs nationwide, a $100 billion in annual economic
output. And yet practically not a year goes by where the Jones
Act does not come under attack.
Most recently, former OMB Director Peter Orszag stated in a
recent Newsweek article that the Jones Act represents a
``operating tax on all of us'' and that ``the solution is to
rescind the law to get an efficient and cost-effective mode of
shipping.''
Now those of you who are testifying in support of the Jones
Act, which perhaps is all of you, would you like to comment on
this most recent assault on the Jones Act? Any of you?
Mr. Roberts. Well, I will take a shot at it. I think there
is a--there is a perception. There is a group of people who
wake up in the morning and think about expanding international
trade, and that that is all they focus on. They may have a
certain perspective on the Jones Act that is not the same as
those of us who worry about American jobs, American
productivity, American economic growth and our national
security interests. And if you focus on those other issues, the
American jobs and so on, you support the Jones Act. If you are
more wake up and think about something different, then you may
question it.
Ms. Hirono. Yes, go ahead.
Mr. Cox. As the Chamber of Shipping of America, Ms. Hirono,
we represent American companies that own and operate ships. And
they operate both foreign flag and U.S. flag, and they are
engaged in domestic shipping as well as international shipping.
And we do support the Jones Act, and our members recognize
that.
And the question comes to mind when this is raised, and I
just wonder why water is considered somewhat different when we
are dealing with American cargoes moving between American
ports; why are we being treated differently than the railroads
or trucking or airlines? Would anybody at all suggest that we
should have foreign truck operators moving our cargo because
after all, it would be cheaper. Yet, when it comes to water,
this seems to just likely be thrown out there, why are
Americans moving cargo between American ports using American
equipment run by Americans? It is a bizarre question in my
opinion.
And I operate internationally in many areas. And on one
committee, I have to keep telling my friends and colleagues in
the international community, Europe in particular, saying well,
you look across the river, and you are making an international
movement. Here, you look across the river and you see another
State. That is why we treat ourselves in a particular way, and
the Jones Act is used by some as sort of this pejorative
reference as to how we are operating. I look at it as an
American way of operating.
Ms. Hirono. Mr. Cox, you make a very good point, and I wish
that more of our community and people who continue to raise the
issue of the Jones Act adding to consumer costs, they should
hear from you.
And I also want to make sure, Mr. Matsuda, I would like to
know what the U.S. DOT's position is on the Jones Act for the
record.
Mr. Matsuda. Absolutely supportive. It is the lifeblood of
the Merchant Marine, the U.S. maritime industry, and it helps
not just with the economy, but there are so many ways in which
it supports our national security.
Ms. Hirono. Thank you. And as we are focusing on creating
jobs and making it in America, I do have some--I have a wish
that our shipbuilding industry in this country becomes much
more robust, and it is really gone from what used to be a much
more--a very robust industry, manufacturing, in our country to
something far, far less.
And Mr. Tellez, you mentioned that you would like to
support the shipbuilding industry in our country and enhance
opportunities for domestic shipbuilding, do you or any of the
others have a big idea on what we can do to promote our
domestic shipbuilding industry?
Mr. Tellez. Big ideas? First of all, Aloha and Mahalo, for
your recent support of the Jones Act on the floor. We thank you
very much for that.
We talk about the marine highway and short sea shipping as
one of the vehicles to achieve this overall expansion and
creation of jobs. That is going to require a tremendous--if
left alone for the private sector, that will require a
tremendous private investment. And there will be no private
investments if there is no proof of life. No one is going to
invest that kind of money without proof that there is going to
be a trade there for them to get their return on their money.
So to start to initiate it, I hate to use the word
stimulate, but to stimulate it and to get this project started,
this marine highway project started, it is going to need and
require Federal support. And to be frank and honest, the
recent--the $7 million thrown at the idea by the Federal
Government by DOT is, frankly, a paltry sum in the face of
bigger investments in other trades. You are talking about a
major shipbuilding initiative. You are talking about major port
infrastructure initiatives. So it is going to require a major,
major investment.
On another point to that matter, the short sea shipping
takes care of a lot of ills created by the overcrowding of the
highways. Anyone who has taken a family trip down to Disneyland
by car will testify to the problems they face. Short sea
shipping can alleviate and take care of a lot of those problems
in a very green and environmentally safe manner.
Again, it is going to take investment. And it is also going
to take not competing the truckers but becoming an adjunct and
a partner to the truckers by taking a long-haul industry and
converting that to a short-haul industry. We think we can get
that done.
Ms. Hirono. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence. My
time is up. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Cravaack.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the testimony today. It has been very
enlightening.
Being a retired Navy captain, I understand the importance
of a maritime industry, and how important it is to have a U.S.-
flag, U.S.-crewed vessel ensuring that when we do have to go
over the horizon, we have the proper assets to do it and the
proper people that have been trained in a way that we need to
make sure that they will be able to carry the flag when the
rubber starts hitting the road. So I highly support U.S.
Vessels and the U.S. Jones Act as well.
But how do we get there? That is the big thing for me. I am
seeing a lot of challenges.
Lake Superior, for example, the harbor maintenance tax. Mr.
Cox, can you help me help us making sure that the right money
gets to the right projects to start making sure that our
vessels can get into our harbors to start exporting product?
But also, expound upon that a little bit more, and just like we
were talking about shipping within the United States, the
double taxation that occurs as well. We need to get commerce
rolling. That is how we get good shipbuilding. I don't think we
have had a salty or a laker built in Superior for decades. So
what we need to do is get the economy rolling, get jobs
rolling. That is how we start inspiring our shipping industry.
Mr. Cox, if you would, sir.
Mr. Cox. Thank you, Mr. Cravaack.
I am going to stay away from which ports need dredging and
support therefore. But I think your point about the harbor
maintenance tax is an important one, and the double taxation.
We have never spent what we have collected in the harbor
maintenance tax. So it sits in a pot; and I understand we
borrow from that pot, and we put an IOU in it so it is a
convenient repository for cash flow purposes.
But at the same time, if we are talking about removal of a
double taxation, I think that it is very small right now and I
can't give you numbers, Chairman and Members, but it is very
small because we are trying to initiate short sea shipping. In
fact, as we sit here, I think there is some short sea shipping
in California that is occurring right now. There is, I believe,
the Richmond barge ship movement is happening. And I know that
the American Feeder Line, in fact yesterday, just started their
initial short sea shipping.
So I think we have to try and support that. I think that
the elimination of that double tax might be one of those little
prods that lets everyone in the industry know that yes, our
Government is behind us, that they are supportive of us. Does
that mean that we look to you for the answers to everything?
No, but at least take an impediment out of our way. I think
that signal would be important to the industry with respect to
the harbor maintenance tax.
I am going to stop because I will get into which ports
deserving dredging and which don't, and I am going to stay away
from that.
Mr. Cravaack. I appreciate that. We do have $5 billion
sitting in that account. And you are right, they have been used
as offsets. One of the chief concerns I have, especially coming
from the Lake Superior region, is the locks and dams. Even
going down the Mississippi as well. The locks and dams
associated with the age of these, they are well over their
actual life span. So I am very concerned with that, and making
sure that we start spending the money to support our shipping
industry because I, like Mr. Tellez says, I strongly believe
that this will be part of a component of getting commerce
rolling here in the United States.
Mr. Cox, if I can just ask you about another thing, a
proposal has been introduced where the House would exempt
nonbulk, primarily containerized cargoes from the harbor
maintenance tax if it is transported between U.S. ports and
Canada and U.S. ports of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence
Seaway for the purpose of reducing costs of container movements
by ship and barge. Do you think this would be a good proposal
in getting traffic rolling on the seaway?
Mr. Cox. Yes, sir. That would be the removal of the double
taxation that I'm speaking of. Focusing on containerized cargo,
of course, is focusing on the more valuable cargo. And since
harbor maintenance tax is ad valorem, then you are getting the
bulk of the coverage that we expect. I think with bulk trade,
we are not quite as--the value there probably doesn't have the
same meaning as the containerized movement would. In fact, my
thought begins to say we are moving a lot of bulk in containers
now, too. Grain is moving in containers because of ease of
movement.
But I think we ought to also review the bulk area. I think
a lot of bulk is included now in the double taxation. So I am
not sure how much more we would have to change that language to
include the totality of cargo movement in the country.
Mr. Cravaack. I am trying to get containerized vessels on
Lake Superior. That is one of my main objectives.
Mr. Cox. I am fully supportive of that, sir.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Harris.
Dr. Harris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel for
coming here to testify today.
Mr. Matsuda, let me ask, we heard a lot about the harbor
maintenance trust fund. I know it is a big issue for the port
of Baltimore. What is the position of the Administration on the
use of that harbor maintenance trust fund? Does the Maritime
Administration feel that if we used all of that $1.3 billion,
we could work through our backlog of dredging projects which
would permit our ships to be at least fully loaded coming into
our ports? It seems it is pretty inefficient if 30 percent of
our vessels can't carry a full load because of a dredging
backlog?
Mr. Matsuda. Well, the Administration doesn't have a formal
position other than fiscal year 2012 budget proposal for use of
the harbor maintenance.
Dr. Harris. Do you agree with that proposal that doesn't
fully use all of the funds submitted for the harbor maintenance
trust fund for dredging projects?
Mr. Matsuda. It is the position of the Administration.
Dr. Harris. What do you think, within the shipping
community, is it a reasonable request, do you think, that they
have to use those taxes that they pay for the purpose for which
they are collected?
Mr. Matsuda. Well, certainly there is that expectation. I
think that there are----
Dr. Harris. You can see the reason behind that expectation,
I guess?
Mr. Matsuda. Yes.
Dr. Harris. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mohr, you have mentioned some of the regulations that
may keep us from being competitive with regards to I guess
permitting regulations, things like that. Can you be specific
about any regulations that as a subcommittee we should be
looking at where the Federal Government is at a competitive
disadvantage, America is at a competitive disadvantage to other
countries with regard to shipping?
Mr. Mohr. Thank you very much.
Particularly when you look in Asia, they can take a port
from concept to operation in about 5 years. They are able to
meet their demands. They are able to focus on their exports. In
the U.S., we tend to go through a number of layers of
regulatory review, having separate reviews at the Corps of
Engineers, at EPA, and at U.S. Fish and Wildlife and so on.
These reviews are all done independently and then combined, and
if there is an issue with one, it is an issue for the entire
process.
Frankly, the permit process tends to be almost a fetch rock
sort of an effort. You bring in your rock, and they tell you if
they like it or not. And if they don't, you go get another
rock.
Dr. Harris. Well, thank you. Let me just ask you, because
Mr. Cox testified that some of the issues and regulations with
regards to the different States having different regulations,
but your impression with regard to at least port enhancements,
that a lot of these problems are Federal level?
Mr. Mohr. I think there are issues at all levels. Certainly
I agree with Mr. Cox that certain issues need to be dealt with
entirely at the Federal level. The ballast water issue is one
where we don't want to balkanize the process and have different
requirements for different shipping regions. There needs to be
uniformity on issues such as this.
But I think a more collaborative approach, particularly
from the Federal regulators on how we address the construction
of a facility or the deepening of a channel is much more
productive, in which we could, in fact, work together to be
able to define a reasonable response rather than trying to meet
a standard that can change actually over the period of time
that the permit is in play.
Dr. Harris. When that process becomes long, I'm sure that
can happen.
Mr. Roberts, what is AMP's vision for the marine highway?
This projects seems like a project that is worthwhile idea. Of
course, in the fiscal year 2012 budget, I believe that
feasibility moneys have been eliminated. But what does AMP
think about this?
Mr. Roberts. Yes, the AMP certainly supports the marine
highway system. We stand united with our brothers on this panel
in that regard. It already exists in certain respects. If you
consider there are 40,000 vessels in domestic commerce
operating now, there is a lot of cargo that moves in coastwise
trade.
The focus of the marine highway is on intermodal cargoes
that now currently move predominantly on the highways. Getting
those cargoes off the highways and on the waterways makes
abundant sense and would be a great project to do.
I have to say that we have not been asked by our customers
to create such a system, and that leads to the suggestion that
is sort of consistent with the harbor maintenance tax reforms
that are being discussed, that the harbor maintenance tax falls
on the customers. If you can remove that disincentive that the
customers have to using the waterways, and focus on providing
incentives for customers to use the waterways, we think that
may be a very effective way of stimulating demand and then
allowing the private sector to respond to that demand.
Also, continue making the Government investments in
infrastructure. Those are critically important, and the harbor
maintenance tax is there to support that.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Roberts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings, we first offer you our deepest sympathy and
wish you and your family peace and strength during this
difficult time.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Matsuda, as you know, last year I convened two hearings
in this subcommittee to examine the state of U.S.-flag vessels
in the foreign trade. According to data provided by MARAD and
compiled in part by contractors engaged by MARAD to assess the
U.S. maritime transportation system, the U.S.-flag fleet, which
was comprised of 94 vessels as of March 2010, was carrying less
than 2 percent of the U.S. foreign trade. How many vessels are
currently in the U.S.-flag ocean-going fleet, and what
percentage of U.S. foreign trade is it carrying?
Mr. Matsuda. Currently there are about 120, or slightly
below that, in U.S. ocean-going trade; but there is also about
the same amount of cargo, relatively speaking, carried on those
vessels versus overall foreign trade of the U.S.
Mr. Cummings. So what steps has MARAD taken in the last
year to increase the number of vessels in the U.S.-flag ocean-
going fleet?
Mr. Matsuda. Well, our strategy was multifaceted. First, we
wanted to make sure that we got a full understanding of the
situation and that is why we launched the study in cooperation
with the subcommittee last year. That study is nearing
conclusion. We are getting work back from our contractors. And,
obviously, we want to make sure that it is accurate and are
satisfied with the result.
But secondly, it is securing the cargoes that are necessary
to build the industry. That starts with the cargo preference
program. As you know, we have made headway with a number of our
agencies that ship Federal products--or finance Federal
shipments recently with the Department of Energy. Also, we held
the first ever Federal shipper forum, where we brought these
agencies together and started the conversation about how we can
more effectively run this program to make sure that they are
complying with the law and that cargoes that are federally
financed are going on U.S.-flag vessels.
Mr. Cummings. Now you said the report is due soon?
Mr. Matsuda. Yes. We expect this summer.
Mr. Cummings. This summer. Can you give us a date? We like
deadlines.
Mr. Matsuda. I do, too, sir. We always want to make sure
that we are releasing the best quality product.
Mr. Cummings. Give us a date. Give us some kind of date
now. Don't take us into the winter. When are you talking about?
Mr. Matsuda. Our best estimate is September 1.
Mr. Cummings. Well, see if you can get it by September 15.
That would give you 2 extra weeks; how about that?
Mr. Matsuda. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Sure. What trends do you project regarding
the size of the U.S.-flag fleet in the foreign trade over the
next 5 years?
Mr. Matsuda. Well, it largely depends on cargo. As we heard
from a number of the witnesses today, the support that the
Federal Government provides this industry is what largely
dictates what cargo opportunities will be there. It is not just
a matter of subsidies. These companies in return are providing
a very useful, in fact vital, support to the U.S. military and
other parts of the Government. We respond to humanitarian
missions, carry food aid, and do a number of things that carry
out the Government's mission. So it largely depends upon
whatever kind of support the Federal Government can provide.
Mr. Cummings. How many MSP eligible vessels are currently
documented in the U.S. but are not receiving payments because
the MSP program is fully subscribed?
Mr. Matsuda. Approximately 55.
Mr. Cummings. On another note, what steps has MARAD taken
since the President established his export initiative to ensure
that U.S.-flag ocean-going fleet is part of and benefits from
that export initiative?
Mr. Matsuda. Well, we have met with the Export-Import Bank.
We have also participated in meetings with the National Export
Council. As you know, Secretary LaHood serves on that council.
It is true that the United States maritime industry does
provide an export service, whatever we are carrying that is not
something that a foreign flagship is carrying or a foreign
company is carrying, so working within this system and trying
to make sure that these opportunities exist to carry the
Nation's export cargo as it continues to grow, make sure that
we can help provide more opportunities for the fleet as a
whole, and grow the industry.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very
much.
Mr. LoBiondo. The gentleman from coastal Louisiana.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Matsuda, we have been following closely the efforts of
MARAD's ship disposal program. The National Maritime Heritage
Act requires you all to dispose of vessels at the least cost to
the Government and regardless of whether a vessel is disposed
of through a procurement contract or sale to a private party
for recycling. Each contract, and I quote, ``shall use full and
open competition.'' My concern is that you all recently awarded
a contract on a noncompetitive basis totaling $3.1 million to a
California recycler of you all's choosing, even before the
recycler's yard was fully operational. Why was this facility
given these contracts, and why did your agency not utilize a
fully transparent process when awarding this contract?
Mr. Matsuda. First, I can speak to that. This was the
contract awarded to ADR Systems in Vallejo, California. ADR is
a certified facility that meets all of the regulatory and
environmental requirements in order to operate a ship recycling
facility in the U.S.
The process for awarding this contract was followed whereby
we do publish in the Federal Register a rationale for awarding
it. The bottom line is that, frankly, if we had not done this,
we would be stuck working with sole-source contracts to clean
up and dispose of ships in the Suisun Bay fleet for the time to
come. We needed to end that cycle of sole-source contracts by,
unfortunately, presenting a sole-source contract.
Mr. Landry. Well, in order to participate, and I am glad
you brought up the certification of facilities because I am
also concerned with that, too. There is a facility in my
district whose certification has languished in your agency for
more than a year while evidently other facilities have been
certified. Even facilities that have had questionable
environmental histories, have seen their certifications kind of
fly through your agency.
I received a letter from a particular company in my
district who has been trying to get their certification done.
This facility is specifically in Amelia, Louisiana, and if you
are not familiar with it, if you can send me some information
as to why that facility has languished in its certification, I
would appreciate it.
Mr. Matsuda. I am happy to follow up with you on that, sir.
Mr. Landry. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We talked about infrastructure and the Jones Act. We talked
about a variety of things, but I want to talk about the people.
Mr. Tellez, you noted that the present paperwork required
for mariner licenses is an impediment to expanding the maritime
job market. Has your organization and others approached the
Coast Guard about this?
Mr. Tellez. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Can you talk about what you recommended----
Mr. Tellez. As I mentioned, one of the big impediments has
been the recent NVIC on medical requirements instituted by the
Coast Guard. It was causing a major problem. The commandant
called a meeting of all the maritime unions and training
centers. We met. To their credit, one of the actions that they
took part in was to kind of focus on the medical review
process. They added some folks at the National Maritime Center.
They created a dedicated 800-telephone number just to handle
folks who have problems with the medical review. That has
somewhat alleviated the problem; but the problem still exists.
It is caused mainly by the myriad number of various kinds
of documents that are required to support whatever application
you are submitting. Unless those documents, that documentation
comes in beforehand, or rather with the application, you are
going to run into a lot of delays. The word we are getting out
there is it is up to a couple of months, maybe even longer if
that documentation isn't fully submitted with the initial
application.
Again, they are trying, but I would suggest that even their
correction and their improvement still leaves a major hold up
of folks trying to get their licenses.
Mr. Larsen. If you could keep us up to speed on your
thoughts and your evaluation of the progress, we would
appreciate it.
Mr. Tellez. Yes, sir.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Roberts, we haven't asked about Title 11,
Federal ship financing. It provides for a full faith and credit
guarantee by the U.S. Government to promote the growth and
modernization of the U.S. Merchant Marine and U.S. shipyards.
Does AMP have any recommendations for changes to Title 11
amending the act to raise the cap on the overall amount on
guarantee, smaller scale programs to be more responsive to the
needs of smaller ports and harbors, has AMP taken positions on
those or other reforms?
Mr. Roberts. No, Mr. Larsen, we have not considered those
issues. We do support the Title 11 program. We believe it is
basically sound, that the valuation criteria make sense, and
that they are consistent with commercial underwriting
requirements. And we would encourage an efficient processing of
applications. I know there are challenges there sometimes, but
generally we very much support the program. We would be glad to
take a look at some of the suggestions that you have presented.
Mr. Larsen. Excellent. I would appreciate if you would do
that.
Mr. Mohr, at least one of your tenants at the port is a
shipyard, a smaller shipyard, and I know they have been a
recipient of an assistance to small shipyard grant to be able
to expand their facilities and improve the footprint and
efficiency of the facility. Can you comment on your view, the
port's view of the effectiveness of this grant program as it
applies to the shipyard?
Mr. Mohr. I can, Mr. Larsen. The yard you are referring to,
Everett Shipyard, a subsidiary of Vigor Marine, has increased
its employment by about 30 percent since the grant has been
received. The facility that we are referring to largely does
U.S. ferry work for the Washington State ferry system and also
Navy work and has been able to add, in addition to that some--
as a matter of fact, Crowley tug boats have been in there
recently and some barge work and other things to fill in.
But the grant that they received added stability to the
overall organization. Prior to that, they were largely kind of
a boom-bust kind of an operation. When they received bids, they
were busy; when they didn't, they were virtually empty. But the
work that has been done to date, and I believe they are
continuing to apply for these grants, has added substantially
to the stability of the employment, and they are able to
additional facilities and take on additional work as well.
Mr. Larsen. Can you provide, Port of Everett being an
example, and obviously you are not a larger port like a Seattle
or Tacoma or L.A.-Long Beach on the West Coast, but you do have
a variety of niche markets you are serving so your
infrastructure needs would be smaller than your larger ports.
But as an example, for your capital plan, what are your
infrastructure needs in terms of total amount of dollars you
need every year, if it is a 1-year or 5-year timeframe,
whatever you use?
Mr. Mohr. Our current infrastructure plan requires just
over $100 million in investment. It includes the strengthening
and expansion of our facilities. Our community is a historic
industrial community; and as such, included in that money,
there is a substantial amount for cleanup for past pollution
that has taken place by the manufacturing facility that was
located there previously.
Mr. Larsen. When you say previously, give us the timeframe
of previously?
Mr. Mohr. From about 1930 to 1981.
Mr. Larsen. And you are still cleaning it up?
Mr. Mohr. We are cleaning it up, yes. It was the site of a
former pulp and paper mill.
We also are deepening our facilities in recognition of
the--we do have natural draft at our port and require very
little dredging. But by moving our docks out just another 100
feet, we are able to pick up another 5 feet of depth at
dockside, which adds substantial advantage.
Our port really serves a very narrow market in our support
for the aerospace industry, but we also handle a lot of value-
added type of products and manufactured products, windmills and
such. But we export large pieces of machinery because of our
specialty in handling very expensive, one-off types of
equipment. So we move a lot of mining equipment, a lot of farm
equipment, and a lot of critical path equipment into Asia and
into the Arctic Circle area of Russia.
Mr. Larsen. Equipment manufactured in the United States?
Mr. Mohr. Equipment manufactured in the United States.
Mr. Larsen. But the point I want to make is you are a
smaller port, you serve niche markets, and your capital plan is
still $100 million?
Mr. Mohr. It is. In fact--any time you talk to any port in
the United States that is doing a serious infrastructure
upgrade or expansion, it is always in the hundred million
dollars. Even a small barge dock that we built to handle
aerospace parts was a $30 million endeavor.
But having said that, we also support 31,000 jobs in our
community directly from the products that we do handle.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
One final question. Mr. Roberts, I think maybe this
question has been asked a little bit, but how likely is it that
an expansion of U.S. exports would trigger cargo preference
requirements to increase the demand for U.S.-flag vessels and
U.S. crews?
Mr. Roberts. Can you ask that again? I'm not sure I got
your question.
Mr. Larsen. How likely is it that an expansion of U.S.
exports would trigger cargo preference requirements to increase
the demand for U.S.-flag vessels and U.S. crews?
Mr. Roberts. I am afraid I haven't thought about that. I
would be happy to do so and get back to you.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Tellez?
Mr. Tellez. Although the initiative has been created to
double the exports over 5 years, that doesn't happen just
because somebody says it. The Government has to basically start
that off. One of the major players in starting that off is
going to be Ex-Im Bank projects, which are projects funded by
taxpayer dollars that by law have to be carried on U.S.-flag
ships.
If the national initiative is going to be a very real
effort, that is where it is going to start. When those Ex-Im
Bank projects get going, you will see an expansion, and we have
already seen expansion. We have seen at least four new U.S.-
flag vessels flagged in to take advantage of this cargo. The
more that those Ex-Im Bank cargoes are generated, you will see
more U.S. jobs, more ships reflagged to take advantage of those
that are in that business get full employment for at least the
next 5 years.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Tellez, do you feel that the cargo
preference laws are being adequately enforced?
Mr. Tellez. Anecdotally, I can only say no. I don't have
any numbers or proof. But just from the industry and from what
we hear from the industry, no.
Mr. LoBiondo. If you come across anything that would be
specific, if you can pass it on to us, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Tellez. Again, other than what we have already spoken
about, the Department of Energy cargoes and some of these Ex-Im
Bank cargoes, that I know specifically, if those laws are
enacted--or, rather, enforced, as I just mentioned, we will get
our full share of employment and of U.S.-flag vessels employed.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
One last question. Mr. Matsuda, help me understand this.
You needed to end sole-source contracting by awarding a sole-
source contract? I don't get it.
Mr. Matsuda. This was a particular problem with the ship
disposal program. We have got a number of vessels in the Suisun
Bay reserve fleet which are required by court order to be
disposed of within a certain time schedule. To meet that time
schedule, we needed to add capacity to help either recycle
those vessels locally or have their hulls and cleaned of
invasive species and transported to other recycling facilities
around the country.
Unfortunately, we were dealing with only one single
shipyard which was large enough to process these vessels before
they could be transported around to other facilities, and we
had to deal with them on a sole-source basis for a number of
contracts.
By certifying and working with the new facility in the Bay
Area Region, we now introduced competition so that there are in
fact two shipyards that can compete for that work.
The reason we issued it as a sole source, it still was
within the limits obviously and in accordance with the law, we
had to have a fair and reasonable price, and it turns out that
the price that was negotiated was lower than the average of all
of the other ships that had been disposed of.
Mr. LoBiondo. I am not sure that I fully get it, but OK.
I would like to thank all of the panel members for being
here today. I think this was helpful and informative. The
committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

