- STREAMLINING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: IMPROVING PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND CUTTING COSTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STREAMLINING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
IMPROVING PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE,
AND CUTTING COSTS

=======================================================================

(112-56)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 13, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-682                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee

7_____

Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,               Columbia
Arkansas,                        HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
Vice Chair                         MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BOB FILNER, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,      (Ex Officio)
Tennessee
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)

(ii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY
Panel One

Fugate, Hon. Craig, Administrator, Federal Emergency Management
Agency.........................................................     6
Hunter, Dean, Deputy Director, Facilities, Security, and
Contracting, U.S. Office of Personnel Management...............     6
Jadacki, Matthew A., Assistant Inspector General, Office of
Emergency Management Oversight, Office of Inspector General,
Department of Homeland Security................................     6

Panel Two

Dayton, Mike, Acting Secretary, California Emergency Management
Agency.........................................................    30
Metcalf, Chief William R., EFO, CFO, MIFireE, Second Vice
President, International Association of Fire Chiefs............    30
Stammer, Keith, Director, Joplin/Jasper County Emergency
Management Agency..............................................    30
Wilson, Joe, President, Safety and Security Group, Industrial
Systems Division, Federal Signal Corporation...................    30

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Dayton, Mike.....................................................    39
Fugate, Hon. Craig...............................................    46
Hunter, Dean.....................................................    63
Jadacki, Matthew A...............................................    69
Metcalf, Chief William R., EFO, CFO, MIFireE.....................    80
Stammer, Keith...................................................    86
Wilson, Joe......................................................    96

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions from the Subcommittee on Economic
Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency Management:

Fugate, Hon. Craig, Administrator, Federal Emergency
Management Agency..........................................    53
Hunter, Dean, Deputy Director, Facilities, Security, and
Contracting, U.S. Office of Personnel Management...........    67

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T0682.006

STREAMLINING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
IMPROVING PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE,
AND CUTTING COSTS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public
Buildings, and Emergency Management,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 8:34 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The subcommittee will come to order. First, let
me welcome FEMA Administrator Fugate, Mr. Dayton, Secretary of
California Emergency Management Agency, and all of the
distinguished witnesses, and thank them for their testimony
today.
Today's hearing is on streamlining emergency management,
and how we can improve preparedness and response, while cutting
costs. I believe reducing costs goes hand in hand with
improving our emergency management system. Inefficiencies and
red tape cost money and bog down our response system. And today
we will examine how we can streamline and cut through that red
tape.
Last month Ranking Member Norton and I introduced the FEMA
Reauthorization Act and the Integrated Public Alert and Warning
System Modernization Act. As our committee reviews these
important pieces of legislation, we must ensure we don't just
reauthorize the same old ways of doing things, but ensure we
are learning from past disasters, and making reforms that are
much needed.
FEMA was originally created in 1979 by Executive order, and
operated for nearly 30 years without explicit authorization and
statute. FEMA was first authorized in statute in 2006 through
the Post-Katrina Act, and that authorization expired last year.
While FEMA can continue to operate without explicit
authorization, authorizing FEMA in the law helps to provide
congressional guidance in the operations of the agency.
So far this year we have had 86 major disaster declarations
and 26 emergency declarations, exceeding the highest yearly
total from prior years. And last month we had the very real
possibility of the Disaster Relief Fund running out of money,
going into question our ability to respond and provided needed
resources following disasters.
The reality is we can both cut costs and improve our
responses to disasters. The very things that impede
preparedness and drag out response are the same things that
usually result in higher costs. For example, the longer it
takes to push disaster aide out the door, the longer it takes
communities to recover, meaning we are spending more money in
rebuilding and administrative costs.
Cutting through unnecessary red tape and streamlining is
critical in saving lives, restoring communities, and saving
taxpayer dollars. We also must ensure resources are properly
leveraged. Ensuring we are prepared at all levels from
individuals to local communities and States will go a long way
in saving lives and minimizing costs.
The urban search and rescue system and the emergency
management system compact reauthorized in our legislation both
provide, with small investments, significant capacity at the
State and local levels, for resources to be leveraged. Despite
the chance to address some low-hanging fruit and improving our
emergency management system and cutting costs, our subcommittee
has had hearing after hearing since Hurricane Katrina, pushing
for FEMA to look for ways to streamline its onerous and often
outdated regulations and policies.
Many of FEMA's regulations and policies have created so
many hurdles and so much red tape that communities devastated
by disasters have often found it frustrating to navigate the
process.
Another example is in 2000 Congress enacted the Disaster
Mitigation Act that included provisions requiring FEMA to
implement cost-estimating to help communities rebuild faster.
By all accounts, this one change could help streamline one of
FEMA's key disaster assistance programs. However, it is now 11
years later, and FEMA has yet to implement those provisions.
I also understand FEMA is engaged in a bottom-up review of
its Public Assistance Program. However, we have not yet seen
results from this review. While I am pleased these steps are
being taken, I am worried these actions have taken just too
long. With high unemployment, budget deficits, and everyone
having to tighten their belts, the red tape is just too
expensive. That is why it will be important today to examine
how we can improve our emergency management system, and what
may be the best legislative solutions to achieve those
efficiencies.
I hope today we can hear from our witnesses on how our
preparedness and response systems can be streamlined and
improved. I look forward to working with Administrator Fugate,
members of the committee, and other stakeholders on
reauthorizing FEMA. I thank the witnesses for being here today
to address these important issues.
I would like to now recognize Ranking Member Norton from
the District of Columbia for 5 minutes to make any opening
statements she may have.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Chairman Denham, and thank
you very much for calling this hearing. And I am pleased to
welcome our witnesses to today's hearing to discuss
streamlining, cost-cutting, and improving preparedness and
response to natural and terrorist events.
Over the past several years, this subcommittee held
numerous hearings to ensure that our Nation is prepared to
respond to disasters using an all-hazards approach. As part of
the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006,
Congress directed FEMA to develop a national preparedness goal
and system. Last month FEMA issued the goal, and has been
directed by the President to issue the national preparedness
system later this year.
I believe that the Nation is generally pleased with
improvements to emergency preparedness response and overall
management of the--management of disasters, as the public
responds to FEMA's management of the many major disasters
throughout the Nation this year shows.
Last Congress, this subcommittee held a hearing on lessons
learned from Hurricane Katrina, and discussed the need to
streamline emergency management and improve FEMA's use of
existing authorities.
Assistant Inspector General Matthew Jadacki will testify
today that FEMA should take many of the same steps that were
recommended last year to improve its programs and policies. One
area that the inspector general focuses upon, and that was of
particular concern to me when I chaired this subcommittee, was
FEMA's administration and implementation of the Public
Assistance Program. While I commend FEMA for initiating a
bottom-up review of the Public Assistance Program, I am
concerned that the inspector general must again comment, for
example, on instituting a cost estimating system for repair and
reconstruction.
The Congress executed--the Congress insisted upon a--that
FEMA--I am sorry, there is a typo here--the Congress
experienced a FEMA emergency of its own in August when the
administration submitted a $500 million supplemental
appropriations request to provide funding for FEMA through the
end of the fiscal year.
FEMA then instituted an immediate needs--instituted
immediate needs funding, authoring payments only for certain
categories of assistance. By mid-September, FEMA indicated that
it had insufficient funds to make it through the end of the
month. However, the last week of September, FEMA found that it
had enough funds to make it through the end of the month. I am
interested to know how and when FEMA discovered this money.
I am particularly concerned about the Federal Government's
response to the August 23, 2011, earthquake in the National
Capital region. In 2008, the national response framework
required each Federal agency to plan for its role in a
coordinated Federal response to an emergency. Have Federal
agencies met this requirement?
Most important, has OPM, or the Office of Personnel
Management, consulted with FEMA on how to guide agencies
concerning an all-hazard approach to disasters? If so, what
explains the Federal Government's response to the 5.8 magnitude
earthquake in August. The earthquake occurred at 1:51 p.m., but
agencies appeared to act haphazardly on their own concerning
dismissal, ensuring a rush to the Metro, which no
transportation system could have effectively handled. OPM did
not send notice to officially dismiss Federal employees until
4:00 p.m.
Ten years after 9/11, there appears to be no all-hazards
site or communications vehicle widely known to the public and
to Federal agencies. Instead, cell phones jammed because
Federal employees and others did not know to go to a site or to
text for information, or where in the world that site was.
If the point of preparedness is to prepare for the
unexpected, such as an earthquake in this region--which was a
perfect proxy for a terrorist attack--there is little evidence
that the Federal Government is prepared for emergencies where
there is no notice, and that requires disseminating information
to the public, or is prepared for an unexpected evacuation from
the District if evacuation is required at all.
I understand the FEMA conducts post-disaster meetings to
analyze lessons learned and to develop best practices. Did
such--had such a post-disaster meeting occurred here with FEMA
or the Department of Homeland Security and the region following
the earthquake? Over the last few years, FEMA has made
improvements, many because of lessons learned from prior
disasters. What about a disaster where the Nation can least
afford it, at the seat of government?
I look forward to the testimony from all of today's
witnesses, and thank them all for their testimony today. And
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I now call on Mr. Barletta for a brief opening
statement.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Chairman. And I want to thank the
panel for coming here. It is very timely for me, being a Member
of--in a district in northeastern Pennsylvania that was--that
saw the worst flood in its history. And, Mr. Fugate, nice to
see you again. We met in Duryea, Pennsylvania, with the Vice
President.
First of all, I want to comment FEMA on their reaction time
to this disaster. As I said, this was the worst disaster in
northeastern Pennsylvania history. And we had boots--FEMA had
boots on the ground very quickly, which was very good to see.
I am just going to make a couple of comments of how--what I
saw and my experience, how I think we could improve our
reaction to some of these disasters.
One of the problems that I see that has happened--and I am
holding up one of the pictures--this has been community after
community after community. I don't know if the national media
never really focused on how bad this disaster is, but some of
these communities have been totally wiped out. You will go in
an entire town where you can't even see the homes, because
everyone's personal belongings literally lined every street,
where you could not even get to the sidewalks.
The problem here is that the public assistance portion
comes too slow. And what is happening is the municipalities are
not able to haul the debris away, because they are unsure
whether or not they are going to be reimbursed, how much they
are going to be reimbursed. Some of their costs are $300,000,
$400,000, $500,000, and they just stopped hauling the personal
belongings away. So I think we need to find a way to get the
public assistance help to these communities, to these
municipalities, so that they could start cleaning up the
communities.
I would also like to talk a little bit about the hazard
mitigation, and the way it is calculated to get the money to
the States. Because it is after the individual assistance, the
public assistance, then we get to the hazard mitigation. And
what is happening there is many people are cleaning out homes
that are clearly--they are never going to live in again. And it
is sad to see senior citizens sweating, dragging out their
belongings, when it is obvious they are not going to live there
again.
And it is a double cost to the municipality, as they are
hauling this stuff away, and then we are going to come in there
and most likely either buy these folks out or--you know, we
need to tell them to stop. And I think if we had a better way
to calculate the hazard mitigation, we might be able to save
some money for the municipalities and for the Federal
Government.
I also think there is a disconnect. As quickly as FEMA
comes into the disaster, what happens in a lot of these
communities, most of the public officials are part-timers,
part-time mayor, part-time supervisors. I was a full-time
mayor. So we had a plan if there was a disaster. But what
happens, FEMA was very quickly to come in and talk to the
public officials, but many of the public officials then really
didn't know how do they connect to the residents when there is
no power, people are displaced all over the place. And many of
the public officials really didn't know what to do or what the
process is.
And I actually closed my offices here, sent our people
down, and we set up little stations in some of these
communities to help the residents, because they were literally
just coming into the municipal buildings with a million
questions. So I think there needs to be more communication with
FEMA and the public officials, educating them on what they
should--how they get to the residents, how they get messages to
them.
And, you know, I think that the very early stages is where
I think we need to reassure the people who are affected by
these disasters that the Federal Government is here to help.
So that is just some of the remarks I want to make. And I
will be--again, during the public question portion, we will--I
am sure we will have some more questions. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And I would like to welcome our
witnesses here today. On our first panel we have the Honorable
Craig Fugate, administrator, Federal Emergency Management
Agency; Mr. Matthew Jadacki, assistant inspector general,
emergency management oversight, Department of Homeland
Security; and Mr. Dean Hunter, deputy director, facilities,
security, and contracting, U.S. Office of Personnel Management.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered. Since your
written testimony has been part of the record, the subcommittee
would request that you limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes.
Administrator Fugate, welcome. You may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE CRAIG FUGATE, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY; MATTHEW A. JADACKI, ASSISTANT
INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT,
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY;
AND DEAN HUNTER, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, FACILITIES, SECURITY, AND
CONTRACTING, U.S. OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

Mr. Fugate. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Norton. In talking about the disasters this year, the DRF, the
complexity of providing assistance, both under individual
assistance and public assistance, and looking at how we can be
more cost effective, we are in agreement. It is getting there
that is the challenge.
One of the challenges we have faced is because of the
magnitude of disasters as this administration came into. We
have been working hard to, A, recover dollars from older
disasters. That has been something that, in the last 2 years,
has returned billions of dollars back into DRF from open
disasters that had not been closed, from mission assignments
that had not been closed out, from projects that had been
completed by States but had balances that had never been closed
out. To a large degree, that is why the DRF made it to the end
of the fiscal year without hitting zero.
But I would also like to point out that the disaster relief
fund is not about the disasters we have had. It is also about
the disasters that can occur with no warning. And, Mr.
Chairman, you know we don't get a forecast for earthquakes. And
so, although--we were able to pull recoveries that we had
planned for in fiscal year 2012 forward, and were able to not
shut down individual assistance.
I am under no allusions that the DRF had sufficient funds,
if we had had a catastrophic disaster occur in that timeframe.
And so our efforts to ensure that during that process we did
not stop individual assistance, which we felt was the highest
priority in the open disasters, we pretty much shut down
everything else we could to make that goal line, so that we
could make it to the continuing resolution and start back up
and begin funding all the prior permanent work we had stopped.
But I need to emphasize that the disaster relief fund has
to be in a position that, when the next disaster strikes with
or without warning, we have the resources we need to begin that
response. As was pointed out, in Pennsylvania, up and down the
coast in Irene, we were moving teams ahead of the storm, we
were moving teams and resources prior to request from the
Governors for disaster declarations. This is part of the legacy
of the Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act. We learned
the lesson that the Federal Government cannot wait until the
disaster overwhelms States to begin moving teams and resources.
But that requires that there are balances in the DRF to support
that.
The other issues that have been raised, having been a
customer of FEMA as the State of Florida, I understand the
complexity of public assistance, unfortunately, about as well
as anybody. One of our goals at FEMA has been to look at the
regulatory requirements, and what we can relieve.
As far as cost estimation and some of the work we are doing
in the bottom-up review, we are looking at a two-stage process,
particularly in permanent work that is--such as construction in
buildings or large-scale public works projects. The current
program is a reimbursement program where we have multiple steps
of trying to manage a project by literally reimbursing
construction over the period in the life of that event. That
requires a high degree of administrative cost, oversight, and
review that becomes very complex and very costly to administer
those dollars.
We are looking at a different way to approach that in
breaking large projects into two parts. One is a design phase,
pretty much what anybody else would do if they were going to
build a big building. You just don't go out and start building
and pay a contractor until it is done. You go out and you have
all your studies done, you get all your environmental impacts
and historical reviews done. You make sure that everything
about the project has been approved by those organizations that
permit and have the other requirements.
You then have the building approved by an architect or
engineer that says, ``This is what design-to-build costs will
be.'' That is phase one. The second phase, as we would see it,
would be to actually make one payment at the beginning of the
project, and we are done. That would alleviate a lot of the
reimbursement oversight and the length it takes to sometimes
close out public assistance. It is not quite to the point of
being a cost estimate, but it would build a design phase to get
the best accurate estimate, when it is sometimes difficult to
do that across large, complex projects.
We also looked to reduce the cost of administering how we
do our business. When I got to FEMA, we rarely implemented
something we called virtual joint field offices. We would
oftentimes set up an office, bring in staff, have security, and
all the other resources needed to run a joint field office to
administer public assistance programs within the State. We have
been very aggressively looking at how not to use those
facilities when it is not warranted, in cooperation with the
States. And by using virtual joint field offices where we don't
establish a permanent presence, use our regional offices and
structures, and are able to administer the public assistance
program to the satisfactory requirements of the Government and
the State, we can significantly reduce that overhead.
We now look at our joint field offices and develop spend
plans, which we hadn't done before, so we can actually see how
much is it costing us to administer that disaster. These and
other steps are ways that we are looking at how we can drive
down the administrative cost of the programs, but at the same
time looking at how we can streamline the process without the
unintended consequences of fraud and waste that can result--and
oftentimes has resulted--when shortcuts were taken without
proper planning.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Administrator Fugate.
Mr. Jadacki, you may proceed.
Mr. Jadacki. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Norton, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss streamlining and cutting costs while
improving preparedness and response capabilities at the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
I would like to first acknowledge the great amount of work
that has been done by FEMA in the past 5 years. My office has
conducted a significant amount of work assessing FEMA's
programs and policies, as well as conducting audits of disaster
grants and subgrants. We have made important findings and
recommendations in a number of areas, and I am pleased to say
that FEMA is implementing many of our recommendations.
With regard to streamlining, my testimony is focused on the
Public Assistance Program just mentioned by Mr. Fugate here,
and the disaster close-out process. I will also discuss several
areas for potential cost savings, including debris removal and
holding grantees and subgrantees accountable for ineligible and
unsupported costs. And finally, I will touch on improving
preparedness and response through tracking lessons learned and
implementing corrective actions.
Before I address these topics, I would like to take a
moment to discuss the disaster relief fund, the increasing
number of disaster declarations, and the Federal cost share for
disasters.
Recently, due to a number of ongoing disasters and a spate
of declarations this year, the DRF was depleted to a point
where only funding for immediate needs was authorized. Funding
for long-term projects was put on hold. The disaster relief
fund is not a bottomless pit. It needs periodic replenishments,
either through the normal appropriations process, or through
emergency supplemental legislation.
One advantage of the DRF is that it is a no-year fund,
meaning that unused DRF funding does not expire at the end of
the year, as do most appropriations. Another benefit of no-year
funding is that unused or unexpended funds identified through
streamlining or cost-cutting efforts may be returned to the DRF
for future expenditures. FEMA was able to extend the DRF
through the end of the fiscal year by employing some of these
measures.
Two suggestions have been made by my office and others for
reducing the Federal cost of disaster relief, including
strengthening disaster declaration criteria to prevent marginal
emergencies and disasters from being declared, and adjusting
the cost share so that States are responsible for a larger
portion of recovery funding.
One of the reasons the number of disasters continues to
increase is the way FEMA assesses whether to recommend to the
President that a disaster be declared. FEMA relies on a
combination of quantitative and qualitative factors when
assessing a declaration request.
But one of the quantitative factors is based on the per
capita income in 1983, which was $12,583, and the other
quantitative factor, the total amount of damage to the State,
remains at the threshold set in 1999, which was $1 million. It
is up to Congress and the President to decide what the
threshold for disaster should be. But I would suggest you take
the time to look at the criteria used to make the decision.
It may also be time to reassess how much the Federal cost
share should be under disaster declarations, and it is
important that Congress reexamine the circumstances under which
the Federal cost share should be raised above 75 percent. I am
not saying that the cost share should never be increased. But
when it is, there should be time limits. While cost share
adjustments can be a great help to State and local governments
when economies have been devastated, they reduce the
supplemental nature of the Stafford Act funding. And when the
States' cost share is reduced to zero, there is little
incentive for State and local governments to save money, or to
close out projects in a timely manner.
At the request of this committee several years ago, we
conducted an indepth review of the public assistance process.
And we were asked by the committee to come up with
recommendations and alternatives to help streamline the
process. We issued a report about 2 years ago and I testified
on that, and we made several recommendations to FEMA, but we
also provided alternatives that Congress can look at to change
or help the disaster assistance program.
Within FEMA, we wanted to get some sort of standards or
performance measures, as far as appeals and some of the other
factors that were resulting in some of the delays of funding.
We also recommended that FEMA develop tracking systems to kind
of keep track of these types of things, that when something
goes into the process it is not lost in the process, that
things are able to be unraveled or resolved in a timely manner.
FEMA has done that.
But more importantly, we made some recommendations--and
Craig alluded to these a couple minutes ago--that we think may
or may not require congressional action. One is negotiating
settlements. Right now, the process that we are using with the
project worksheet works fine for smaller garden-variety types
of disasters. It is great if you are going to rebuild City Hall
where City Hall was before. That is fine.
But in catastrophic types of events, we don't think that is
the best way to do it. The use of the cost-estimating format
might be one solution, where we get estimates upfront, where
people agree to them, and then, instead of tracking every
single actual cost, we come up with estimates of what the costs
are going to be, and we agree to that and walk away. That would
significantly reduce the administrative burden on both the
Federal, the State, and local governments.
It worked pretty well. There was a pilot study that was
done a couple years ago on the debris removal pilot program,
where estimates were used and the States were encouraged, and
they received a higher incentive if they had a debris
management plan in place. So we are looking at that.
Finally, I just want to mention the lessons learned. One of
the things--I think the most important thing--is what are we
learning from disasters. I heard earlier about the fact that
there were some problems in DC with the evacuation, and we are
going to hear the person from OPM talk about that. But I think
it is critical, as we go through these disasters, to ask what
are the types of things that we did, how can we build on those
types of things, and how can we look at some of the efforts
that we have done, undertaken in the past, to help improve
operations and streamline and cut costs. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter, you may proceed.
Mr. Hunter. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Norton, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Dean
Hunter, and I am the deputy director for facilities, security,
and contracting at the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. In
that position I have primary responsibility for security and
emergency actions at OPM. Thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss OPM's role in
determining the operating status of the Federal Government in
the National Capital region and, in particular, our actions
concerning the earthquake of August 23, 2011.
By law, individual Federal agencies possess the authority
to manage their workforces, and to determine the appropriate
response during emergencies, including natural disasters.
However, in order to facilitate a consistent and coordinated
approach on a regionwide basis, Federal, State, and local
authorities have traditionally looked to OPM to determine the
operating status of the Federal Government across the DC area.
As emergencies arise, our standard protocols include
participation on conference calls hosted by the Metropolitan
Washington Council of Governments, COG, in order to develop
situational awareness, facilitate the exchange of information,
and coordinate communications and response efforts among
Federal, State, and local agencies, and other stakeholders.
Our principal priorities are to ensure the safety and
security of the Federal workforce and the public, and to
maintain the continuity of Government operations.
The afternoon of August 23rd was an unprecedented no-notice
event. At OPM headquarters almost immediately following the
tremors, the fire alarm was pulled by one or more of our
employees, triggering an evacuation. This evacuation began
before we were fully able to determine the nature of the
threat, and to make a judgment as to whether evacuation or
sheltering in place for our facility was the appropriate course
of action.
Within minutes, however, we were able to confirm with the
U.S. Geological Survey that a 5.8 magnitude earthquake had
occurred. Our initial concerns were for the safety and security
of our personnel, and we took immediate steps to conduct an
orderly evacuation of our facility, while building engineers
conducted a damage assessment.
While our building evacuation was underway, we began
attempts to gain situational awareness in order to make an
informed decision on the operating status of the Federal
Government across the region. Our concerns, centered on whether
facilities were structurally safe to reoccupy, the length of
time necessary to conduct damage assessments, the impact of
potential aftershocks, and the effect of the earthquake on
transportation capabilities throughout the region.
Our efforts to obtain such awareness through our
traditional protocols, however, were hampered by communication
challenges. Cell phone, landline, and email service was
sporadic, at best. We developed awareness by monitoring radio
traffic over the Washington area warning alert system, which
became a forum for status reports on damage assessments and
transportation capabilities, including the operating status of
bridges and roadways--Metro and Amtrak, among others.
We were able to establish contact with the DC Homeland
Security and Emergency Management Agency and GSA officials, and
these contacts were vital in our efforts to gain awareness of
regional capabilities, and obtain feedback on potential courses
of action.
OPM's announcement on the status of the Federal Government
was broadcast at 3:47 p.m. Given the communication challenges
noted, which prevented us from having a full understanding of
local conditions, and after careful review, we concluded that
it would not have been prudent for OPM to issue an announcement
earlier. Further, this unique event called for special
tailoring of the OPM standard messaging regarding early
releases.
The OPM announcement recognized that many Federal agencies
had already made the determination to release their employees
early, and further, recommended that individual agencies
consider early dismissal, recognizing ongoing traffic and
commuting conditions. Implicit in this message was the
understanding that individual agencies were better positioned
to make decisions on a building-by-building basis, giving the
varied levels of damage anticipated, and ongoing structural
assessments. We concluded that a blanket OPM regionwide
determination was neither feasible nor appropriate.
Prior to and since the earthquake, we have been working
closely with our Federal, State, and local partners to amend
the OPM decision framework to include a shelter in place
option. Further, we are actively engaged with COG in an
interagency effort to strengthen emergency management efforts
throughout the region, with an eye towards enhancing
communications capabilities in the future.
Recognizing that getting the message into the hands of our
Federal employees is paramount. We are maximizing the use of
social media, including Twitter and Facebook, to reach
personnel the fastest in an ongoing event. Further, we are
strengthening our partnerships at the local level, including
recent OPM participation in the District of Columbia's
functional emergency management exercise on September 28th.
Additionally, we have reached out to our internal OPM
community through a town hall forum to reiterate that
sheltering in place is almost always the best option to follow
until a full picture of the circumstances at hand can be
obtained.
In conclusion, our initial assessment is that our efforts
were appropriate. However, as with any major undertaking, a
full review with all of our partners is necessary to analyze
lessons learned, and to bridge critical gaps.
Thank you for this opportunity. I am happy to address any
questions you might have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Fugate, section 404 of the
Stafford Act allows FEMA to delegate administration of the
hazard mitigation program to States. This could lower costs for
FEMA and streamline the process. Florida has requested a
delegation of authority. However, FEMA has yet to issue the
criteria to approve State applications. When do you expect the
criteria will be completed?
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, usually when it comes to the
State of Florida, I was recused. So I don't have that. I will
have to get staff to respond back in writing. But one of the
challenges that, as a State, we were trying to work through
when I was there was to get the criteria to administer the
program to the satisfactory requirement to ensure that the
funds met the requirements of the program. That was a
challenge.
And so, I will have to have staff respond back. Because, in
general, for the last 2 years I have recused myself under my
ethics agreement for specifics. But I knew on the State side
our challenge was trying to get the approval, based upon our
history of administering Federal dollars, and some of the
challenges we had had in previous events to satisfy FEMA that
we could meet those requirements in administering the grant
program.
Mr. Denham. Well, I will look forward to getting that in
writing.
But on a national perspective, last month FEMA announced
the disaster relief fund was close to running out of money, and
then later somehow found $2 billion that was later identified.
Can you explain what happened here, and where that money came
from?
Mr. Fugate. There was no $2 billion found in the last week,
sir. That was $2 billion that had been placed back in the DRF
over the course of the year. We were tracking, and had began
providing appropriation staff updates in early August on the
daily balances as we went through the process of looking at the
potential to implement immediate needs funding.
With the onset of Hurricane Irene, we made a decision to
implement immediate needs funding, which stopped all funding
for all permanent work, and would only fund emergency
protective measures and individual assistance programs on all
open disasters.
As the fund continued to go down, we were still doing
recoveries from older disasters. The two things that were the
variables that are hard to predict is what is going to be the
demand rate in States such as Pennsylvania, New York, New
Jersey, and Vermont, as people begin registering for individual
assistance. Based upon the early registration rates, and based
upon how much we had been able to recover, and what we thought
we could recover, we saw balances that would either approach
zero and would result in inability to continue individual
assistance, or drop so low that we would have to take
additional action such as shutting down all the field offices
that weren't tied to individual assistance.
So, in those final weeks there wasn't a $2 billion
recovery. That had been over the year. But we were still
getting periodic recoveries, including a last one for about $70
million, in the final week. Those allowed us to continue
providing individual assistance. But again, it dropped the fund
to such a low level that, in prompting the President's request
for a supplemental, he was looking not only for the funds that
we would need going into fiscal year 2012 to do the rebuilding
from all these disasters, but to ensure that we had sufficient
funds to close out the year, but also be prepared to respond to
the next disaster.
Mr. Denham. So you knew the funds were out there. This
wasn't a surprise.
Mr. Fugate. Sir, we cannot just arbitrarily take money away
from States. We have to work with the States. These were
recoveries that we were making from previously obligated funds
to a State for projects where, if they had closed out that
project and didn't tell us there was no further drawdowns, that
they were allowing us to then recover those dollars back.
That process was accelerated throughout most of August and
September, to try to pull in as much as possible. In our budget
spend plans, we project how much we were going to look at
recovering each month. We were actually pulling against our
fiscal year 2012 recoveries, trying to get more money from the
future recoveries into this year.
But it is not something that is so predictable that I can
give you an accurate count of how many dollars will come in on
each day. It is literally, as we free up and get the States to
concur project-by-project, that we are able to recover the
funds.
Mr. Denham. I understand. It sounds somewhat political to
me. Obviously----
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, to be honest with you, I am about
as apolitical as they get, and I was doing my job, trying to
make sure we could continue our mission.
Mr. Denham. I understand. And I can tell you from the CR
perspective, that there were some things that were challenging
at the time, and this was one of those areas that was used as a
political hot potato.
Mr. Fugate. Mr. Chairman, I was trying to do everything in
my powers to make sure we did not have to stop individual
assistance payments to people who, as you saw in that picture,
were flooded out of their homes and needed rental assistance.
I was prepared to have to look at being anti-deficient if a
disaster happened. I did something I never thought I would be
doing in this Government, which was writing shut-down plans for
the DRF, and figuring out how we would respond to the next
disaster without adequate funds.
Mr. Denham. They expedited the $2 billion that was sitting
out there that we were waiting to close from States. Did we
not?
Mr. Fugate. Sir, that $2 billion was not closed out in the
final weeks. We have been recovering that at a rate at anywhere
from 125 to 150, sometimes as high as $200 million a month,
depending upon how we can close out open disasters. And these
go back, as far back as hurricanes in the 2004, 2005 years that
we have been recovering. That is over $4 billion that I am
aware of, close to $7 billion in the last couple years that we
have been recovering as part of our budget in the DRF that is
actually part of our spend plans.
Mr. Denham. And I understand. But doesn't that sound like
an issue to you? ``Well, we are trying to raise money on a
monthly basis, yet we are not recovering money over the last
decade''?
I mean we understand that there are emergencies out there
that we need to close out that have sat for years and years.
Could the system not be expedited? You obviously know where
these funds are, and how much has been allocated to every
State. Correct?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, sir. And we also know that until they
complete the projects--because we work a reimbursement, many
States are reluctant to close out those costs until they have
all their final bills in and have reconciled those costs.
When I got here we had not been recovering a sufficient
amount of monies. This is one of the areas that we have started
in this administration, is to really look at how you recover
and start closing out these disaster costs, and putting the
money back in the DRF. You know, again, this was not something
that we had seen a lot of when I got here. We have been putting
a lot of effort in doing that.
And again, the ones that we got that were the most
straightforward were those that were mission assignments. FEMA
had issues that the missions oftentimes for Federal agencies
had been closed, but the balances had not been recovered. Last
year that was over $2 billion we were able to close out from
that. This year we are closing out State and local projects. It
is a little bit more difficult, because it has to be when they
agree that they should be closed for us to make the recoveries.
Our next step will be going after those longer term
payments, as the IG has been pointing out, that were improperly
made, and begin those recoveries, and either looking at can
they reimburse us, or whether we are going to refer those to
Treasury.
So, we have been doing our job to get the money back where
we know it is at, as it can be released, and as we can verify
it is no longer needed. But again, Mr. Chairman, this is
something that we have been doing and working hard, and has
been one of the reasons why the DRF has been able to do what it
has been able to do in the last years, is those recoveries.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I am out of time. I would just
finish by saying we absolutely want to make sure that we have
enough funding for all of our emergencies and doing the proper
amount of planning. But the goal of this committee, the goal of
this hearing, is to make sure that, as we create efficiencies,
that we not only are able to fund quickly, but that we are
actually able to close them out just as quick, so that we can
move on and have better planning.
So, thank you for testimony. I now move to Ranking Member
Norton for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the
elephant in the room is the unprecedented earthquake that this
region experienced in August. It is a perfect proxy for a
terrorist attack, because it was unexpected. And it needs to be
analyzed. It was as unexpected as it could be. It was
unexpected as any terrorist attack could be. It was as
unexpected as 9/11, and needs to be analyzed thoroughly.
Mr. Hunter, I was--you drew curious conclusions at page
four of your testimony. You say, ``Given the unique nature of
the event, communication challenges, our own external''--sorry,
``internal evaluation, and the need to develop a robust
understanding of the transportation capabilities of the region
before the decision was made.'' You cite those factors, and
say, ``On the whole, our initial assessment is that our efforts
were successful, in light of these factors.''
Mr. Hunter, if there was an aftershock within the last--I
don't know, it may have been 24 hours; it wasn't here, it was
elsewhere in the region--had it been here, what site would a
Federal employee go to, to learn information of any kind, even
if you had not enough information to tell them what exactly had
happened? What is that site?
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Congresswoman Norton. We have a
variety of mechanisms that we reach out to the public and to
Federal employees to provide that message. We have an OPM
webpage which provides the status of the Federal Government, we
have a call-in line that employees and the public can reach to
determine the status----
Ms. Norton. Yes, a lot of them tried to use a call-in line.
Mr. Hunter, 10 years after 9/11, don't you think that there
ought to be a site as familiar to Federal employees as 911 when
it comes to learning what to do next, so that cell phones are
not jammed, as they were? Don't you think that would be
elementary at this point? You act as if the cell phones jammed
and, wow, who could have foreseen that? Well, it seems to me
that was entirely foreseeable.
Mr. Hunter. Yes, ma'am. Recognizing that there were
communications devices which were put in place post-9/11, we
had anticipated that those would be successful in use,
including our Government emergency telecommunication systems
and wireless priority service. What we learned during the
actual event is that they weren't as effective as we had hoped.
OPM certainly is just a user of those equipment
capabilities. And in after-action reports, as you had
mentioned--and we will be working very proactively with those
particular owners and other stakeholders to address how we
might----
Ms. Norton. Those owners? I am sorry, I don't even know who
we are talking about. I am talking about OPM.
Mr. Hunter. Sure.
Ms. Norton. I am talking about the largest employer in the
city and the region. And I am talking about--I don't know how
many employees in this region, 200,000? But I am talking about
whether or not--well, let me ask you directly.
Mr. Hunter, will you go back to OPM and try to develop for
OPM, for the Federal Government in this sector, a site that is
easy to reach, is named in a way so that you don't have to
memorize a lot to know where it is? Do you think that is an
appropriate thing to do after the earthquake?
Mr. Hunter. Yes, ma'am. We have been actively engaged with
the Council of Governments, including representation at the
Federal, State, and local level about talking about how we can
improve----
Ms. Norton. Let me just say this, Mr. Hunter. I wish you
would not speak about the Federal, State, and local levels and
the Council of Governments. As important as they are as
coordinating mechanisms, the responsibility for informing
Federal employees who are located here and in this region what
to do next doesn't lie with any of the parties you have named,
but with the Office of Personnel Management itself.
So, whatever they tell you, the leadership, it seems to me,
sir, is in OPM's court. And I would ask you to report within 30
days what is the site that Federal employees can go to in time
of emergency, so that they are not caught really red-handed, as
they were, not knowing--literally, they literally didn't know
what to do. Speak to any of them. Speak to people in their own
agency. They had no idea what to do.
Did FEMA and OPM coordinate before this particular
disaster? For example, have the Federal agencies prepared the
disaster plans required of each agency?
Mr. Hunter. I can tell you, ma'am, that we coordinate
regularly with FEMA's Office of National Capital Region
Coordination. They are actively involved in, as we update our
DC dismissal guide every year, we have an opportunity to meet
with them and network, allow them to provide----
Ms. Norton. Have the Federal agencies prepared--in 2008--
let me be specific--the national response framework required
each Federal agency to plan for its role in a coordinated
Federal response to an emergency. I want to ask. Have the
Federal agencies met this requirement, and has OPM integrated
such plans, if they exist?
Mr. Denham. And, Mr. Hunter, I would ask you to be brief.
Mr. Hunter. Yes. I would have to defer that question to
FEMA, actually, as they oversee the national response plan.
Ms. Norton. That is curious.
Mr. Denham. And we will have a second round on this panel--
--
Ms. Norton. Yes, but do you know if their plan----
Mr. Fugate. Very quickly, the response plans to being able
to carry out our functions, yes. As OPM is pointing out, the
difficulty, what happens when you have a shut-down of your
agencies and an agency having to make a decision about
implementing their continuity of operation plans, as well as
continue their emergency functions.
Those are out there, and we are in the process of
implementing ours, based upon the earthquake's original
impacts, and then we are able to go back and resume our
operations, once we determined this was not a catastrophic
impact, and we would be working through the States and local
governments, what the resource request would be.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Crawford for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question
for Mr. Jadacki.
You mentioned disaster close-outs is an area of concern.
The longer it takes to close out a disaster, the higher the
cost to the taxpayer. Can you elaborate on how disaster close-
out times impact costs, and what solutions you might offer to
correct the problem?
Mr. Jadacki. Yes, this has been a problem for a number of
years, and we have actually done several reviews on it. As of
September, there were about 400 open disasters. And we have
over 80 declarations this year. They just keep piling on.
So, keeping an open disaster, there is an administrative
cost involved in that. But in a lot of cases, it is really up
to the States to complete the work. And that is a problem,
giving States the incentives to close out the disasters. Once
the disasters close out there are no opportunities for
additional funding.
And the States are impacted by multiple disasters that sort
of add on to that. So if you have States with several
disasters, closing one disaster or giving one disaster a
priority is issue.
But keeping them open, going back to the field offices, you
know, the cost of maintaining those disasters, there is funding
out there that has to be reconciled, and possibly funding that
can be de-obligated, projects that were approved for a certain
amount that came in under that. There are opportunities for
that. But the longer you wait to review those and close those
out and get them reconciled, the longer it takes to get the
funding back into the disaster relief fund.
We have disasters open going back to 1994. The Northridge
earthquake is still open--1994. There are a number of disasters
that are more than 8 years old. I think there are over 30 or 40
disasters open over 8 years old. So the longer it takes to see
what the actual costs are, to identify what funding isn't
needed, plus the cost of administrating these things, just
keeps adding on to the amount of the disaster.
Mr. Crawford. Is it possible you might implement--and once
a disaster is declared, is there a window or a protocol that is
prescribed period that, you know, States or other
municipalities, localities, county governments, whatever, is
there a window of opportunity there that you might prescribe,
once a disaster is declared?
Mr. Jadacki. Yes, according to the FEMA regulations it is
48 months after the disaster is declared that the project
should be closed out. What happens is that some of the longer
term, more complex public assistance projects take longer to do
that. And also, on the back end, the hazard mitigation grant
program is traditionally sort of on the back end, too. And
those projects tend to take a back seat, and they also extend
the life of the projects.
Some of the smaller garden-variety disasters--yes, you can
close them out pretty quick. But some of the more complex
ones--earthquakes, for example, may have hidden damages that do
not become apparent until the work is actually done. They
extend the life of those, too.
There are regulations out there that do impose time limits,
but they are often exceeded.
Mr. Crawford. Any suggestions on how you might address that
in the future? Under the current budget constraints, would that
not be a priority issue?
Mr. Jadacki. You know--and as Mr. Fugate mentioned--the
funding is on a reimbursable basis. So we are really at the
mercy of the States, depending on when they complete the
project and get reimbursed. I think something that should be
considered by Congress--and I think FEMA is considering right
now--is actually using estimates, much like you would settle an
insurance claim. You go out there and you agree on what the
damage is. But, the insurance company is not going to sit there
and make sure every nail is put in the right place, and all
that stuff. They are going to give the insured a check, and
they are going to rely on that.
What FEMA does is based on reimbursement, getting actual
costs back. They are scrutinizing those costs. And it just
delays, and the oversight and administrative costs are just
enormous. So I would think some sort of an estimate, maybe
under the CEF, the cost estimating format, that was actually in
legislation--the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000--would be a
good alternative, or some variation thereof, using estimates.
Mr. Crawford. OK, thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Could I ask you, Mr. Hunter, to--when you
return to OPM, to work on the notion of phased dismissal during
a disaster? Of course I am sure lots of private employers
didn't know what to do either, and perhaps let their employees
go.
From all appearances, it looks as if each agency decided
when dismissal would occur. Is that the case?
Mr. Hunter. Yes, as an initial point of clarification, yes.
They would have made that initial decision. Each agency has an
occupant emergency plan which would address their protocols for
shelter in place and evacuation.
Ms. Norton. As much--as important as it is to defer to the
differences among the agencies, the fact is that the blame goes
almost entirely to OPM and the Federal Government for
overwhelming the Metro system. That is the one place where we
could have thought in advance--and advance means we had 10
years to think about this--because the same thing has happened
every time there has been a disaster of one kind or the other.
You can understand it with 9/11, then we had the man--the
tractor man. Same thing happened there. And it keeps happening.
As long as each individual agency can decide this question,
then we don't have a Federal Government, and we don't have a
Federal Government plan.
And it is totally unfair to Metro to say, ``Just buck up
and do what you can,'' and it is unfair to Federal and private
employers--employees, to have this rush to Metro to overwhelm
Metro, which could cause another disaster, especially since
there was, after all, an earthquake, something we had not
experienced before.
So, could I ask you, Mr. Hunter, to also submit to the
chairman within 30 days an outline--at least an outline of a
plan for phased dismissal in the District of Columbia, where
you have more Federal employees, I believe, than you have in
any single location in the region?
I am interested in a process we spent a lot of time working
on in past years. And what came out of it, I think, was the
FEMA appeals arbitration panel, because we were vexed by
impasses. And, in fact, I recall that there was more than $1
billion on the table after Katrina in the Gulf, simply because
of impasse.
So, the first thing I want to know is: Do we now have a
system where, instead of the Federal Government--that is to
say, FEMA--having an expert and then the local jurisdiction
having an expert, that, in fact, both sides agree on an expert,
so that you don't set up an adversarial process on costs from
the get-go without any requirement in the statute to do it that
way?
Mr. Fugate. Ranking Member Norton, the arbitration panels,
as you pointed out, was limited to certain disasters. But one
of the things that came out of that in the hearings and we did
the after-action on is where we have licensed engineers who are
certifying projects going up and testifying against FEMA
project managers that are not licensed engineers, we lost every
time.
And it was the simple recognition that if the jurisdiction
or the State does have an individual of record who is willing
to attest their professional license to the accuracy of the
information, we will accept that, and not try to challenge
that, unless we think there is something abnormal about what is
being recommended.
But in many cases, the cost estimates--when an engineer
certifies that a building is not repairable, we are not going
to look to challenge that, if that engineer certifies it and
attests to it. So one of the things we did do is----
Ms. Norton. So I understand now. Instead of--understand
what we had before. The Federal Government actually paid for
the State's expert, and the Federal Government paid for its own
expert. We don't have that now. You recognize a single expert,
both sides agree, and you go with that?
Mr. Fugate. In most cases, unless we think there is
something that is very unusual. And usually we will consult
with the IG and other folks if we think there is a concern
there.
But what we did do was go back to the basic principle that
if you have an engineer of record, a licensed engineer,
professional engineer who is going to attest, they have
professional ethics and standards to make those certifications.
We should be looking at those as the highest caliber of
results, and we should use that in basing our decisions, versus
merely disputing that and not having that similar level of
expert and professional guidance.
So, again, in most cases, yes. You got a professional
engineer that says the building is destroyed, I am going to
accept that, unless there is something really out of left
field. But in general, we find that if you are going to do
that, that is acceptable to us.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Barletta?
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I could pick up
on Mr. Denham's comments, the CR debate here in Washington
actually came right during the middle of this event. And we
were told here that if we didn't pass the CR, that FEMA was
going to run out of money by September 25th. And I remember
going home that weekend wondering what I was going to tell
these people, how we would allow this to happen here in
Washington.
And I don't know where the miscommunications came, but
nobody is going to convince me that somewhere politics wasn't
being played here. And the people back in my district were the
football.
So, I am not pointing a finger at anyone, but wherever it
happened here in Washington, I hope it never happens again,
because I would recommend those that are playing that game go
to the areas like this and tell these people that, you know, we
are using this to try to pit one side against the other. And I
didn't appreciate it, and I don't know where it happened, but
it should never happen again.
Some of the people that were flooded out here, again, were
actually flooded out in 2006, and they signed papers to be
bought out, and they still haven't received any of the money.
And as they were cleaning their homes out, again, they told me
that they are not even going to contact FEMA, because they are
afraid that if they get another check from FEMA, you know, they
will have to give it back, they will spend it and they won't
have it again.
And I am just wondering why it would take so long for folks
from 2006--and here we are, 2011 and another flood--why they
haven't received their buyout.
Mr. Fugate. I would have to go back and look at those
specifically. I know, from my experience in Florida, doing
buyouts are a challenge. Generally it is a cost share. We do 75
percent. It requires that the State and local governments
prioritize the funds for that.
The 25 percent match is oftentimes a huge challenge for the
individuals. Plus, there is other things that oftentimes factor
in. There are going to be deed restrictions on a buyout that
would prohibit any construction back in those areas, or any
development back in those areas. So, from the standpoint of
trying to get the match, trying to get through all the hurdles
to actually do the buyout, and then do the buyout and
demolition, is a complex process.
What happened from 2006 forward, I am really going to have
to go back and ask staff to respond back in writing. I just
know my experience is it is a challenge.
The other point you made about the mitigation dollars
following after, part of that is based upon--hazard mitigation
dollars are based upon the percentage of the assistance
provided. And it is usually at 6 months that we get our first
initial lock-ins that will tell us the approximate amount.
But both in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and other States, we
have recognized the value of early buyouts. If we can get
direction from the State, that will be the priority for their
dollars. And if we have some inkling what those dollars look
like, is begin that process in concert with the repair and
clean-up.
And again, it is a very challenging--but I think one of the
huge hurdles that we run into oftentimes is the cost-share
requirements or the 25 percent match, is the Government going
to make that, is it going to come from the homeowner
themselves?
And then the other issue that also gets to be time-
consuming is fair market value, and trying to determine that as
we do the buyouts.
Mr. Barletta. You know, I was in a community, Makenagua.
And as I was standing there, they took me out to a telephone
pole and showed me--the Susquehanna is one of the most flooded
rivers in America--they showed me all the marks on the
telephone pole for all the various floods. And we were hit
twice, as you know. Tropical Storm Lee followed, so we were hit
twice. And this actually was 2 feet higher than Hurricane
Agnes.
But it was just remarkable, how many pieces of--how much
paint was on this telephone pole from how many floods. They
might have had five, six, seven significant floods in this
little community. At what point does it make sense that we come
in and just move these people out? Isn't it more costly over
time to come in and constantly--because it is going to be
flooded again.
Mr. Fugate. Absolutely. I think that if you look at some of
the floods this year, we have actually had floods of record
across this country, including what we saw in Pennsylvania,
where it exceeded Agnes. Those floodings would have been much
worse, had not previous buyouts occurred.
And so, I think that, again, these are decisions local
leaders and homeowners make. It is not something that we
necessarily want to force. But I think where--we can provide
the financial incentive and streamline the programs. As the IG
will point out, I am--I agree. Any time we go to 100 percent
there is all kinds of issues unintended. But I think if you are
going to adjust cost share up, it should be those things that
do long-term savings, versus just the traditional repair and
rebuild.
So, mitigation programs, buyout programs, if you wanted to
look at cost-share adjustments, where you could remove a hazard
permanently from the U.S. taxpayer exposure, those would be
areas where I would look to either reduce the requirements, or
to increase cost share to more successfully complete those.
But it does have economic impacts, because you are going to
lose tax base. These have to be permanent changes. We just
don't buy out and let them rebuild 5 years later, when memories
fade. And in many cases, there is also the emotional issue of
people who grew up in these homes having to make the decision
to sell and move out and see their neighborhood go away.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Norton?
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hunter, after the
earthquake, I issued a release and my staff made phone calls in
which I asked for a post-disaster meeting involving FEMA and
the Department of Homeland Security with the Homeland Security
regional directors. The purpose, of course, would be to do a
post-disaster evaluation with everybody at the table.
My staff could not get an answer, except it looked like
some kind of meeting had been held, but it didn't look like it
was the kind of meeting that could be called a serious attempt
to do a post-disaster evaluation. Could you or Mr. Fugate
indicate to me at this time whether any such meeting has been
held in this region with Homeland Security chiefs from the
region to evaluate what happened and what to do next?
Mr. Hunter. Congresswoman Norton, I can tell you that,
prior to the earthquakes, we were actively involved with FEMA
and----
Ms. Norton. And, Mr. Hunter, please answer my question.
Mr. Hunter. Yes----
Ms. Norton. I want a--I want to know whether there has been
a post-earthquake meeting to analyze the response of all
concerned, not just the Federal Government, following the
earthquake. Not what happened before. Please respond to my
specific question.
Mr. Hunter. Yes, ma'am. There has not been a meeting
specifically arranged that I have been present for, for OPM to
focus solely on that issue.
We have been engaged in a committee which was in place
prior to the earthquake, looking at our responses to snow
events and how we could improve that. That standing working
group, which included representation from FEMA, has continued
to look at the earthquake and how that adds an additional
flavor. And so we have been examining those efforts as a part
of that continuing working group.
Ms. Norton. What has that working group--has it done a
serious--first of all, does it include people from the region,
or is it simply people from your staff?
Mr. Hunter. It does. It includes, again, the Federal,
State, and local----
Ms. Norton. And you think it could do a post-disaster--
serious post-disaster analysis?
Mr. Hunter. I think we could always use more eyes in
looking at the issue and make sure that we are moving forward
correctly----
Ms. Norton. I am not talking about eyes or ears. I just
want to know--perhaps Mr. Fugate can help me.
Of course Mr. Hunter says he thinks they were quite
successful. I think if you talk to Metro or to the average
Federal employee, they just thank heavens that it wasn't more
serious, especially considering that it was an earthquake. But
they will tell you about all kinds of communication flaws and
inability to get information, and the rest.
I don't understand how the Federal Government, which is in
charge of homeland security for the entire Nation wouldn't be a
leader in sitting down, since it had a kind of case in point
from which to work, that would help the Federal Government and
then help it with other disasters.
Rather than continue this line of questioning, could I ask
Mr. Hunter and Mr. Fugate to get together and decide what is
the appropriate way to do, as formal as you believe necessary,
a post-earthquake analysis of what happened and what could be
improved? Would both of you commit to doing that?
Mr. Fugate. Yes, ma'am.
Mr. Hunter. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much. Now, my prior question
about a single expert and about the appeals arbitration really
comes down to how--to my aversion to, lawyer though I am, to
adversarial processes where people can just sit down and reach
an agreement, save money, and save time.
So, I am interested in--I believe it is the inspector
general who issued a report recommending that FEMA establish a
mediation or arbitration process for appeals that have reached
an impasse. Now, the one I spoke about was if the impasse
involved a great deal of money. I want to know what happened to
that.
But Mr. Jadacki, were you referring to, in the normal
course of business, the use of a mediation or arbitration
process to just move along and get the issue resolved? And what
kinds of circumstances did you have in mind?
Mr. Jadacki. What we find is that second appeals, the
appeals that go to FEMA headquarters, are the most problematic.
They can appeal first, the grantee or subgrantee, to the FEMA
region. FEMA can deny it or accept it. And if there is a second
appeal, it would go to headquarters. That is where we found a
lot of appeals that kind of got lost into the--you know,
somewhere out there. Some of the appeals lasted years to get
resolved.
What we were recommending is that there is a tracking
system, so that the Feds, the States, and the locals know every
step of the process, where their appeals are, and what some of
the concerns are, versus going into this abyss and not knowing
about it.
FEMA has developed a tracking system, and I understand that
the number of appeals--the number of days that appeals are
outstanding has been reduced significantly. But it needs to be
transparent, too. So, as far as a formal mediation board, we
know it is out there for an arbitration panel. But we made
recommendations that FEMA track these things and make them more
transparent so that folks know what the delays are, why the
cause in delays, who is responsible for the delays, and where
they stand in getting these appeals resolved.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Fleischmann?
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Administrator
Fugate, I wanted to say thank you, first and foremost. I
represent the Third District of Tennessee, Chattanooga, Bradley
County. Earlier this year, that area was ravaged with
tornadoes. It was destruction the like I had never seen in my
life. I viewed it from the air, I was on the ground. Your
office--and you were kind enough to meet with me in Washington,
DC--and the work that FEMA did on the ground was outstanding.
It was quick, very responsive. And so, on behalf of my
constituents, thank you very much. I am a freshman congressman,
and I was very, very new to office when that hit. So, first and
foremost, thank you, sir.
I just have one question. It is my understanding that last
Congress and at previous hearings you noted that FEMA's
policies and regulations--and, in effect, that perhaps they
could be streamlined somewhat. Where are you in that process
right now, sir, and when can we possibly see some of the
results from those reviews, sir?
Mr. Fugate. Thank you, sir. And again, I will pass on to
the team. It is a good partnership with the local officials
there in the State of Tennessee, and that makes our job easier.
As I stated earlier, we have been working on a bottom-up
review. But I think a couple things. First of all, we did some
things, not in your State, but in some of the areas where
tornadoes hit, where we saw a big challenge with debris. And
the debris was going to impact our ability to get people back
in their homes quickly. This is in Tuscaloosa, and there were
other areas hit with the tornadoes--and again, in Joplin.
Without any changes to the Stafford Act, without any
changes in regulations, we were able to go in there and
expedite debris removal and move debris faster and in greater
quantities. We are currently looking at that to see how that
went. But it was a process which--the goal wasn't necessarily
get the debris picked up, it was to get housing back quickly.
But we are also looking at--and I think this comes back to
the chairman and the ranking member's concern--when we get into
big projects, and as the IG points out, there are so many
issues in a reimbursement process that can hang you up and
literally spend years rebuilding, that we want to break big
projects into two phases: design phase, where, as the ranking
member and the chairman points out, let's get all the answers
done, we know what it is going to cost us, we get that final
estimate, we are not going to have the true accounting cost,
but the cost of administering that will be far less than going
ahead with that estimate; and then have an engineer or
architect say, ``It is going to cost us this much to go build
this fire station, we are done, go build a fire station, we are
out of it.''
So, these are the things we are looking at as, again, not
necessarily do we have to have changes in the Stafford Act--
and, oftentimes, not even in the CFR--but what are our policies
and procedures that are impediments. And then, what do we have
that would be statutory that we would come back to Congress and
going, ``We think this may be a better idea, but we are going
to need Congress to give us guidance that may require a
legislative change.''
But again, we look at costs. How do we speed up the
process, while minimizing waste, accountability, and fraud. But
our history tells us that the current process is costing us far
more than it should. And if we are going to make savings,
rather than putting the savings on the back of the survivors in
the communities that are trying to get assistance, we have got
to reduce our cost of administering those dollars.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir. And I wish you all of the
best in your endeavors.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Carnahan?
Mr. Carnahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Norton, and to our panel here today.
I wanted to touch on a number of things. Being from the
State of Missouri, where we have had our fair share--probably
more than our fair share--of natural disasters recently, our
friends in Joplin being first among those, but there has been a
dramatic increase in the number of disasters declared in my
area and across the country.
Do you feel that the criteria have been changed, or have
there just been a greater number of large-scale disasters? And
if there are more disasters, to what do we owe this change? Or
is this just unpredictable weather patterns? How is that for a
wide-open question, Mr. Fugate?
Mr. Fugate. Well, one of the things I have asked the IG to
build into their work plan is to look at our declarations, and
are we following our criteria. Again, some of it is based upon
numerical factors. Some of it is subjective, particularly with
individual assistance.
I have asked and looked at our own percentages of what are
we doing, as far as approvals and denials, because I think the
total number of events is actually driven by how much weather
and how many extreme events we have had. So I went back and
looked at, well, what is our percentage of approvals versus
denials, and how does that look against the average?
And we are seeing it is within the range. It is a little
bit higher, but we have had other years that were higher, as
far as approval rates versus denials. But it is not something
that stands out so much to say as we suddenly changed
everything in the last couple of years.
What we do know is we look at events over $500 million as
being catastrophic. We have already had three of those this
year. That is on pace to be a record.
So again, Governors are making these requests, based upon
their impacts. I am sure there is a lot of factors that go into
driving those. But when you look at the number of extreme
weather events that have been driving, principally, all of
these disasters, whether it is droughts that are producing
wildfires across the southwest and in Texas, heavy rain--
record, you know, in your State, where you were hit multiple
times. I am pretty sure Governor Nixon was making those
requests based upon he felt that those costs and impacts
justified that request.
Mr. Carnahan. Mr. Jadacki?
Mr. Jadacki. Mr. Fugate asked us a couple months ago to
look at the growing number of disasters. I think we had more
than 80 declarations so far this year, which is a record. The
normal was around 40 to 60, so the number has been growing.
One of the things we are looking at is the declaration
process itself, what are the factors that go into that. Some of
it is qualitative, some is quantitative, some is very
subjective.
One of the early things we found--and, actually, GAO did a
study about 10 years ago--was some of the economic numbers that
were used, the per capita factors were outdated. Our results
indicate that they could be outdated, so we are looking at
that.
What we also want to do is look at the PDA process,
preliminary damage assessment process, to see how close they
are several months later, maybe a year or two later, to the
actual disaster cost. That has been a little bit more
difficult, but there may be problems in the preliminary damage
assessment, where those initial numbers come from, that are
used as a basis for their recommendation.
So, we should begin a report in the next several months,
and we are going to look at that. And if there is a problem
with estimating the damages upfront, does it take in all the
factors. Those are the types of things we will be looking at.
Mr. Carnahan. We certainly would like to see that report,
and hopefully that is instructive for all of us. But thank you.
And Mr. Hunter?
Mr. Hunter. From the OPM perspective, we did experience a
year with many more decisions concerning the operating status
of the Federal Government than we had seen in prior years. I
believe we had 19 actual events where we made a decision
concerning the release or a change in the status of the Federal
Government. And, from our perspective, we will continue to be
actively involved as a decisionmaker in these events.
Mr. Carnahan. The other question I wanted to ask was, given
the--you know, this sort of post--you know, this looking back,
in terms of lessons learned, I wanted to specifically ask how
does FEMA internalize these lessons learned, in terms of
communicating those to staff, in terms of communicating that to
first responders, to community leaders, to citizens. I mean
that is--we all try to learn from these and how we can do them
better, how can we prepare better.
But talk to me about the process of how we are getting that
out.
Mr. Fugate. Well, it is done through several things. One is
the after-action review process. But we actually find that
sometimes the formal process takes longer than we like. So we
oftentimes will do quick looks and make immediate adjustments,
based upon that.
So we both internally look at that, but we also work with
our partners. And I will have staff prepare for you the formal
process and what we do.
But as an example, in the last go-around with the
hurricanes, we ended up deploying more of our Incident
Management Assistance Teams than we normally do. We came back,
there were some lessons learned. So, rather than wait for a
formal written process, we brought all those teams together,
ran them through an exercise and evaluation, but also building
upon the lessons learned and the response. We did that within
about 4 weeks of the hurricane. So we have a formal process,
but we also see something we want to address immediately, and
we are doing that.
And go back to one thing about earthquakes. Quite honestly,
if you went to most State and local Web sites in this area, you
couldn't find one word about earthquakes. Pretty much now, they
all tell you the same thing: You don't evacuate, you get under
something heavy, like a desk like this one, and you stay there
through the shaking and then you leave. That is something
everybody in California knows, but here on the East Coast it
was a lesson learned. Many people didn't realize the East Coast
may also have earthquakes.
Mr. Carnahan. And one last question, if I may, Mr.
Chairman. We heard news reports after the earthquake in
Washington about what animals at the zoo were doing. You know,
10 or 15 minutes before the earthquake. And our best scientists
don't appear to be able to predict when earthquakes are coming.
But is there something that the--by observation of
animals--and I asked this of our zoo director back home in St.
Louis, but has there been any conversation about that? It is a
little out of the scientific mainstream, perhaps, but is there
something there worth looking at?
Mr. Fugate. I am going to defer that to the U.S. Geological
Survey.
Mr. Carnahan. I thought you might try to answer that one.
Mr. Fugate. You know, again, I was tempted to put a webcam
out there, just so we would know next time. But the reality is
I think there is a lot of information comes out--and again, we
defer back to the USGS as our science and experts when it comes
to earthquake prediction science and where that is at, as a
viable warning tool, sir.
Mr. Carnahan. And the--maybe on the higher-tech-level
question, I did a tour recently of the GSA facility in St.
Louis. They were showing us some of the technology they have,
in terms of going beyond some of the disaster preparedness
books they have done in the past, to really getting this down
to PDAs and handheld devices in much faster real time. Is that
technology getting out there in ways needed? Is there anything
else we need to be doing?
Mr. Fugate. Just the short answer is I think with portable
devices, tablets, and the ability to now reduce down binders
into short pieces of information that you can access readily,
we are moving rapidly from webpages and binders.
I think we recognize at FEMA that our information has to be
mobile, it has to be streamed and adapted to mobile devices.
Tablets offer new opportunities. But again, we are finding that
the traditional ways of getting information out in an
increasingly mobile society hit a wall.
One of the advantages of having downloaded information, if
the wireless or, in this case cellular, is overloaded, you
still have the information on your device. So even FEMA is
getting into the app business. We have one for android, we are
working on one for iPhone, where the information is already on
your phone, you don't have to download it. But it would give
you critical information in an emergency on the first steps you
would take.
Mr. Carnahan. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Fugate, in September 2009
numerous Federal agencies signed an MOU by which they committed
to work in partnership with the State of California and
stakeholders to address water challenges within the Sacramento
and San Joachim delta. These challenges include disaster
response due to impacts and earthquakes, flooding,
environmental problems, water supply, and coordinated
activities with California agencies. Do you know what FEMA's
current role is in that?
Mr. Fugate. Specifically, Mr. Chairman, no. I can get that
back in writing. And I will ask Nancy Ward, who is our regional
administrator who is based in Oakland, to provide a written
update, and we will get that to you. But we--particularly in
the issue with the levee systems and the potential for massive
flooding in an earthquake, that is something I know that region
nine has been working with the State on.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I look forward to a response in
that.
And just in closing, I just want to address one last issue.
Mr. Jadacki, you had talked about the Mitigation Act of 2000,
if that were implemented today.
I have the same question for each of you. We have 400 open
disasters currently. And 10 percent of that are over a decade
old. If we had this act in place today, would we not be
estimating the costs, paying them out almost immediately, and
then having a real number that we can actually deal with in the
budget on FEMA?
Mr. Jadacki. Yes, I think--and Mr. Fugate alluded to this,
too--the way it works right now, with the reimbursable basis on
an actual cost basis, it is just a prolonged, complex process.
If we come to an agreement upfront with a certified engineer,
somebody who meets the criteria, has no conflicts, and agree on
a price upfront that we are going to estimate and will agree
on, I think that would greatly expedite the projects
themselves, and also reduce the administrative burden.
So, I think the cost estimating format is probably
something that we should consider. You know, 5 or 10 years down
the line, if we are still doing project worksheets, there is
something wrong with that process.
I will tell you one of the drawbacks--and we did some work
on this--that concerns some of the grantees and subgrantees, is
that if the project amount comes in over the agreed amount,
then there is a burden on the grantee, too. They are concerned
about that. And I know, doing some work in the debris removal
pilot program, that was one of the concerns with the agreement
amount. If it comes in over, they have to make up the burden of
the those additional costs.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Fugate, if that mitigation act
was in place today, would that not streamline the process?
Mr. Fugate. Probably about 80, 90 percent, but it won't be
100 percent.
Here are some of the challenges you are going to run into.
What if the grantee is in a dispute and a lawsuit that goes to
their State supreme court over insurance payments, since we
cannot duplicate benefits?
The other issue, as the IG points out, is in some of the
design-to-build criteria we are looking at, where we provide
the initial funds to go through all of the review, design, and
build, what happens after we finalize, and the applicant now
finds that there were hidden flaws or other things that were
not apparent until construction began.
The only way this works is if you limit the bites of the
apple. And the problem is, if you provide appeal processes, we
are right back where we started from in that nobody is going to
want to close something until they are ensured that their costs
are met.
So, I think this is the challenge. If we are trying to do
nonduplication of benefits, or we are trying to maintain such a
small margin of error, there will be a longer process. If we
are willing to accept greater risk--and I think most of the
applicants I have talked to want that risk to be on the Federal
side--they would much rather us pay them more than what it is
going to cost them, than us pay them less than what it would
cost.
But it would reduce--and I think this is a tradeoff--our
administrative costs at some point get so high that it may be
more acceptable to take greater risk and not have the degree of
precision we get by reimbursing on the actual cost, because it
saves us administratively. But then you are going to have the
other side of the equation. Is this waste? Are we paying too
much?
And so again, I have been on the other side, where in
Hurricane Andrew one of our hold-ups was on a lawsuit with the
insurance companies that went to the Florida supreme court.
And, as you know, when you get there, that is years, if not
decades, sometimes, to get answers. But we could not move
forward on a project until we knew what the insurance coverage
would be, because of nonduplication of benefits, before you
could finish that project.
So I think 85, 90 percent, even higher, yes. But they are
going to be outliers that are going to be very complex. But it
would definitely get a lot of this down to a more manageable
number.
Mr. Denham. So if you believe that it will streamline the
process, knowing that there will be still be some challenges--
85, 90 percent, I am willing to take that--it is the Mitigation
Act of 2000 or 2011, going into 2012. If it is an improvement
of the process, why has it taken over a decade to implement?
Mr. Fugate. Well, my 2\1/2\ years have basically been a
startup of trying to get there. And I think what we have come
to, instead of--I think one of the concerns was trying to do it
all at one time. And I think what we have come back with, which
is, I think, a more adequate way to do it, is fund the design
phase, give them the initial project worksheet on a complex
project, like a charity hospital, and go, ``Let's do a design
phase. Let's get all the issues out front, let's get all the
costs out front, let's get all the damage estimates out front,
let's do all the permitting, everything, including now, a
design that we have agree upon, and a cost estimate.''
And then, provide them the second amount, which is that
amount, and we are done. No more reimbursements. We don't wait
until the project is built, we don't do any more inspections.
We do the single audit act on those Government entities that
get the funds.
But once we do the design phase, which I think is where all
the details have to be worked out, once we get to the
construction phase, and they say, ``Here is our estimated
cost,'' an architect/engineering firm has signed off, ``This is
what it is going to cost to build this building,'' then we
issue them a grant for that amount, and we are done.
Now, the question will be what steps--and this is--again,
we are getting this out--we are starting to share this with our
States and others, as we get this out--what are their concerns
about what they perceive as perceived issues. As a State, I
will tell you I will never want to agree to something that is
final, if I feel that it is going to put the State at greater
exposure because we underestimated costs.
So, again, we have gotten to the point now where we have
enough of this to start reaching out to our partners at the
State and local levels to start sharing some of these ideas.
But I think if we break it into two pieces on complex
projects--a design phase, we get everything done to where we
say, ``This is what we are doing,'' and then, once we have
that, we issue payment--I think that, for complex projects,
would streamline the process.
That design phase, quite honestly, sir, may take us several
years. But once we are done, and we get the final payment
requirements for construction, then we are not there through
the life of the project. We are done. They are able to finish
it.
And again, the other approach, which is even more
streamlined, but of greater risk, is to estimate what the value
of the loss was, and treat it like an insurance payment, and
then not deal with any additional oversight. But that would
mean that we would have to release the applicants from a lot of
the oversight we are required to have, through a variety of
Federal programs, including historical, environmental, and
other types of fiduciary requirements.
But just like if your home burns down, you don't have a
mortgage, and your insurance pays you the check, they don't
tell you how to spend the money. We do. And that would be a
much more radical approach that would definitely take the input
of Congress, of how do we treat these, is this going to be an
insurance payment, or is this going to be a reimbursement for
actual cost, as close as we can make it an estimating process.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Thank you. I believe we have learned
a lot this year. We look forward to working with you as we do
the FEMA reauthorization, as well as streamlining this. But
certainly we have learned that there are some great
improvements that can be made. So thank you to each of you for
your testimony today. Your comments have been very helpful.
We will now recognize the second panel of witnesses: Mr.
Mike Dayton, acting secretary, California Emergency Management
Agency; Mr. Keith Stammer, director, Joplin/Jasper County
Emergency Management Agency; Chief William Metcalf, second vice
president, International Association of Fire Chiefs; and Mr.
Joe Wilson, president of Federal Signal's Safety and Security
Group, Federal Signal Corporation.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered. Since your
testimony has been made part of the record, the subcommittee
would request that you limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes.
In fact, we would actually recommend less than 5 minutes, if
possible, because votes have been called early today.
Mr. Dayton, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF MIKE DAYTON, ACTING SECRETARY, CALIFORNIA
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY; KEITH STAMMER, DIRECTOR, JOPLIN/
JASPER COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY; CHIEF WILLIAM R.
METCALF, EFO, CFO, MIFIREE, SECOND VICE PRESIDENT,
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE CHIEFS; AND JOE WILSON,
PRESIDENT, SAFETY AND SECURITY GROUP, INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS
DIVISION, FEDERAL SIGNAL CORPORATION

Mr. Dayton. Well, great. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. It is
great to see you, and I appreciate the opportunity to be here
today.
Since January of 2010, California has received four major
disaster declarations. So more than 75 percent of California's
population is covered under at least one of these declarations.
Together, these incidents caused nearly $280 million in
damages. And this does not include the $50 million in damages
we sustained during the March storm event. Unfortunately, FEMA
denied our request for Federal assistance for this incident.
During this same period of time, California has received 10
fire management assistance grants to help offset the $43
million it cost to suppress these fires. As significant as
these numbers are and sound, they pale in comparison to what we
anticipate when--not if--a major earthquake occurs in the Bay
Area or Southern California.
You know, the greatest lesson we learned from the Japan
earthquake and tsunami was to not underestimate the hazard. We
have taken this lesson to heart, and are preparing for the most
catastrophic scenarios.
Our catastrophic plans for the Bay Area and Southern
California assume a greater than 7.8 magnitude earthquake,
which would result in more than 500 separate fires, more than
3,000 casualties, and over 600,000 families needing shelter.
Major disruptions to the lifelines will occur. Transportation
routes will be down. Gas supply, water supply, electrical
systems, communications will be a challenge. Mass care and
sheltering needs for tens of thousands. A catastrophic
earthquake will present unprecedented logistical challenges for
California and the Nation.
In addition to these grim realities, a great quake along
the Hayward Fault could compromise the integrity of the delta
levee system, which, as you know, provides the irrigation
supply for Central Valley farmers, and also 20 million
residents in Southern California. The prospect and
inevitability of such a devastating calamity focuses our
efforts on preparing for such an event through our protection,
mitigation, response, and recovery efforts.
And very briefly, I would like to highlight our efforts in
these mission areas, and recognize FEMA's contributions, and
also suggest ways in which FEMA and Congress could make these
investments more efficient and more effective.
With respect to protection and mitigation, we have made
great strides in hardening critical infrastructure sites using
the Buffer Zone Protection Program. We have also made great
progress in seismically retrofitting public buildings like
schools, hospitals, and other public infrastructure, such as
roads. But much more needs to be done to provide incentives to
individual homeowners, especially multifamily soft-story
structures that are in known liquefaction zones in the Bay
Area.
And it is absolutely imperative that FEMA streamline and
consolidate requirements for environmental, historic, and
benefit cost reviews. As the panel before us spoke about,
unfortunately mitigation projects can languish in red tape for
years, as is the case with the East Bay Hills mitigation
project, which California received--initially applied for
grants in 2005 and 2006, and the same trees, the eucalyptus and
Monterey pines that had grown up and were the source of
California's most devastating fire have grown back. But the
mitigation effort is still tied up in environmental review.
On the positive side, FEMA has been an invaluable partner
in developing catastrophic plans for the Bay Area and Southern
California. Work is also being done on a catastrophic plan for
the Cascadia subduction zone in the Central Valley and the
delta levees.
First and foremost, in the response mission area, it is
critical to maintain the investment in the 28 USAR teams. These
are absolutely essentially for large-scale incidents.
Secondly, given the frequency and intensity of California's
fires in the wildland/urban interface, I must urge you to
fundamentally change the direction and focus of the assistance
to fire fighters grant program. The current process is
ineffective, inefficient, it lacks strategy, and it runs
counter to any attempt to regionalize these investments. A
much, much better approach would be to block grant these funds
to States, and let us build regional capabilities that, in
turn, will be national assets.
With respect to recovery, I must first commend FEMA for the
quick and efficient process they use to process the fire
management assistance grants. Decisions are made at the
regional level, and there is clear guidance. Unfortunately, I
cannot offer the same observation for the process of applying
for a major disaster declaration. It is unduly cumbersome,
bureaucratic, even pedantic. FEMA should have clear guidelines
and have a greater consideration for the cumulative effects of
multiple disasters on a region or a State.
There are a lot of unknowns in disasters. Whether or not
FEMA will provide financial assistance shouldn't be one of
them. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Dayton.
Mr. Stammer?
Mr. Stammer. Good morning, Subcommittee Chairman Denham and
Ranking Member Norton, and to the members of the subcommittee
as well. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss improving
emergency management, especially in these areas that have been
discussed. This discussion will, of necessity, focus on the EFI
tornado, which struck Joplin and Jasper County on May 22, 2011,
as well as the emergency management response, as represented by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and how the local
agencies view that response.
Let me begin by stating that I have been in the business of
emergency management for 19 years. I have been through several
natural and manmade disasters during those years, none of which
compared to the Joplin Tornado, as it has become known. I have
worked with State emergency management agencies from two
States, as well as FEMA, and have become familiar with their
mission and methods of operations. I have had extensive hands-
on experience in managing disaster scenes, as well as being an
instructor in the National Incident Management System, as well
as the Incident Command System, both standards of the industry
for disaster management.
I, therefore, feel qualified to state that, without a
doubt, the FEMA of today is not the FEMA of yesteryear. In
times past they have been accused of being slow to respond,
distant when on scene, and hard to work with. This was not the
case this time. I can truly say that FEMA's response to the
Joplin Tornado was a positive experience.
The Joplin Tornado struck at approximately 1730 hours on
Sunday evening, May 22. I was in the emergency operations
center, so I put out the call for aid to our local partners,
then to the Missouri State Emergency Management Agency, both
calls being standard operating procedure per our local
emergency operations plan.
When I asked the State of Missouri about FEMA, I was
informed that they were already en route. FEMA personnel began
to arrive within hours of the tornado, with initial response
personnel on scene no later than early that next morning. We
were most pleased to see them in the emergency operations
center, as we understand the crucial role FEMA plays in
partnering with State and local entities to ensure a quick and
adequate response to the current and ongoing needs of our
citizens.
FEMA personnel immediately met with our local officials,
administrative personnel, and response agencies to get an
overall view of what had happened, and what their role might
be. We found them to be neither invasive nor authoritative, but
rather, supportive and collaborative. This, indeed, was a
breath of fresh air to all of us.
Some excellent examples of what FEMA was able to do for us
at the local level include: GIS mapping; Federal Coordinating
Officer on scene; FEMA liaison assigned to our city manager;
and, of course, the successful story of the mobile housing
units.
That said, there are always ways to improve response and
recovery efforts, especially on incidents of this scale. The
real enemy in such situations as the Joplin Tornado is time.
Once the myriad efforts required to effect a successful
immediate response are complete comes the question: What next?
For us, the immediate answer was debris removal. We were given
an Expedited Debris Removal completion date of August 7, which
we completed by August 6. Needless to say, time was of the
essence.
While hardly unique to our situation, an overriding problem
we faced was the realization that there were three separate
entities on scene, each trying to work the problem at hand.
These three were: local government, State government, and FEMA.
Trying to communicate among these three was a continual chore,
especially when the human element was factored in. State and
Federal people were constantly changing out, resulting in some
confusion as to who occupies what roles. Beyond the fact that
new introductions needed to be made all the way around, each
new person seemed to have a somewhat different understanding of
the rules and program, resulting in more time needed to
integrate them into the current effort.
May I suggest three observations which I feel would
decrease the amount of time required to facilitate the response
and recovery efforts? I realize that these are neither far-
reaching nor national in scope, but I assure you they are of
concern to we who find ourselves at the tip of the spear during
such an incident as the Joplin Tornado. These three are: a
current roster of all FEMA personnel on scene; a menu of
services provided by FEMA; and, finally, fine-tuning the
Expedited Debris Removal program.
In summary, I was most impressed and pleased with the role
FEMA played and continues to play in our response and recovery
efforts. We are thankful for the effort of our Federal
Government and our elected officials in facilitating a response
and recovery that can only be described, in our world, as
successful.
Thank you for this opportunity.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Chief Metcalf?
Chief Metcalf. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking
Member Norton, and members of the subcommittee. I am Chief
William Metcalf, of the North County Fire Protection District
located in the San Diego suburb of Fallbrook, California, and I
am the second vice president of the International Association
of Fire Chiefs. I thank the committee for the opportunity today
to represent the views of local first responders.
My testimony today is based on my personal experience with
some of the major disasters this Nation has faced over the past
decade. During the response to Hurricane Katrina in 2005, I was
in Baton Rouge, coordinating assistance to fire departments
throughout the area impacted by that storm. And in 2007, I
commanded the mutual aid response to the California wildland
fires in my home of San Diego County, where thousands of homes
were lost, 250 in my own community. From these experiences, I
firmly believe that an effective national mutual aid system is
the key to an efficient emergency response.
Emergency response is primarily a local responsibility.
However, this year's numerous natural disasters have
demonstrated that local jurisdictions can be overwhelmed. And
when that happens, they must rely on local, State, and national
mutual aid systems. An effective mutual aid response that saves
lives and limits damage also will cut the cost to the American
taxpayer.
My written testimony describes 10 components required for
an effective mutual aid system. And today I would like to
highlight some of these important concepts.
The first is scalability, and scalability is a major
component of an effective mutual aid system. Local
jurisdictions are the first responders to any type of disaster.
If it is a major event, we recognize that there should be no
expectation of Federal assistance for the first 24 to 72 hours.
So, there must be a system in place to help those overwhelmed
local responders in the meantime.
Today most local neighboring communities have mutual aid
agreements that we use every day to respond to incidents. And,
as fire and EMS budgets are decreased in these economic times,
we, as chiefs, rely even more on our neighbors to help protect
our communities. When our local communities are overwhelmed,
the region activates its regional or statewide mutual aid
system.
Working with FEMA, the IAFC has developed the intrastate
mutual aid system program. Using the examples of California,
Ohio, Illinois, and Florida, the IAFC has worked with 30 States
to develop statewide mutual aid systems that are capable of
mobilizing resources without assistance. Another eight States
have completed exercises and are in the process of being able
to attain this goal. Then, when a State requires interstate
assistance, it uses the Emergency Management Assistance
Compact, or EMAC. And EMAC is composed of all 50 States, and
was ratified by Congress in 1996.
An effective mutual aid system also requires the timely
reimbursement of the resources. In the past, local fire and EMS
departments have had to wait up to 2 or 3 years for
reimbursement after a nationwide mobilization. That cannot
happen in today's fiscal environment. We recommend the creation
of a transparent system to allow local public safety agencies
to track their reimbursement requests through the interstate
and Federal processes. A transparent reimbursement system will
assure accountability.
Interoperable communications are another vital component to
an effective mutual aid system. During 9/11, Hurricane Katrina,
and the recent tornado in Joplin, Missouri, emergency
responders faced problems with communications interoperability.
Congress has an opportunity to resolve this problem this year.
The IAFC, other organizations representing the leadership
of public safety and State and local governments, and the
chairmen of the 9/11 Commission all support bipartisan
legislation to establish a nationwide, wireless public safety
broadband network. This legislation also must allocate the D-
Block in 700 megahertz band to public safety. Once this network
is built, any local fire department could plug in and
communicate with other fire, EMS, and law enforcement agencies
during a major disaster.
In addition, there must be a nationwide credentialing
process, so that incident commanders know the qualifications of
responders on scene. FEMA has recently released credentialing
guidance documentation, and the IAFC supports FEMA's efforts in
this area. However, we recommend that FEMA be mindful of the
cost of compliance with the FIPS-201 standard, and ask the
agency to work with State and local stakeholders to develop
less expensive and more user-friendly methods of compliance.
And finally, I would like to mention the importance of
Federal grant funding to an efficient emergency response
system. In a major earthquake, hurricane, or terrorist attack,
there are few Federal civilian fire or EMS resources,
especially early in the event. So, local first responders from
around the Nation initially will be engaged. However, the cuts
to local public safety budgets today are reducing the Nation's
capability to respond to these major disasters.
The DHS and FEMA grant programs build this capability,
while not supplanting local funds. In addition, the grants
provide incentives for localities and regions to plan, train,
and exercise together to better respond to future disasters,
both natural and human-made.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address this
subcommittee.
Response to a disaster is primarily a local responsibility.
However, it can quickly escalate to a State or national
response, depending on the magnitude of the incident. Effective
and well-resourced State and local mutual aid systems will
reduce the dependency on Federal resources and reduce the
overall cost of disaster response and recovery.
On behalf of America's fire and EMS chiefs, I would like to
thank you for holding this hearing, and look forward to
answering your questions. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Chief Metcalf.
Mr. Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Norton, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for allowing me to appear before
you today to provide testimony on important matters of public
safety and emergency management. I am Joe Wilson, president of
the industrial systems division, Safety and Security Group for
Federal Signal Corporation.
Federal Signal is a longstanding supplier to the emergency
management industry. We design, manufacture, install, and
integrate mass notification systems. Our systems are used for
tsunami warning, community warning, military, campus alerting,
and in and around nuclear power plants and industrial
facilities.
On any given day, news headlines highlight disasters or
other emergencies across the United States and cause Americans
to evaluate their own levels of safety. Whether looking back 10
years to the tragedy of the 9/11 attacks, or remembering the
high levels of natural disasters 2011 has wrought, we are
constantly reminded of the imperative to be fully prepared for
the unexpected.
It is during these times of economic challenge when local
communities rely most upon FEMA to acquire public warning and
notification systems. In fact, Federal Signal's 2011 public
safety survey conducted by Zogby International recently found
that half of Americans feel they are less safe today than they
were prior to 9/11. And almost 4 out of 10 consider their
community to be either slightly or completely unprepared in the
event of an emergency.
FEMA has an important role to play in establishing
standards and promoting best practices throughout the Nation.
But local community needs differ widely. National or even State
priorities are not always in synch with the demand of local
communities. For that reason, decisions about how local
communities utilize national grant dollars should be made at
the local level.
It was not long ago that those Government agencies charged
with the responsibility for issuing warnings to the general
public depended almost exclusively on outdoor sirens and radio
and television broadcasts. But now interoperability is also a
key concern for public safety officials, who must consider a
much broader spectrum of communication technologies. This
includes everything from landline and cell phones, pagers,
radios, text messaging, and public address systems, to a
variety of IP-based technologies, including email, Instant
Messaging, smartphones, and even social networking technologies
such as Twitter and Facebook.
Fortunately, there are multiple ways to achieve national
objectives. Most current funding is focused on the development
of completely new technology. But these costly systems are not
the only way to achieve interoperable communications. Many
local communities could achieve this goal through IP-based
software solutions that leverage existing communications
infrastructure at a significant saving over a widescale
replacement.
Today's grant funding often works against the leveraging of
existing infrastructure, thus costing communities and the
National Government more to solve interoperable communication
challenges. Allowing States to make decisions about how they
use interoperable grant funds would foster continued
advancement of new technologies designed to bridge analog and
digital radio worlds with IP communications and public
communications networks.
The Integrated Public Alert and Warning System has largely
been considered a solution for effective public warning. The
Nation's commitment to IPAWS brings significant value to the
community. Although the system was designed to reach all U.S.
citizens, FEMA recognizes that most alerts are issued at a
State and local level. Unfortunately, there is no one-size-
fits-all approach to mass notification. Most locally based
solutions require a customized approach.
It is also important to consider how people prefer to
communicate during an emergency. Our survey revealed that one
in four Americans would prefer to be notified about an
emergency by a telephone call or by television. Eighteen
percent say they would like to be notified by text message, and
15 percent would like to be notified via outdoor loudspeakers.
While advanced technology and messaging formats enable more
effective emergency warning systems, a host of human factors,
such as age, physical disabilities, and cultural differences,
must be considered in the overall emergency plan.
Though today's technology has certainly expanded our
communication options, it should be evident that these
technical advancements have also placed a whole new set of
concerns on the table.
In conclusion, FEMA plays an important role in establishing
standards and fostering the adoption of best practices. Its
leadership in facilitating and leveraging of new technology and
establishing a framework for the sharing of technology is a
necessary job that only an agency such as FEMA can perform.
Establishing effective processes which provide opportunities
for both industry leaders and local emergency managers to
participate in the development of these systems can help ensure
widescale support of its programs. This is a critically
important step in raising Americans' confidence that public
safety is truly a priority.
Thank you, and thanks for this opportunity to speak today.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Dayton, as part of the FloodSAFE
California initiative, the California Department of Water
Resources is involved with the delta flood emergency
preparedness response and recovery program. The stated goal of
this program is to promote effective multi-agency emergency
response. Can you tell me what Cal EMA's involvement is with
the State program?
Mr. Dayton. Yes, sir. We are a great partner with the
Department of Water Resources. We just completed a large-scale
exercise, Golden Guardian, that I think you are aware of that,
that exercised our capability to respond to an event. And then
we are also working with them to identify additional funding
sources to shore up those levees.
Mr. Denham. And are you aware of the Federal MOU regarding
the challenges that the delta faces?
Mr. Dayton. Yes. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Denham. And do you believe having FEMA's involvement in
these efforts is important for the success of the program?
Mr. Dayton. It absolutely is. Nancy Ward has been a great
partner in region nine, the administrator for FEMA.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Dayton. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. And Mr. Stammer, as we saw in the charts here
earlier from Mr. Barletta's district, debris removal is a
critical first step in recovering from a disaster. You comment
on FEMA's new Expedited Debris Removal program. What
improvements do you believe need to be made to the debris
removal program to make it more efficient?
Mr. Stammer. We understood from the get-go, sir, that the
debris removal program is fairly new. I believe it has only
been used about three times before on the level that we had
done. One of the things that we have recommended is that there
be a combination not only of the Expedited Debris Removal
program, but also afterwards, in terms of such things as
foundations and such. They were separated, and we have asked
that those be considered to be put together as one program, so
that we don't have to go in and come out and then go in and
come out.
The other thing would be that such things as the right of
entry forms and such would be more put together and made whole
prior to the actual incident. Again, I think that was a factor
of the--this has not been done very often. Once we worked
through that entire process, we found that it worked very
smoothly.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And Chief Metcalf, can you talk
about your experience, dealing with the wildland fires? And
what improvements do you believe should be made in FEMA's
response to such disasters?
Chief Metcalf. We believe that FEMA already is proving a
valuable partner when it comes to response to wildland fires.
And probably the most recent specific example of the results of
their work is the development of mutual aid systems that I
spoke about in my testimony.
Both Texas--Texas is a State that, prior to the
implementation of the intrastate mutual aid system program that
we worked on with FEMA--Texas was not able to really
effectively mobilize resources on a mutual aid basis. They were
one of the earliest States that participated in that process.
They were one of the earliest States to build a State plan, to
exercise that plan and test that plan, and we all got to watch
the much-improved ability of the State of Texas to mobilize
fire resources in response to the recent wildland fires this
season in that State.
So, from that perspective of building capacity at the local
level, of providing training and helping to put in place
systems at the local level to respond to these incidents, FEMA
has already accomplished good things. And we believe that
continued efforts along that way will improve the wildland fire
response.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And Mr. Wilson, the Integrated
Public Alert and Warning System Modernization Act, which would
establish a framework and timetables for the development of
IPAWS, specifically would ensure FEMA consults with and gets
input from key stakeholders as this system is developed. How
important do you believe input from State and local officials
in the private sector is to developing an effective system?
Mr. Wilson. We think it is very important, especially--
again, as most events are local in nature, when there is a case
when a national broadcast has to be made, there has to be a
means to do that. And that is what IPAWS is part of.
But I think having the local folks be able to contribute
their ideas is critical, because each State has unique needs,
as we can see from the variety of natural disasters that we
have spoken about today. And so, I think it is very critical.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And I, as well as this committee,
have a bill that is moving forward on this issue. So we will
have a number of other questions for you. And I actually have a
number of other questions for each of you. But in the sake of
time with early votes now being called, I do apologize, but we
are going to present those to you in writing, as well.
I would ask unanimous consent that the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses have
provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to them
in writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain open
for 15 days for any additional comments and information
submitted by Members or witnesses to be included in the record
of today's hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered. I would like to
thank our witnesses again for their testimony today. And if
there are no other Members having anything to add today, the
subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 10:31 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

