- REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS AND ENSURING SAFE TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS AND
ENSURING SAFE TRANSPORTATION OF
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

=======================================================================

(112-24)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
RAILROADS, PIPELINES, AND
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 12, 2011

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Available online at: http://www.fdsys.gov/

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-720 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

JOHN L. MICA, Florida, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
THOMAS E. PETRI, Wisconsin           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Columbia
GARY G. MILLER, California           JERROLD NADLER, New York
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 BOB FILNER, California
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 HEATH SHULER, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         LAURA RICHARDSON, California
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
VACANCY

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

GARY G. MILLER, California           CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JERROLD NADLER, New York
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  RICK LARSEN, Washington
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   TIMOTHY H. BISHOP, New York
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington    GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BILLY LONG, Missouri                 LAURA RICHARDSON, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
JEFFREY M. LANDRY, Louisiana         NICK J. RAHALL II, West Virginia
JEFF DENHAM, California                (Ex Officio)
JOHN L. MICA, Florida (Ex Officio)
VACANCY

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Boston, David W., President, Owen Compliance Services, Inc., on
behalf of the Institute of Makers of Explosives................    67
Byrd, LaMont, Director, Safety and Health, International
Brotherhood of Teamsters.......................................    67
Chapman, Sandra, Director of Transportation, Corporate Regulatory
Affairs, Sherwin-Williams Company, on behalf of the American
Coatings Association...........................................    67
Derig, Paul, Environmental, Health and Safety Manager, J.R.
Simplot Company, on behalf of the Agricultural Retailers
Association....................................................    67
Quarterman, Hon. Cynthia, Administrator, Pipelines and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration................................    67
Windsor, Barbara, Chairman, American Trucking Associations.......    67

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Graves, Hon. Sam, of Missouri....................................   111

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Boston, David W..................................................   116
Byrd, LaMont.....................................................   126
Chapman, Sandra..................................................   137
Derig, Paul......................................................   140
Quarterman, Hon. Cynthia.........................................   146
Windsor, Barbara.................................................   158

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Boston, David W., President, Owen Compliance Services, Inc., on
behalf of the Institute of Makers of Explosives, response to
request for information from Hon. Shuster, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Pennsylvania........................    80
Brown, Hon. Corrine, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Florida, request to submit the following for the record:
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, ``New
Approaches Needed in Managing PHMSA's Special Permits and
Approvals Program,'' Report No. AV-2010-045, March 4, 2010...     5
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Summary of
Subject Matter for hearing on ``Concerns with Hazardous
Materials Safety in the U.S.: Is PHMSA Performing Its
Mission?'' September 9, 2009.................................    38
Air Line Pilots Association, International, written statement..    59
Byrd, LaMont, Director, Safety and Health, International
Brotherhood of Teamsters, response to request for information
from Hon. Brown, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida........................................................    96
Derig, Paul, Environmental, Health and Safety Manager, J.R.
Simplot Company, on behalf of the Agricultural Retailers
Association, response to request for information from Hon.
Richardson, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.....................................................    92
Quarterman, Hon. Cynthia, Administrator, Pipelines and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration:
Response to request for information from Hon. Shuster, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania....    99
Response to request for information from Hon. Brown, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.........   102

REDUCING REGULATORY BURDENS AND
ENSURING SAFE TRANSPORTATION
OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

----------

Tuesday, April 12, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Shuster
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Mr. Shuster. The hearing will come to order.
Good afternoon. Welcome everyone. Thanks for being at this
subcommittee hearing on railroads, pipelines, and hazardous
materials.
As you might notice, this is a fly-in day, so we might be
light on members here. I am informed the ranking member will be
here. She is en route. We are glad to have Mr. Filner here
today.
The hearing today will focus on the reauthorization of
hazardous materials safety programs of the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, or PHMSA. The
current authorization of these programs expires September 30th,
2008.
We also will be focused on how we can best reduce the
regulatory burdens while ensuring hazardous materials are
transported in a safe and efficient manner.
We have a distinguished panel of witnesses here with us
today, and it is my pleasure to welcome back Administrator
Cynthia Quarterman, the Administrator of PHMSA. I believe this
is your first trip up here in 2011. In 2009 and 2010, I think
we saw you here about every week, so we are very familiar with
you, as you are with us. So, again, thanks for being here.
I think, as most people know, that the Transportation
Committee is working on the reauthorization of a transportation
bill, and it is important that I say transportation bill. In
years past, it has really been called the highway bill, but
Chairman Mica is going to put great focus on it being a
transportation bill looking at the wide variety of
transportation needs we have in this country.
In addition to a strong rail title which will be included
in the reauthorization, we are looking to reauthorize hazardous
materials safety programs in the transportation bill and look
forward to the discussion here today.
I am interested in highlighting some of the key areas that
I feel strongly must be given closer examination and that we
have raised before: special permits and approvals and cargo
tank wetlines.
Special permits provide a means for varying from a specific
provision of the Hazardous Materials Regulation, the HMR, in a
way that achieves at least an equivalent level of safety to
regulations or is otherwise consistent with public interest.
Similarly, special permits and approvals allows its holder
to perform a particular function that requires consent under
the HMR. For example, explosives and fireworks may only be
transported with an approval. To be issued, a special permit or
approval of the application must have a fitness determination
made by PHMSA.
In October of 2009 and August, 2010, PHMSA changed its
procedure for conducting fitness determinations for special
permits and approvals. I am concerned that PHMSA failed to go
through usual notice and comment procedures in making these
changes. Doing so in this manner lacks transparency and takes
away the ability of stakeholders to give their input. Moreover,
the current criteria for judging fitness are not entirely
clear, which creates a climate of regulatory uncertainty.
During the same period of time, PHMSA noticed a rulemaking
that became final on January 5, 2011, requiring additional
information in special permit applications. Much of this
additional information does little to increase safety, while
creating unnecessary burdens on shippers, while also increasing
costs.
We are focused on streamlining the special permit and
approval procedures, incorporating more special permits into
the hazardous materials regulations, and establishing fitness
criteria in a manner that promotes consistency, predictability,
and transparency. Doing so will both enhance safety and allow
the economy to grow.
I also want to touch on the issue of cargo tank wetlines.
We have addressed this issue in the subcommittee previously and
will discuss it in more detail today.
According to the U.S. Department of Transportation, from
1999 to 2009 there were eight incidents of fatality or injury
attributed to wetline releases. There are over 50,000 cargo
tank shipments of flammable liquids each day, meaning the risk
of a fatal wetline incident is one in 30 million. Despite this
low incident rate, in January, 2011, PHMSA issued a notice of
proposed rulemaking on this issue to require trucks to undergo
retrofits or meet certain performance standards that would
increase costs. Simply put, the rulemaking overstates the
benefits of changes to wetlines regulation and underestimates
the significant cost to retrofit tank trucks and the inherent
risk of retrofitting.
In closing, I am looking forward to hearing from our
witnesses regarding issues concerning maintaining uniformity
and avoiding duplication. I continue to highlight in our
hearings that, throughout our government, I am deeply concerned
with the regulatory overreach that cripples our economy,
stifles job creation, and ties our Nation in red tape.
I applaud President Obama for his recent comments on
reducing the regulatory burden and for calling for a
governmentwide review of burdensome regulations. However, it
seems like every time I turn around, another agency is making--
moving forward with new, difficult, and expensive rulemakings.
We must ensure that our regulatory process maintains the
highest level of safety while appropriately balancing the
importance of promoting economic growth, innovation, and
competitiveness and job creation. There is a significant
disconnect between the President's word and the action of many
of the agencies in his administration.
And, with that, I would like to yield to the ranking
member, if she has a statement.
Ms. Brown. Thank you for holding this important hearing on
the reauthorization of the Department of Transportation
hazardous materials safety program.
Last Congress, when I was chair of this subcommittee--it
seems like a very long time ago--we conducted an extensive
investigation, along with the DOT general, which raised some
serious safety concerns within the agency. I am happy to be
here today to hear from PHMSA and other stakeholders to see how
the program is doing, how they have made it safer, and what we
need to consider as we work to reauthorize the important safety
program.
SAFETEA-LU made a number of significant changes in the
hazardous materials safety program. The law provided DOT with
enhanced inspecting authority. Last time we had a PHMSA in this
room, we testified--I raised concerns about the number of
inspectors we had. In 2009, it was just 35 inspectors to
monitor in the entirety of the entire country. Today, I
understand we are up to 51, which I believe will go a long way
to conduct more adequate inspections and help ensure compliance
with the regulations. Yet I believe there is still a lot of
room for improvement. Fifty-one inspectors for 300,000 entities
is not a lot.
SAFETEA-LU also strengthens training requirements and
doubles funding for the firefighters training program. The
hazardous material emergency preparation grant program is
critically important for training firefighters and other
workers on how to respond to accidents and incidents involving
hazardous material. PHMSA estimated that the program provided
more than two million emergency responses with initially
trained or re-certifying trainees.
As we look forward to reauthorization, I think it is
important to continue this program and to ensure that the level
of training these firefighters and other HAZMAT workers are
receiving is adequate.
I look forward to hearing today about what changes they
have made to the special permitting and approval program, the
subject of our investigation just 2 years ago. During our
investigation, we discovered that the agency was not reviewing
the applicant's safety record before issuing these exemptions
from safety regulations. It did not follow up on unreported
incidents. In many cases, it did not know whether a carrier was
even authorized to transport hazardous material.
At that time, we issued an alarming number of special
permits or exemptions from important safety regulations and
provided little or no oversight to the program. Special permits
and approvals are not a right but a privilege for carriers to
be exempted from certain HAZMAT regulations. In law, safety is
mandated to be the highest priority. We need to make sure that
there is significant oversight over this program, that
exemptions are not just blindly handed out to individuals or
trade associations. Safety background review and fitness
determinations are a critical part of making this program a
success so that, while commerce is not hindered, safety is not
compromised.
I would like to state for the record that I think it would
have been more appropriate that the DOT Inspector General
testify before us today to discuss their investigations and
recommendations.
I would like unanimous consent to submit for the record a
copy of the DOT IG report and a copy of the committee's reports
on its investigation and findings.
Mr. Shuster. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Brown. And I ask unanimous consent for a statement from
the Air Line Pilots Association to be included in the hearing
records
Mr. Shuster. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Brown. With that, I thank the witnesses for appearing
before our subcommittee today, and I look forward to hearing
their testimony.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the ranking member; and, Mr. Filner,
if you have an opening statement.
Mr. Filner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to take advantage, though, first of the fact
that there is Chairman Shuster in the room by moving that we
reinstate all earmarks in the transportation bill.
Mr. Shuster. Without objection. I am OK with that. I have
just got to get my leadership to go along with that.
Mr. Filner. Thank you.
I want to talk just briefly, Mr. Chairman, about one issue
that will come up in the testimony, and that is primary lithium
metal batteries and cells.
As you know, we passed the FAA Reauthorization Act
recently, which included a provision that prohibits the
Department of Transportation from enacting safety standards for
lithium batteries and cells that exceed the standards set by
the International Civil Aviation Organization, ICAO. I think it
is absurd that the United States government would be prohibited
from doing anything to protect U.S. citizens beyond the
standard set by an unelected group of these representatives.
The convention that set up ICAO made clear that the U.S. and
any other country would have the right to adopt regulations to
protect the safety of its citizens and would not be prohibited
from doing so by ICAO. This right was provided to each
signatory which was signed in 1944.
This right to protect our citizens was also codified in our
own law. Section 5120 of title 49 allows the Secretary to
prescribe a safety standard or requirement more stringent than
the standard or requirement adopted by international authority
if the Secretary decided the standard or requirement is
necessary in the public interest.
When we considered the FAA bill, I intended to offer an
amendment that would restrict the carriage of primary
nonrechargeable lithium metal-based batteries and cells on
cargo aircraft. It would have prohibited these dangerous
materials on cargo aircraft until safe packaging materials were
available and proven to contain a fire and the cargo aircraft
itself was equipped with an effective fire suppression system.
It would also--my amendment would have required cargo
aircraft be equipped with smoke suppression systems that
maintain cockpit visibility sufficient to allow the pilots to
see basic flight instruments and outside environments at all
times during emergencies when dense, continuous smoke was in
the cockpit.
Now, I withdrew my amendment, due to concerns that the
language would prohibit the transportation of life-saving
medical devices, but I think the problem of the safety still
remains.
As you all know, I think there are two types of lithium
batteries, the primary nonrechargeable and secondary or
rechargeable. My amendment only affected primary,
nonrechargeable metal-based batteries and cells, which
constitute, at the most, 5 percent of batteries shipped. These
batteries and cells use a different manufacturing process in
which lithium metal is used versus lithium ions, which are used
in the secondary type battery. The metal used is much more
volatile at low temperatures and easily catches fires.
While shipments containing primary lithium metal batteries
have been banned on both foreign and domestic passenger
aircraft since 2004, there is no such restriction on the
Nation's all-cargo carriers. Lithium metal batteries are
increasingly finding their way into our air transportation
system. Airlines such as UPS and FedEx are flying hundreds of
thousands of lithium metal batteries on a daily basis.
For years, cargo aircraft have safely carried hazardous
materials, but lithium metal battery fires exceed the existing
design specifications of commercial aircraft. Currently, there
is no fire suppression system, as I understand it, that is
capable of extinguishing a lithium metal battery fire in
flight. In fact, on February 7, 2006, a fire caused by lithium
metal batteries on board UPS Flight 1307 destroyed the
aircraft. The pilots, fortunately, were able to land the flight
and evacuate the plane before it became fully engulfed in
flames. But the NTSB investigation raised serious questions
about the safety of transporting these materials and the
adequacy of fire suppression systems.
The report also showed that the pilots were unable to see
their hands in front of them as they exited the plane. Now,
thankfully, they were close enough to the airport before the
smoke blinded them; and if the flight had been further out it
could have crashed into a populated area.
Dense cockpit smoke caused by lithium battery fires has
also resulted in other tragic crashes, including the fatal
crash of UPS flight number 6 on September 3rd, 2010, in Dubai.
According to the accident report issued by Dubai's government,
the cargo of this UPS plane included lithium batteries that
should have been declared as hazardous cargo. They were not,
and there were no hazardous cargo declarations on the flight's
manifest, but at least three of the shipments contained
rechargeable lithium battery packs that should have been
treated as hazardous cargo on an international shipping
regulations. So we have a harrowing picture here of pilots
struggling to land their plane while running low on emergency
oxygen, fighting smoke so thick they couldn't see their flight
instruments.
This report raises serious questions about shipment of
lithium batteries which can short circuit and cause fires that
burn hot enough to melt an airplane. Fires involving
rechargeable lithium ion batteries can reach 1,100 degrees,
close to the melting point of aluminum, a key material, of
course, in airplane construction. Lithium metal batteries fires
are far hotter, capable of reaching 4,000 degrees.
In light of these incidents, Mr. Chairman, I believe we
have a responsibility to act to prevent future tragedies; and
until adequate packaging and fire suppression systems are in
place, we need to restrict the carriage of primary lithium
metal batteries and cells aboard cargo aircraft.
I thank the chair for the time.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman.
Now, Mr. Bucshon, do you have an opening statement?
Dr. Bucshon. Good afternoon. I am Congressman Bucshon from
Indiana's 8th Congressional district and, in the past, a
cardiothoracic surgeon; and I do want to comment just briefly
on the lithium battery issue as it relates to airline safety.
I was not in support of the amendment that was proposed and
then withdrawn based on the fact that what we have learned from
medicine through the years is applicable to a lot of things.
There are a lot of anecdotes in the world about what can
happen, what has happened, and what could happen. But I think
Congress should regulate based on factual information.
Some of the airline instances that have been mentioned,
there is no definitive evidence that the lithium batteries is
what caused the problem, in addition to the fact that hundreds
and hundreds of thousands of these type of things have been
transported on planes across the world with what we can find
about two quoted instances of possible resulting airline
damage.
My State, Indiana, is the second-largest producer of
medical devices in the country; and adding this type of
unnecessary regulation based on anecdote would significantly
hurt the economy, putting possibly 20,000 jobs at risk, based
on the increased costs.
Again, in my view, with some anecdotal evidence, I think
this is one of the things that we need to avoid. One of the
reasons I came to Congress is we need to avoid the Federal
Government always stepping up when there is a very isolated
incident and creating broad policy, again, based on anecdotal
information.
So, again, in regards to this type of regulation in
general, I think Congress needs to avoid that and go with
statistical analysis, statistical fact, and have appropriate
regulation to protect the American people and to protect the
world.
Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman.
And, again, I want to thank all members for being here
today. This is our fly-in day, so we typically don't have
hearings on the first day back, but I am trying to change it up
so that we can get our work done and not be interrupted by
votes and things like that. So I appreciate all you members for
being here.
With that, we will start with our witnesses.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE CYNTHIA QUARTERMAN, ADMINISTRATOR,
PIPELINES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION; DAVID
W. BOSTON, PRESIDENT, OWEN COMPLIANCE SERVICES, INC., ON BEHALF
OF THE INSTITUTE OF MAKERS OF EXPLOSIVES; LAMONT BYRD,
DIRECTOR, SAFETY AND HEALTH, INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF
TEAMSTERS; SANDRA CHAPMAN, DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION,
CORPORATE REGULATORY AFFAIRS, SHERWIN-WILLIAMS COMPANY, ON
BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN COATINGS ASSOCIATION; PAUL DERIG,
ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGER, J.R. SIMPLOT COMPANY,
ON BEHALF OF THE AGRICULTURAL RETAILERS ASSOCIATION; AND
BARBARA WINDSOR, CHAIRMAN, AMERICAN TRUCKING ASSOCIATIONS

Mr. Shuster. Our first witness, the Honorable Cynthia
Quarterman, the Administrator of PHMSA. I understand you have
to leave here at 5:00. If we are still here at 5:00 ourselves,
there is probably trouble, so I will make sure, one way or the
other, that you are out and will be able to catch your plane.
So, with that, Administrator, proceed.
Ms. Quarterman. I appreciate that.
Good afternoon, Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. On behalf of
Secretary LaHood, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the
progress the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration is making in addressing current safety issues in
the hazardous materials safety program.
Each year, more than $1.4 trillion in hazardous materials
shipments cross the United States by air, rail, highway, and
water, totaling 2.2 billion tons and 320 billion ton-miles.
These statistics show the enormity of not only PHMSA's mission
but the mission of the other modal administrations within the
Department of Transportation that share responsibility in
overseeing and enforcing hazardous materials transportation
safety.
In the past year, PHMSA has made groundbreaking progress in
enhancing its hazardous materials safety program, including a
major reorganization. Our objectives, from the outset, have
been to protect and improve safety outcomes, improve employee
relations, and to broaden perspectives across the agency.
In addition, PHMSA undertook an extensive requirement
campaign, filling 90 percent of all hazardous materials
vacancies. As a result, PHMSA had a banner year in 2010,
including seeing the lowest number of hazardous material
incidents with death or major incident in recorded history.
PHMSA has addressed 12 of the 22 National Transportation
and Safety Board's open safety recommendations, including those
related to lithium batteries, cargo tank motor vehicle wetlines
and loading and unloading of hazardous materials. Meanwhile,
PHMSA has successfully closed all 10 outstanding Office of the
Inspector General audit recommendations related to the agency's
special permits and approvals program.
In the past 12 months, PHMSA doubled its rulemaking output,
issuing 33 separate Federal register notices to establish new
hazardous material regulations, including rules incorporating
into regulations 45 special permits that affected tens of
thousands of applicants.
In addition, PHMSA commissioned an independent audit of our
hazardous materials emergency preparedness grants program. The
preliminary findings have already resulted in an action plan
and improvements to the program, and we have released a sample
application that provides State and territorial grantees with
best practices demonstrating effective planning and training
activities.
In summary, the Department and PHMSA are taking positive
steps to address its regulatory priorities, decrease the
incidents associated with hazardous materials operations,
properly manage the special permits and approvals program, and
closely examine the emergency preparedness grants program to
ensure that all allocated funds are being accounted for.
We welcome any and all recommendations for making our
safety program more effective and further ensuring the public
safety. I look forward to working with this subcommittee as we
continue to implement measures to ensure our safety oversight.
Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much.
Next, Ms. Barbara Windsor, who is the chairwoman of the
American Trucking Association by day, but by night she is the
president also of Hahn Trucking, President and CEO.
So, with that, Ms. Windsor, please proceed.
Ms. Windsor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify. Once
again, my name is Barbara Windsor, president and CEO of Hahn
Transportation, a Maryland-based regional trucking firm that
hauls petroleum and other bulk products. My family built and
grew this business over 75 years, and today we operate more
than 100 trucks and employ 150 individuals.
This afternoon I appear before you representing not just my
company but also as the Chairman of the American Trucking
Association.
The trucking industry delivers virtually all of the
consumer goods in the U.S., including essential hazardous
materials such as pharmaceuticals to treat the ill, chemicals
to purify water, and fuel to power our cars. The safety and
security record for HAZMAT transportation by truck is
impressive. Serious incidents have decreased by 30 percent over
the past decade.
Further, the annual number of highway fatalities caused by
hazardous materials has declined from 16 to 4. While the
existing regulations governing HAZMAT transportation have a
proven track record, my written statement addresses six
specific recommendations to further improve the safe, secure,
and efficient transportation of HAZMAT. I will highlight three
of these recommendations this afternoon.
Recommendation number one, ensuring equitable enforcement.
Primary compliance with the HAZMAT regulations rests with the
shipper, who must properly classify the material, select
appropriate packaging, mark and label the package, and prepare
a compliant HAZMAT shipping paper. Each of these pre-
transportation activities occurs before the carrier arrives to
load HAZMAT packages on the truck.
Since most HAZMAT enforcement occurs during roadside
inspections, the responsible party may not be present. A
carrier should not be cited for transporting HAZMAT where a
shipper neither labels the package nor presents a HAZMAT
shipping paper. Similarly, where a shipper omits a certain
required information on a shipping paper, it is not realistic
to expect the truck driver to research the chemical and catch
the shipper's mistake.
Carriers must remain responsible for the correct
performance of HAZMAT functions under their control. However,
Congress should ensure that the carriers are not responsible
for violations of pre-transportation functions that are
performed by the shipper unless the carrier has actual
knowledge of the violation.
Recommendation number two, reform incident reporting
requirements. ATA supports the current Federal reporting
requirements when there is a release or an incident involving
HAZMAT. However, today, there are dozens of telephonic
reporting requirements at the State and local level that vary
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Drivers have no way of
knowing whether a particular incident triggers a local
reporting requirement, and motor carriers are being fined if
the local requirements are not met.
The universal 911 system, combined with the existing
Federal incident reporting requirements, eliminates the need
for separate State and local reporting requirements. It should
be sufficient that the carrier calls the national response
center, when required, or calls 911 to ensure the local
emergency response teams are mobilized.
And recommendation number three, wetlines. The wetlines
issue is not new to the veteran members of this subcommittee.
Wetlines refer to the product piping underneath cargo tank
trucks that transport gasoline and other flammable liquids and
are used for both loading and unloading of tank trucks.
Incidents involving wetlines are extremely rare. In fact,
an individual is more likely to be struck by lightning than to
be injured by a wetline incident. Notwithstanding this
incredibly low incident rate, PHMSA has proposed a new
restriction restricting the transport of flammable liquids in
wetlines.
My written testimony goes into additional detail on the
costs and benefits of PHMSA's proposed wetlines ban. We
recognize that wetlines are the subject of an open NTSB
recommendation, and we therefore urge Congress to have the
National Academy of Sciences objectively study the issue and
hold PHMSA rulemaking in abeyance until the analysis is
complete.
Thank you for allowing me to testify today, and I would be
very pleased to answer any questions.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Ms. Windsor.
Next is Mr. David Boston, who is President of Owen
Compliance Services, Incorporated.
Mr. Boston, please proceed.
Mr. Boston. Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and
members of the subcommittee, I am testifying on behalf of the
Institute of Makers of Explosives, whose members have been
adversely affected by changes to the procedures and
requirements of PHMSA's approvals and permits program.
Mr. Shuster. Could you speak into the mike a little more?
Pull it towards you.
Mr. Boston. My written statement provides background on the
purpose of special permits and approvals, the exceptional
years' long safety record achieved by industry while using
these regulatory authorities, and the importance of these
agency authorities to the economy. During my remaining time, I
will highlight the serious problems that have resulted from
PHMSA's management of the program over the last 18 months.
The investigations of this program in the last Congress
revealed procedural inadequacies, none that contributed to a
death or serious injury. Instead of asking holders of special
permits and approvals to resubmit missing documents, PHMSA
implemented standard operating procedures governing the
issuance, revocation, and termination of these authorizations
without providing for public notice and comment as required by
statute. These new procedures set up a complex system of
application reviews, including costly site visits based on
unpublished and unknown standards that have the potential to
shut businesses down. These burdensome procedures render no
commensurate safety benefit but affect every applicant for and
holder of special permits and approvals.
Adding to the complexity, PHMSA expedited new rules that
radically increased the types of data applicants must submit.
How this information would enhance safety was never explained
by the agency. The new requirements imposed on industry and the
agency significant additional burdens and costs.
Without notice and comment, PHMSA has used the approvals
process to establish unpublished requirements, undoing
longstanding practices used to classify explosives without any
record of incidents of fatality or serious injury, including
issuing classification approvals with expiration dates, second-
guessing the results of classification tests performed by
laboratories approved by PHMSA, and relooking at the merit of
so-called family approvals, as well as asking some applicants
to break up family groups.
Without notice and opportunity for public comment, and in
spite of the regulated community's longstanding safety records,
PHMSA has redefined the historic use of the agency's fitness
authority and established a three-tier fitness determination
scheme.
PHMSA asserts that it is not obligated to establish fitness
criteria through rulemaking because this is something that
relates to internal processes within PHMSA. We respectfully
disagree. Every decision has an outside effect. Industry must
understand the performance standard against which it will be
measured.
Despite promised improvement, an unprecedented backlog of
special permit and approval applications has developed as a
result of the agency's new paperwork and processing
requirements. Industry has been told that the application
processing procedures, like fitness criteria, are internal
agency procedures with no external effect. However, any delay
in processing applications due to the agency's new multi-
layered clearance procedure results in lost business
opportunities. American industries are now disadvantaged in the
global race to market by our own government.
PHMSA's now using this backlog and its inflated application
processing procedures to justify imposing a user fee on special
permit and approval applicants. A portion of the fee would
cover PHMSA's general operating budget, even though only a
small percentage of the regulated community are holders of
these authorities and the Federal Government is the program's
largest user. PHMSA's user fee proposal is a hidden tax on
companies whose innovation and goods are needed for economic
recovery.
While approvals, as other regulatory standards, may safely
remain unchanged for years, Congress never intended that
special permits be a long-term solution for the innovations
they authorize. Rather, proven special permits were to be
incorporated into regulation. Regrettably, PHMSA's failure to
incorporate such permits into its regulations now exposes the
affected industries to current whims of agency action.
Last week, this subcommittee heard testimony from an
explosives company about PHMSA's use of the special permit
process to force the installation of untested technology on
trucks used to haul bulk explosives and consequences that
followed. Despite best efforts to comply, the retrofitted
systems failed, causing total system shutdown while loaded
vehicles were operating at speed. Instead of using scarce
resources to incorporate these decades-old, proven special
permits into regulation, as Congress intended, PHMSA has
created a perverse, upside down regulatory environment, where
it is more difficult to move a truckload of significantly less
risky explosive precursors than to move a truckload of
dynamite.
In closing, special permits and approvals are necessary
regulatory tools. The approvals and permits program which
provides safety benefits to the public has been successfully
run for decades without serious incident and without user fee.
Industry wants the certainty of regulations and believes
that changes to how PHMSA implements these regulatory
authorities should be subject to notice and comment rulemaking.
PHMSA's extensive bureaucratic changes would not have saved one
life. They have created wasteful delays and expenditures of
resources.
This subcommittee should ensure that PHMSA promptly
addresses these issues through rulemaking and without imposing
user fees or demands for untested technology.
Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Boston.
Next we will hear from Mr. Paul Derig--did I pronounce that
right?
Mr. Derig. That is correct.
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. Who is the environmental, health
and safety manager for J.R. Simplot Company.
Mr. Derig, please proceed.
Mr. Derig. Thank you, Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member
Brown, esteemed members. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
here before this subcommittee.
I am here to testify on behalf of the Ag Retailers
Association, a trade association which represents America's
agriculture retailers and distributors of crop inputs,
equipment, and services.
As stated, I am the environmental, health and safety
manager for the J.R. Simplot Company, directly responsible for
support and oversight of regulatory programs, including
transportation in Simplot's agribusiness retail operations.
Simplot retailer operations are comprised of retail farm
supply distribution systems, with over 100 facilities in 16
western states that provide products, technical, and field
services to local farmers, horticulturists, and landscapers.
Over the past 30 years, I have been involved with many
aspects of hazardous material handling and transportation, both
through industry experience and as a public responder in the
States of Idaho and Oregon. This hearing is important to ARA,
as the ability to safely and effectively transport crop input
products is vital to our industry and food production.
ARA supports the Federal Government's principal role in
HAZMAT transportation, regulation, and enforcement but is
concerned about the administration of several portions of the
Hazardous Material Transportation Act.
First, the hazardous material safety permit program needs
improvement. Every 2 years, carriers must renew their hazardous
material safety permit; and the eligibility criteria for that
renewal cycle is on a floating scale. So the bottom 30 percent
in each category are disqualified for permit renewal. This
results in greater than 50 percent of the applicants being
deemed ineligible for the hazardous material safety permit.
Furthermore, the system is biased against carriers that
operate in rural areas. Carriers in rural areas receive far
fewer inspections than carriers operating on Federal highways
and busy areas.
The safety level should not float from permitting cycle to
permitting cycle. A level of safety should be defined and not
fluctuate 2 years later. This disqualifying category data
should be aggregated so that a company's entire record is taken
into account. Additionally, Congress should conduct oversight
of this program.
To illustrate, I would like to share a personal experience.
In January, 2010, Simplot's hazardous material safety permit
renewal was denied based on eligibility. In other words,
Simplot was in the top 30 percent of the national average for
out-of-service violations in that permitting cycle. After
lengthy review, I found that half of the out-of-service
inspections were performed by the Minnesota Department of
Transportation on ammonia nurse wagons that were not currently
in use. The Minnesota Department of Transportation referred to
a State Department of Agriculture rule stating that cargo tanks
with more than 10 percent liquid level are deemed to be in
service.
After a long process of disputing the violations with State
and Federal authorities, all of the Minnesota inspections were
overturned and the out-of-service violations were removed from
the system, leaving Simplot with 14 inspections for the year,
with one hazardous material out-of-service violation.
Simplot still did not qualify for the hazardous material
safety permit. The denial of the permit resulted in losing the
ability to deliver two products that amount to $12.5 million in
annual revenues for our company.
Secondly, I would like to further explain the importance of
the DOT federally preempting State and local regulations that
impose an unreasonable burden on commerce.
The safe and secure transportation of hazardous material is
best achieved through the uniform regulatory requirements. In
the previous example, the State Department of Agriculture
Regulation had Federal regulatory consequences that reached far
beyond Minnesota. For a business to move forward, it is very
important to have consistency in the rules. We suggest that
Congress strengthen DOT's preemptive authority, authorize DOT
to preempt State and local regulations that impose an
unreasonable burden on commerce, also remove the 2005 hazardous
material amendment which put a limitation on the preemptive
effect of the law. These amendments create a loophole through
which States can use enforcement authority to impose
inconsistent requirements on the regulated community.
Lastly, I would like to talk you about preempting State
hazardous materials registration and permitting programs.
States are free to institute their own hazardous material
registration programs, resulting in varying registration
requirements from State to State. To date, only six States
participate in the Alliance of Uniform Hazardous Materials
Procedures State HAZMAT registration and permitting programs.
Since the inception of the test program, we have not seen any
type of safety review in our operations, and this has increased
paperwork and costs with no added value. Congress should
preempt these hazardous materials State regulation programs
that are ineffectual to safety and security concerns.
We look forward to working with the committee and DOT in
the future.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Derig.
Next, Sandra Chapman, who is the Director of
Transportation, Corporate Regulatory Affairs, for the Sherwin-
Williams Company; and she is testifying on behalf of the
American Coatings Association.
Ms. Chapman, please proceed.
Ms. Chapman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
subcommittee.
I want to address two issues to the committee today, the
enhanced enforcement authority of PHMSA and the authority of
the agency in the international arena.
Historically, PHMSA has been a leader in the U.N.
Subcommittee of Experts, serving as chair and, more recently,
as vice chair. This very important multi-modal organization
makes decisions that have significant repercussions throughout
the hazardous materials transportation industry.
Likewise, PHMSA is a multi-modal agency that has broad
authority to oversee and coordinate the requirements for all
modes. This broad, multi-modal vision is essential to PHMSA;
and the agency must be permitted to continue to serve in this
capacity in the international arena.
The coordinating of the domestic and international
standards for limited quantities over all modes of transport is
a great example of PHMSA's valuable work. For almost 2 years,
PHMSA worked with industry stakeholders and through the U.N.
subcommittee to develop standards that would provide as much
multi-modal uniformity as possible. PHMSA worked closely with
the Coast Guard to address standards for vessel mode and with
the FAA to address standards for the air mode. The results of
PHMSA's efforts are limited quantity requirements that are
clear, reasonable, and appropriate, given the limited risk
presented by these materials in transport.
Since 1967, the Secretary of Transportation has delegated
responsibility to lead and coordinate DOT's activities in these
international forums to PHMSA. More recently, however, it is no
longer clear that PHMSA is the lead agency for this work. In
the most recent reorganization of the Office of Hazardous
Materials, the International Standards Division appears to have
been minimized in staff resources, and the current
international standards coordinator is also serving as an
acting director for another office within PHMSA. This situation
is unacceptable, and Congress should send a strong message to
PHMSA that this international work is paramount to the safety
of transporting dangerous goods and by specifying that PHMSA
should be the lead agency for this important work.
Turning to the enforcement issue, as a shipper, my industry
understands that PHMSA is an enforcement agency; and there is
no doubt that PHMSA needs the tools to enforce the HMR
aggressively. But these enforcement tools must be based on
safety and accountability.
PHMSA's partners in HAZMAT safety and enforcement are the
State agencies. Safety demands uniformity in the regulatory
requirements applied to industry and in their enforcement. We
highly recommend that DOT work closely with State enforcement
personnel to provide consistent training in HAZMAT enforcement,
because businesses must have uniformity in enforcement
standards and procedures in order to operate efficiently.
PHMSA's enforcement teams have always had the authority to
open and inspect a package under very limited circumstances.
Following the Value Jet tragedy in 1996, this authority was
broadened to address the serious concern of undeclared
hazardous materials. Those would be materials that are
hazardous but are not packaged, marked, and labeled accordingly
and were not presented to the carrier as hazardous.
However, in a very recent final rulemaking PHMSA has
interpreted this amendment language very broadly and is
applying the enhanced authority to open and inspect packages to
more than just those packages that are undeclared. PHMSA
intends to apply this authority to packages that are declared
but may be out of compliance with some other aspect of the
regulations.
For the paint industry, this has the potential to be very
disruptive, as a regulated can of paint looks exactly like a
nonregulated can of paint, except for the labels and markings.
Open-and-inspect authority should be applied as Congress
intended to undeclared packages. PHMSA already has an
enforcement process to address noncompliant packages, and this
process should be employed.
Congress also must consider the broader safety and
accountability concerns in this situation. Package-opening
activities should only take place at properly equipped
facilities in order to protect public health and safety.
In addition, there should be notification to the offerer
that a package is being removed from transport for inspection
and testing. We urge Congress to consider the impact to the
shipper, carrier, and consignee when a package is removed from
transport for inspection. If a worst-case scenario occurs and
there is a release, who is liable?
This is an extremely difficult situation, and we ask
Congress to include indemnification language intended to hold
harmless persons who are injured, including economic injury, by
a release from a package that is opened or otherwise handled
under this section.
With these additional safety and accountability norms, we
believe that PHMSA will have the appropriate tools to
aggressively enforce the HMR.
Mr. Chairman, we are happy to answer any questions at an
appropriate time. Thank you very much for this opportunity to
address the committee.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Ms. Chapman.
Next, we will hear from Mr. LaMont Byrd, who is the
Director of Safety and Health for the International Brotherhood
of Teamsters.
Mr. Byrd, please proceed.
Mr. Byrd. Good afternoon. My name is LaMont Byrd; and,
again, I am the Director of Safety and Health at the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters. I would like to thank
Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to testify here today.
The Teamster's Union represents approximately 300,000
workers in the U.S. who handle and transport hazardous
materials. These workers include truck drivers, dock workers,
warehouse workers, airline pilots, and law enforcement officers
and emergency response--or medical personnel who respond to
traffic accidents that may involve the release of hazardous
materials.
We recognize the need for comprehensive hazardous materials
legislation that ensure the strong enforcement of the rules,
clearly defines regulatory jurisdiction, and provides for
safety and security training of workers who are involved in
HAZMAT transportation activities.
We are particularly concerned with strengthening hazardous
materials transportation safety in the tank haul industry and
support the notice of proposed rulemaking to protect workers
who load and unload cargo tanks.
We also support the proposed rule concerning safety
requirements for external product piping on cargo tanks
transporting flammable liquids.
Today, I will briefly comment on training for hazardous
materials workers and emergency responders, OSHA jurisdiction,
and transporting lithium batteries on aircraft.
It is critical that HAZMAT workers be provided with
comprehensive worker safety and security training to enable
these workers to protect themselves from the hazards associated
with transporting HAZMAT. Likewise, it is essential that
emergency responders receive a level of training that allows
them to protect themselves, nearby persons, property, and the
environment. Therefore, the Teamsters Union supports operations
level training for emergency responders.
The Union developed a comprehensive HAZMAT/HAZWASTE
training program for our members and other transportation
workers, and the Union receives a training grant from DOT PHMSA
to conduct instructor training for HAZMAT workers. To
successfully complete our train the trainer course, aspiring
trainers must complete 56 hours of classroom, lecture, and
small group activities and teach at least one HAZMAT awareness
level course while being evaluated by a Teamster master
trainer.
Our students who completed our program reported that they
had their HAZMAT-related job responsibilities increase as a
result of receiving the training. They joined the Safety and
Health Committee, answered HAZMAT-related questions asked by
their coworkers, responded to HAZMAT releases, helped to
prevent workplace accidents, and conducted HAZMAT-awareness-
level training.
We believe that the HAZMAT training program adds value in
the workplace, as trained workers have greater safety and
health awareness and can therefore work more safely.
The Union is aware of efforts to eliminate OSHA authority
to protect HAZMAT transportation workers. This is an extremely
important issue to the Union, and we recommend that any
attempts to eliminate or weaken OSHA's authority be rejected.
The Union has had many experiences working with OSHA on
HAZMAT transportation issues. We feel that the agency has
appropriately addressed the issues. Hazards were abated.
Employees have been protected. We think that OSHA is doing a
good job, and we would like to see the agency retain its
jurisdiction.
There is much concern about hazards associated with
transporting lithium batteries on aircraft. The IBT is on
record regarding our position, and I would like to reemphasize
that we agree with the NTSB recommendations regarding
transporting lithium batteries and would like to advise the
subcommittee that we do not support the amendment to the
Federal aviation authorization bill that essentially prohibits
the FAA from promulgating or enforcing regulations regarding
the transportation of lithium batteries by aircraft if the regs
are more stringent than ICAO standards.
The Teamsters Union believes that the current regulations
that are more stringent than ICAO standards should be retained
and enforced. In addition, there should be no obstructions to
promulgating and enforcing any future rules that are more
stringent than ICAO standards.
The Teamsters Union commends the committee's concern about
the safety and security of the traveling public and hazardous
materials workers. We urge the committee to use great care as
you consider streamlining regulations as the lives, health, and
safety of workers is dependent on strong, well-enforced
regulations.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear here today.
I am pleased to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Byrd. Appreciate your
testimony.
I am going to start questioning, and I am going to focus on
Ms. Quarterman so we can try to get her out of here on time.
We heard from the industry. There is great concern being
expressed over the backlog and some of the criteria that PHMSA
has. Moving forward, I understand that there is 1,000 special
permits and maybe as many as over 4,000 approvals that are
backlogged. So how are you proceeding to correct the backlog
and address the backlog that you have out there?
Ms. Quarterman. With respect to approvals, there is no
backlog.
Let me say, to give you a matter of perspective, if you
look in my testimony, there are several charts that show the
number of applications for approvals with respect to fireworks
and explosives that were received in the past 3 years and the
number that have been processed through the first quarter of
2011. In summary, in fiscal year 2009, we processed 2,100
special permits, as compared to 3,800 in 2010. At this point,
there is no backlog above 180 days with respect to explosive
approvals. There are three that are over 90 days.
With respect to firework approvals, we have seen an
exponential growth in the number of applications and in our
processing of those. In fiscal year 2009, we processed only
1,460 firework applications. In 2010, we received 12,000. That
was almost three times as many as we had received the prior
year, and yet we managed to process a full 13,562 of those.
In the first quarter of this fiscal year, we have already
received 7,500 applications, which suggests that we are seeing
another doubling in the number of applications for fireworks;
and we have processed 6,900 of those. We have 24 of those that
are more than 180 days old, and those are all subject to
fitness holds because of issues that we are looking into with
those particular applicants. So there is no backlog with
respect to approvals.
With respect to special permits, as you will recall, we had
a very laborious effort with responding to concerns with that
program. We put in place special operating procedures, and last
year we managed to reduce the backlog in special permits in
August of 2010. So it disappeared altogether.
When we looked closer at the backlog, we discovered that
the files for those special permits were missing a key
ingredient, and that is the safety equivalency determination
that is required. We found that more than half of those were
not in place. So we had to go back and essentially recreate
safety equivalencies in the files that appeared to be missing
that document. We have hired outside contractors, including
Volpe, who have been working with us to put those safety
equivalencies in place.
We fully expect that the backlog will be over with by
August of this year. So there is a backlog in special permits,
but there is a good reason for it, and we have a plan to get on
course with that.
Mr. Shuster. OK. Mr. Boston, I have got information--I
guess submitted by your folks--that say there is a backlog of
4,000. Is that accurate? I mean, the numbers aren't jibing
here.
Mr. Boston. The numbers that you have are taken from
PHMSA's approvals database that they provide on-line. If that
information is not up to date, then that data would be
inaccurate, but we have no way of knowing that. And it is the
only source of information we have regarding the number of
approvals that are outstanding.
Mr. Shuster. I have here on this document that it is from
April 5 of 2011. Is the database incorrect?
Ms. Quarterman. Unfortunately, our Web site is not updated
as often as it should be. We will update that with more current
information. It doesn't get updated on a daily basis. The
information that I have is as of April 11, and I am not sure
where the 4,000 number is coming from, unless he is considering
every application that we have as being in backlog status. We
calculate backlog based on whether it has been in our coffers
for more than 180 days, and there are none in the approvals
program, or very few that fit into that category.
Mr. Shuster. It is based on your Web site so--it says
submitted and pending, and it totals 4,000. So that is
something we need to get--Mr. Boston, are there people from
your industry you are hearing from crying out that there are
pending? I mean, again, we need to--we would like to get to the
bottom and see what is the right number--0 or 4,000 or 40 or
whatever the number is. Mr. Boston.
Mr. Boston. I don't have any immediate information from
other members, but I would be happy to research that and
provide that information to the subcommittee for the record at
a later date.
Mr. Shuster. That would be important that we get that.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Shuster. My time has expired.
We are going to do a second round. But I will go to the
ranking member, Ms. Brown, for 5 minutes; and, again, we can go
another round.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Ms. Quarterman, recently, PHMSA was replaced as the lead
U.S. representative at the United Nations Committee of Experts
on the Transportation of Dangerous Goods, an International
Civil Aviation Organization, by FAA. Do you support this change
and why did it occur?
Ms. Quarterman. PHMSA has not changed its status with
respect to the U.N. Committee that you cited.
With respect to the ICAO Committee, PHMSA is the person who
determines who the representative is; and we, as a department,
made a determination that the person who--that FAA should be
the representative during this round because there are several
operational issues related to aviation that are on the table.
The authorities still rest with PHMSA in terms of who will
be appointed to that committee, and we have the alternate
position. So we work hand in hand with the FAA person, and we
have created internal operating procedures about how things
proceed forward.
Ms. Brown. So you have not been replaced?
Ms. Quarterman. No.
Ms. Brown. The Institute of Makers of Explosives claim that
the change of the special permits and approvals over the past
18 months have not enhanced safety. What is your response to
that?
Ms. Quarterman. Well, as I mentioned in my testimony, this
has been a record year in terms of safety with respect to the
hazardous materials safety program.
In addition to that, as the committee is well aware, in
past years the special permit and approvals program had not
been enforcing or following a number of items within its
regulatory requirements, including doing a fitness
determination, finding a safety equivalency. Or, if it had, it
was old, and we didn't know where it was. The agency didn't
know where it was.
We now have that information and have verified the fitness
of all the operators who have those special permits as they
come forward and approvals. I think that enhances safety
markedly.
Ms. Brown. We had testimony last week in this area, and it
was indicated by DuPont that it has been slowing down and it is
taking a longer time. And we tried to find out that
information, and we could not.
Ms. Quarterman. Well, as the statistics show in my
testimony, we are working at a record pace. You can see that we
have been issuing approvals, you know, multiples of prior
years.
Ms. Brown. And I guess my last question for you, what do
you think Congress should do to help prevent cargo truck
rollovers?
Ms. Quarterman. Well, cargo truck rollovers are a large
cause of incidents for hazardous material safety. This past
year, the NTSB held a hearing where PHMSA, the FMCSA, and NHTSA
were all represented, and we began to have a conversation about
some things that needed to be done. I think we are at the
beginning stages of that.
We did put out a video with FMCSA that essentially tells a
driver what to do to prevent a rollover. A large cause of these
incidents appears to be human error, not knowing what to do
when something happens in the truck.
I think NHTSA is also looking at the possibility of
electronic stability controls for some of these trucks. So we
have a number of initiatives under way.
Ms. Brown. It seems to me that that was more of a problem
when we had the hearing as opposed to the wetlines.
Ms. Quarterman. Are you asking if that is a higher risk?
Ms. Brown. It seemed to be in the testimony that we had. I
want your response to that.
Ms. Quarterman. I agree it is a higher risk.
One of the things that we did very recently that has never
been done before historically is to look at what are the top
10, for example, commodities that cause incidents, what are the
top 10 causes of the incidents and that kind of data. We are
just at the beginning stages. In fact, it is hot off the
presses in terms of being able to work that into our regulatory
process and determine what rulemaking should follow on.
But, importantly, flammable liquids are the number one
cause of incident, and the wetlines rule does address potential
issues with flammable liquid transportation.
Ms. Brown. Can Ms. Windsor respond to that?
Mr. Shuster. Yes.
Ms. Windsor. I would have to agree that a rollover is a
much more potential issue than wetlines. There are very few
cases of accidents involving wetlines as was stated before,
when you consider that we have over 50,000 cargo shipments on a
daily basis. And we as an industry would rather see roll
stability worked on versus the wetlines.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. I will save my additional questions.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you.
Mr. Fincher.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you so much; and thank you, panel, for
coming today to give us your comments.
It is very frustrating to me. It seems like the right hand
doesn't know what the left hand is doing. And we just--keep on
regulating and have more oversight, and we are not getting to
the root of the problem.
Industry, you know, it is just not from one company or one
individual, but it is from multiple, about how overregulation
and too much oversight is not the answer. We all want to make
sure that we are doing things by the book and the safest way
possible. But, at the same time, if we don't stop breaking the
back of our businesses by overregulation, then we are not going
to be able to sustain this path.
Just a couple of questions, just I guess one.
Of the most recent rules and regulations that have been
made related to transporting hazardous materials, in your
opinion, what is the one rule or regulation that has the most
negative effect on your industry? And this is to Ms. Windsor.
Where should we focus first to help relieve the regulatory
burdens?
Ms. Windsor. That is difficult. As I said, we have six
recommendations. Among the issues I didn't discuss are
background checks, which are very onerous for our drivers, and
they spend a lot of money on them. The Safe Trucker Act, which
has been proposed on a number of years, would allow one
fingerprinting. That would help alleviate a lot of regulatory
issues on our drivers. In fact, we have a number of drivers
that just won't get a HAZMAT endorsement because of the current
process, so we are losing out.
Uniform permitting is another thing. If we just needed to
go to one State, versus having to hire someone to contact each
State individually every time we want to do a special permit it
would help a lot. It wouldn't change the dollar amount. It is
just the way the processes take place. Obviously, this issue is
near and dear to my heart, because I am a cargo tank carrier
hauling petroleum products.
There is also the wetlines issue. Instead of spending money
on retrofitting our trailers, we there are other issues that we
could deal with before that.
And reforming the way we do our incident reporting. These
are all things--the six things I brought out are a way that we
could stay safe in transporting hazardous materials and yet be
a safer industry without as much--not changing regulations,
making it a little more efficient.
Mr. Fincher. It seems to me that if we could just talk to
the experts in their fields before we start making rules and
regulations that we know nothing about, it would make a lot
more sense.
Ms. Windsor. We would like to be partners and work
together. We only want safe shipments out there on the highway.
We want our drivers to come home safely to their families every
night. We want the public that we are traveling with to be
safe, also.
Mr. Fincher. Absolutely. And I think we always want to make
sure that we get to the bottom line, and the bottom line here
is the consumer ends up paying.
Ms. Windsor. Yes.
Mr. Fincher. The trickle-down effect is the consumer pays.
Again, nobody wants to be any more safe than I do, but you can
carry it too far, and we are carrying it too far. There are too
many people saying the same thing over and over, whether it is
in the trucking industry, the ag industry, the fertilizer
industry.
And, Mr. Boston, any comments from you? I have got just a
little more time left.
Mr. Boston. Well, I guess, first of all, I would support
that we want whatever regulations that we have to comply with
to be clear and concise. We want to be measured against known
standards and not vague, uncommunicated, unpublished standards.
I think that the primary issue for us is that. So thank you.
Mr. Fincher. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentleman.
And I don't know if he heard the statistic that was cited
here with this wetlines issue. You have a greater likelihood of
getting struck by lightning than you do--so maybe you ought to
drop a bill to outlaw lightening to strike people.
And everybody kind of chuckles, but that is the point. I
mean, we should be focusing on the issues that really have a
significant impact. I certainly don't want anybody to die out
there. But, at the end of the day, the only way I can make sure
of that is if we just stop the 50,000 shipments of hazardous--
the wetline shipments that are out there. That is the only way
to make sure it is 100 percent. There is risk involved. We got
to make sure we focus on what the risk is.
And, with that, Mr. Filner.
Mr. Filner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was just wondering where in the 20th century or 19th
century you would like to take us back to, my friend? I mean,
what do you want, child labor laws taken away? I mean, what do
you want to--this onerousness on your small businesses. Come
on, we are talking about the health and safety of our people.
And I will be happy to talk to the experts anytime you
want. Truck drivers represented by the Teamsters here today, I
will talk to them. I will talk to the pilots. I mean, you are
talking to the guys who own the places, but I want to talk to
the drivers, I want to talk to the pilots, I want to talk to
the bus drivers, I want to talk to the people who make it safe,
and I want to talk to the parents of those people who would
like their--So, you know, tell me how far you want to go back,
whether it is 1910, 1880, I don't know where you are taking us
back to, but--and I was shocked, Mr. Chairman, by the cavalier
and flippant dismissal of so-called anecdotal evidence that the
gentleman from Indiana talked about, Dr. Bucshon. I mean, he
was a doctor. Would he dismiss 52 anecdotes from his colleagues
that a certain medicine produced a heart attack and, therefore,
he says he dismissed it? It is just anecdotal. So I am going to
give that pill to my patients.
I mean, come on. In the incidents that both of us were
talking about, which is lithium batteries, the FAA reported 52
incidents in the last 16 years or so involving lithium and/or
lithium ion batteries, many in the cargo departments of
airlines. And, in fact, FAA's tech center found that the only
FAA-certified fire extinguisher could not extinguish fires from
those batteries. So I take those anecdotes pretty seriously. I
take the experts, the pilots, very seriously who want some
regulation of these batteries.
Yes, we have got to balance that with what we think are the
so-called lifesaving devices that we all want for ourselves and
our family, but we just can't dismiss these anecdotes as just
unworthy of us and somehow too onerous for the consumer. I am a
consumer, too, and I want the pilots, I want the truck drivers,
I want everybody to be safe. And I have to pay more for it?
Hey, I am willing to do that. And let's get that stupid thing
about the consumers paying off the table.
Ms. Quarterman, thank you for your testimony. I mean, do
you take this stuff on the lithium battery seriously? Do you
believe that the ICAO should restrict our ability to have
regulations? And where is your agency in regard to any
regulations that you would be suggesting?
Ms. Quarterman. My agency put out an NPRM earlier last year
to regulate lithium batteries in conjunction with FAA. We are
sister agencies, and we worked together to come up with a
notice of proposed rulemaking. We received I think a record
number of comments on that. We have worked together to put
together a final rule which is now at the Office of Management
and Budget, which means we are waiting for the next steps; and
there is not too much more I can say about it as a result.
Mr. Filner. You would not support the amendment that
restricted us from having a more stringent regulation than ICAO
would?
Ms. Quarterman. I believe the Department is in the process
of putting together a statement in response to that, so I don't
want to jump in front of them.
Mr. Filner. Oh, come on, just say you are against it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I think this Congress and this Nation deserves a
little bit more than these--I don't know--these flippant
comments about too much regulation. I mean, yeah, we want to do
this intelligently, we want to do it cost effectively, and we
want to, you know, take science into account. But to say that,
by definition, it is bad--although I doubt if those same people
would want to eat a steak that didn't go through USDA
regulatory procedures or fly on a plane where there is no
Federal traffic controllers or even be on a street without red
lights. It sounds like that is the kind of society they want
and only--you know, only the bottom line of small business is
going to count.
Well, it costs more money to stop at a red light, I am
sure, but we accept them because they are an interest of all of
us, as we accept meat inspections and air traffic controllers.
And a lot of middle-class inspections somehow are OK, but when
they hit businesses they are not OK.
So I think we have to get away from these simplistic kinds
of discussions and move on to a more science-based kind of
application of this stuff.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shuster. That is what we are all for, moving towards a
science-based and risk-based. Well, where is the greatest risk
involved and let's focus on that and let's spend our efforts
there to save as many lives and avoid as much damage to
property. So that is what we want to do.
Ms. Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I guess I would want to reiterate--I didn't hear Ms.
Windsor's--in fact, I think she came to us with some solutions
for regulations. And though it seems like, quote, let's stop--I
think what the gentleman said was let's take this stupid thing
about consumers paying more off the table. I think that
encapsulates the problem over the last couple of years and why
we are going after some of these regulations that cost
consumers more money when they don't have it and, more
importantly, cost them jobs. I have 13, 14, 15 percent
unemployment in my neck of the woods, and I want people to
work.
And what I heard from Ms. Windsor--and please correct me if
I am wrong--was, with regard to regulations, wasn't to erase or
wipe them out. No one is saying that. In fact, she had some
really good solutions on the table. Eliminating duplicate and
redundant security background checks seems like a good idea to
me. Ensuring equitable enforcement of hazardous materials
regulations, OK, that seems fair. Reforming hazardous materials
incident reporting requirements, and so on.
So I guess I missed the part where we said let's get rid of
all regulations required to transporting hazardous materials. I
want safety on our roads. I want our trucks safe. I want our
families safe, and I want them to have jobs. I want them to be
able to work.
So it is not about protecting businesses. It is about
protecting those people in Clark County and southwest
Washington who are trying to transport materials and get paid
so that they can pay for their kid's education, their food,
their clothing.
So I guess, unless I am wrong--and this is kind of where
the question is--you all aren't up here advocating that we get
rid of regulations, especially as it relates to your industry,
right? You are advocating that we do this in a science-based,
risk-assessed, solution-oriented manner, which to me seems like
the adult conversation we need to have, especially after the
last couple of years where there hasn't been a big check on
these regulations.
And if you would care to comment, please feel free.
Ms. Windsor. No, I totally agree. We are not talking about
reducing regulations. We are streamlining or consolidating
instead of so many variables out here.
I want the workforce--I have a workforce that 50 percent of
my drivers now don't want to get a HAZMAT endorsement because
of the cost of the HAZMAT endorsement from their State and then
the TWIC card, also. It is identical fingerprinting, so it is a
duplication.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So with that then people are not
earning as much as they could be, right?
Ms. Windsor. Correct.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Which means those are dollars for our
economy left on the table----
Ms. Windsor. Correct.
Ms. Herrera Beutler [continuing]. At a time when we have
the worst economy that we have seen in decades?
Ms. Windsor. Correct. Because it becomes very onerous on
them to have all this duplicated credentialing.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentlelady from Washington.
With that, Ms. Richardson for questions, 5 minutes.
Ms. Richardson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Quarterman, I believe it was Mr. Derig said that there
is a bias in the system against rural agricultural folks. Are
you aware of that or are you committed to looking into that for
us?
Ms. Quarterman. It was specifically on page 3 of his
testimony: Further, the system is biased against carriers like
agricultural retailers that operate in rural areas. Carriers in
rural areas receive far fewer inspections than carriers
operating on Federal highways and busy areas. Therefore, you
know, they don't have enough to be able to statistically
overcome the violation.
Ms. Richardson. So are you aware of his concern?
Ms. Quarterman. I am not aware of his concern. I have to
say that some of the things that have been raised here today
are beyond PHMSA's jurisdiction with respect to, for example,
licensing. That is the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration. I would be happy to take back those comments on
those issues to them.
Ms. Richardson. But I think there is a direct correlation
of what he is saying, that if ultimately you are determining
his permit and if he is saying that--and it would seem to make
sense to me in a rural community--I come from California.
Occasionally, I drive to Sacramento. I can see that they
wouldn't have as many inspections because it is, you know,
wide-open highways.
And so I am saying, would you commit to at least looking at
the statistics to see if that is the case and if it is
inhibiting their ability to statistically overcome their
violations, which is what their concern is, which would
ultimately impact their permit?
Ms. Quarterman. Absolutely.
Ms. Richardson. The second question I wanted to ask Mr.
Derig. You said that in 2005 HMTA amendments removed all
preemptive limitations to State enforcement authorities, and
you talked a little bit about this. You also said this creates
a loophole through which States can use enforcement authority
to impose inconsistent requirements. Could you give us a
specific example of what you mean?
Mr. Derig. I think one of the examples is in my testimony
where, actually, the Minnesota transportation folks came in and
did a terminal inspection, which--that is OK. You know, we
invite them in. But what they were looking at was ammonia nurse
trailers, which after the season come back and sit in the yard
and are not introduced back into the transportation system
until the next application season, and if there is not demand
they won't even go out then.
So the Minnesota Department of Transportation justified
their terminal inspection based on a Minnesota Department of
Agriculture rule that was a State rule that said, for
agricultural inspections, all nurse tanks that are used out on
the farm are deemed to be in service if they have 10 percent on
the liquid level gauge.
So that is what the transportation folks did. They came in
and said, oh, all these trailers are in service, should be
ready to be transported, even though they weren't intended to
be transported, and the Federal Motor Carrier is very specific
in the rules about what is in transportation or is planned to
be in transportation.
Ms. Richardson. OK. I have got to cut you off there,
because I have only got a minute and 30 seconds.
Would you mind asking your association to give to the
committee specific examples of where you feel the States are
using a loophole and where a more national perspective would be
more helpful?
Mr. Derig. Yes, certainly.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Richardson. Mr. Byrd, in your testimony you talked
about the fact of eliminating the shared jurisdiction between
DOT and OSHA. And, Ms. Windsor, it is my understanding in your
testimony you said that the American Trucking Association
supports eliminating this jurisdiction, shared jurisdiction.
Could you share with us why?
Ms. Windsor. With the overlapping jurisdiction, we feel it
erodes uniformity. So we support having DOT as the agency in
charge versus the overlapping of the DOT and OSHA.
Ms. Richardson. OK. Mr. Byrd, could you share why you think
that that is not correct? Because I think this is a really
important issue.
Mr. Byrd. Well, thank you for the question.
We believe that both regulatory agencies bring important
things to the table when it comes to protecting worker health
and safety. The Department of Transportation has expertise in
terms of testing containers to ensure that they are durable
enough to transport HAZMAT or placarding or labeling. But the
Department of Transportation is not the agency that has the
staffing or the expertise to deal with worker health and safety
issues that may relate to personal protective equipment, worker
training, worker exposure levels to certain chemicals. So we
think they bring very distinct expertise to the table, but they
are not easily interchangeable. So we don't think that DOT
could take on the OSHA responsibilities.
Ms. Richardson. Mr. Chairman, could I just ask one quick
follow-up question?
Mr. Shuster. Sure.
Ms. Richardson. So, Ms. Windsor, if in fact what Mr. Byrd
is saying, if there were consistent national standards, would
you be opposed to the involvement of OSHA beyond training?
Ms. Windsor. OSHA has always been involved to a certain
point. It is when we are getting overlap instead of uniformity.
It is the overlapping of the two different agencies. Because
OSHA has always been involved on certain, obviously, protective
equipment.
Ms. Richardson. But what Mr. Byrd is saying is that there
is two totally different skill sets that they bring.
Ms. Windsor. I don't see that at all.
Ms. Richardson. You don't see a difference?
Ms. Windsor. No.
Ms. Richardson. OK. If you could supply to the committee
what you see those differences are in writing.
[The information follows:]

Ms. Richardson. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Mr. Shuster. I thank the gentlelady.
A question to Ms. Quarterman again on the current status of
the 2010 petition for rulemaking which was made by a number of
industry groups regarding procedures and fitness criteria that
should be used for processing special permits and approvals.
Could you let us know what the status of that is?
Ms. Quarterman. I believe it may still be under
consideration. I don't have the specifics on where that stands.
Mr. Shuster. Is that something you could get back to us and
let us know where it stands, where we are in the process?
Ms. Quarterman. Absolutely.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Shuster. And the second, what has changed at the
agency? In 2004, the analysis was that, based on the cost-
benefit analysis, they withdrew a rulemaking on the wetlines
and--given the low risk of it. I understand there is a
rulemaking about to be made, a proposed rulemaking. What has
changed at PHMSA for you to take, again, what I perceive and
what I think the statistics bear out and the cost-benefit
analysis bears out, that it is below risk and the cost-benefit
analysis isn't there, and it is going to be very expensive when
we could be focusing on rollovers.
Ms. Quarterman. The agency is not just focused on the
highest-risk incidents. We have to also be aware of those
incidents that are low risk but could result in high
consequence. We have to be thinking about emerging issues, for
example, the explosion of the number of lithium batteries being
transported by aircraft. And in this instance, whereas the
statistics are not great in terms of the number of incidents,
there have been incidents.
And if a school bus full of children were to hit a wetline
and burn, the analysis would be compelling, I think; and we
don't want to have that happen if we can avoid it at the
beginning.
Now, the Department has, as you said, in the past done an
analysis, has put this rule out for comment. We have obviously
updated the rule and tried to consider everything that has
happened in the intervening years, tried to revise the rules
and tried to take the current costs into effect.
We are in the middle of a comment period. The comments are
open. So everything that is being said here will be obviously
fed into that process and put into consideration as we go
forward with the next step in the rulemaking. We are at the
beginning of this process.
Mr. Shuster. And it certainly would be a terrible, terrible
tragedy if that were to happen to a school bus. But from my
understanding of what happens with a wetline accident is that a
school bus couldn't get underneath a truck, and that would be
highly unlikely to happen.
But you know those are the kinds of things that my concern
is that we think of these scenarios that could happen. You
know, one in 300 million, I think, was the number I read
before, but, you know, very unlikely happening. And we are
basing a rulemaking that is going to cost an industry millions
of dollars.
And the other side of that coin is we have seen her
testimony and studies that when you go to retrofit some of
these things you could have a spark and kill people in the shop
that is retrofitting them. So I think you really need to be
focused on--And you yourself said that rollovers are a big
problem and human error, and that is why I look at your numbers
here. You have rollovers, and you have human error. How do you
separate those out? Maybe I don't understand how exactly you
weighted them and things like that, but it seems to me we have
got a much bigger problem and something we can focus on to
spend our time, our effort, and our money correcting those
problems and trying to address those problems.
So, again, I would urge you to focus on those issues that
are of the greatest danger out there on the highways and around
this country.
I continue to hear from different members of the panel--I
turn to Ms. Chapman. Training, you mentioned inconsistency of
training between States and PHMSA.
Let me back up. I continue to hear there is a problem with
the States and with PHMSA, the Federal DOT, and State DOTs and
other agencies, and there is no consistency on training between
the States and PHMSA. What are some of the problems that your
membership has had with inconsistency of training? Because that
goes a long way in solving the human error problems that we see
out there.
Ms. Chapman. Right. Obviously, the regulations are the same
for everyone, and we want them to be enforced uniformly. But
what we see is a pretty large variance from State to State on
how they prioritize the enforcement; and what might seem to be
a minor problem with, say, load securement in one State is
going to be seen as a huge problem with a large fine and points
against the company in another State. We want to be uniform in
our compliance with the regulations, but when it is sort of a
moving target as far as what is going to be considered an issue
or how an inspector is going to interpret the regulations where
they are not real clear, it makes it hard for the industry.
Mr. Shuster. The member is recognized.
Ms. Brown. First of all, I didn't get the memo about
regulations, because we don't have any increase in regulations
in the last 18 months. We have got enforcement. You know, and I
try to work balance. I think safety is the most important
thing. But an example of when we look at the industry with the
wetlands and the response to it, that is an example that I
think we need to take a serious look at.
Rollovers is clearly more serious. And what if the truck
rolled over onto a school bus? I mean, we can go to the
extreme. So I think it needs to be balanced as we move forward,
and it should be based on science.
But, Ms. Quarterman, we have voiced some concerns about you
all moving forward with the wetlines and the benefits. We
actually--I don't know whether you went. I went to a shop where
they were retrofitting. Baltimore? Yeah, we had a hearing in
Baltimore. And we went to the different shops where they was
fixing it, and the fix was more dangerous than the problem. So
I mean I think it should be some balance.
But let me go to Mr. Byrd. There was a discussion about
OSHA and DOT. I mean, they have had separate things that they
do all the time, but OSHA has been primarily responsible for
worker safety. So now, if we want to get rid of somebody, maybe
we should get rid of DOT and just have OSHA to handle the whole
thing. I mean, is that what we are asking for?
Mr. Byrd. No. No, ma'am, I would not recommend that.
As I mentioned earlier, I think each agency plays a very
important role in providing worker safety for those workers who
deal with HAZMAT. And as I had mentioned earlier, what they
bring to the table is not easily interchangeable. You know, DOT
has their area of expertise, OSHA has their area of expertise,
and there are no people that I am familiar with that are in the
middle that have a great deal of expertise in dealing with both
issues. I would see it would be extremely difficult for DOT to
enforce OSHA-type regulations. I think it would cost DOT a ton
of money to promulgate regulations and to train and hire
inspectors to do that type of work.
Ms. Brown. I am not supporting that, but I don't think we
should start over.
But you all administer the grants program.
Mr. Byrd. Yes.
Ms. Brown. We have a unique problem in Florida in that I
think we receive about $6 million--and our Governor turned it
back--for training of the firefighters. As we move forward with
the real ugly politics, should we come up with a different way
to get that training? Not necessarily going through the States,
maybe the local communities or maybe it should be a different
kind of way. Because one Governor says, yes, we want the
training; and then the new Governor comes in and says, well, we
don't want to do the training of the firefighters and the
workers.
Mr. Byrd. Well, I know in the case of truck drivers our
employers provide some training, but the union provides what I
think is a higher quality training overall, and we provide that
directly to the rank-and-file truck driver and dock worker.
Now, what we have had some success in is working with our
employers to provide some training, and that has been
accomplished through cents-per-hour contributions. But the
funding that we get from the Federal Government I think is
extremely important, enabling us to have a further reach in
terms of providing high-quality training.
Ms. Brown. Ms. Quarterman, can you respond to that question
as to how we are going to provide that training when we have
this ugly negative politics that is going on in Washington?
Ms. Quarterman. Whenever anything political is happening,
we just do the best we can.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, we are in the
process of auditing our training program, our grant program,
and reassessing the priorities and how it will work going
forward in the future.
If I can just respond to the OSHA issue as well.
Ms. Brown. Yes.
Ms. Quarterman. Let me say that I agree with Mr. Byrd on
this issue. DOT PHMSA has absolutely no interest in becoming
occupational safety and health regulators. Our expertise is in
the HAZMAT area.
One of the reasons we are very interested in the loading
and unloading issue is, for example, the first quarter of this
year there were five fatalities, four of which were related to
loading and unloading. It is one where we think we can bring
expertise in loading and unloading of hazardous materials
commodities and focus on that portion of the operations and try
to get people to assess their risks and do a better job. But we
have no desire really to be in charge of occupational safety
and health.
Ms. Brown. And the last question--and I know my time is up,
but I want to ask this question. In the last 18 months I have
heard a lot of rhetoric about additional regulations, but it
hasn't been a lot of additional regulations in the last 18
months. We may have additional enforcement that did not go on
for a period of time. Can anyone speak to that additional
regulations?
Ms. Quarterman. Well, I can say that, as a part of the
President's initiative to streamline regulations, we have,
within the HAZMAT portion of the Pipeline Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration, I don't know, maybe 20 some-odd pages of
ideas of things that could be streamlined. We had a big meeting
at the Department asking questions of constituents what places
where they thought we could streamline the regulations. I am
all in favor of that. The regulations are about this thick. I
think if we could--obviously, we haven't gone through them with
a fine-tooth comb recently. We need to do that. We need ideas
for streamlining the regs.
Ms. Brown. I am not disagreeing with that. But one of the
reasons why we had other hearings and we have had additional
enforcement was because the response from the audit general
said that you needed to because of the safety aspects of it and
how it was impacting the community. I mean, we are not just
doing it for any other reasons other than safety.
Ms. Quarterman. Correct.
Ms. Brown. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shuster. Ms. Quarterman, the time--I am going to just
ask you one more question and then get you off to your
airplane.
How many different rulemakings are out there that PHMSA is
looking at? I asked about two of them, I guess. Are there more
out there that you are looking at?
Ms. Quarterman. I don't know how many current rulemakings
are pending. In terms of major rules, there is the lithium
battery rule, the loading and unloading rule, and the wetlines
rule. Those are the ones that I think of as being significant.
You know, there are always rules in adopting international
harmonization, you know, things around the edges. But, to me,
those are the biggest rules we have pending.
Mr. Shuster. Well, I appreciate you coming today, Ms.
Quarterman. We will let you head out the door.
And as you are getting ready to head out the door I will
just reiterate that I hope we can figure out something on this
wetlines issue. Because, contrary to what my esteemed colleague
from Florida said, you know, that is not an enforcement, that
is going to be a change in regulatory burden. And also a
reminder that across the government, maybe not PHMSA so much
but the EPA, and again across the spectrum of the government,
there has been tremendous increase in regulatory burden on
business. And much of it, in my view, is not based on science.
It is based on somebody's response to it, either emotional or
being something they want to see not based on sound science. So
I think the economy is getting overheated with that type of
regulatory burden.
So thank you, Ms. Quarterman. I hope you make that plane.
Does the gentleman from Pennsylvania wish to be recognized
for questions?
Mr. Meehan. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
take a moment.
I am very appreciative of the testimony, and,
unfortunately, we get drawn in numerous directions. So I try to
take the time to read your testimony so that I am educating
myself on a lot of the issues you are bringing forward. So I
want to thank you for the effort that you put in to helping us
understand the problems that you are facing and particularly
where we are looking at regulations that impact the industry.
Ms. Windsor, you may be the person to answer this, because
this is a situation in which I simultaneously sit on Homeland
Security and deal with a number of issues there; and having a
background previously in law enforcement, we dealt with a lot
of the credentialing problems that are associated.
Can you explain to me just briefly the concern you have
with the uniformity and duplication in that process? I know
that is the kind of a thing to an individual trucker or
otherwise that can just be another cost or inefficiency; and,
obviously, we want to look to find ways to streamline this
process so that the ends are met, but we are not having
unrealistic expectations.
Ms. Windsor. And definitely we want our drivers that are
hauling HAZMAT to be credentialed properly. But, currently, a
truck driver will go to their local or State DMV and they are
fingerprinted there and will apply for a hazardous materials
endorsement on their license. Then if they are hauling HAZMAT
products to a port, they have to get the TWIC card,
Transportation Worker Identification Credential. In fact, I
have one. Even though I don't transport product, when I go to
visit our trucks I have to have my own.
And that we are talking where it can be anywhere from the
initial HAZMAT endorsement, maybe $100 to $115. Then it is $130
for the TWIC card. Then many shippers then also want additional
credentialing. When in fact we are fingerprinting our drivers
over and over again doing credentialing and background checks.
We believe there should be one database. That if the TWIC
card is going to be our Transportation Worker Identification
Credential, then that should be our card for our credentialing.
Right now, it becomes so onerous on a truck driver they can
spend as much as $270 just to be credentialed to be able to
even haul product.
Mr. Meehan. Is there a time associated from time to time
when a trucker is trying to ship materials that they are
delayed and held up while somebody inspects or checks the
identification that they have for compliance?
Ms. Windsor. Well, it has been, of course, difficult
picking up the different cards. Because they can go in and be
fingerprinted, and maybe they make an appointment. It can be 2
or 3 weeks before the background check returns.
I have drivers that are HAZMAT and nonHAZMAT. During the
winter months, those that haul dry bog during the summer, when
that slows down I can move them into home heating fuels or
something of that nature. They have elected not to go through
the fingerprinting because of the cost and the time it would
take for them to get their credentialing. They lose the
possibility of additional earnings; and, of course, they have
made the decision not to go through the difficulty of being
fingerprinted or the background checks.
Mr. Meehan. What are you seeing with respect to States
having different standards or whether there is any kind of
concern about nonuniformity?
Ms. Windsor. There is major nonconformity in the States. A
disqualifier in one State can be anything from child support to
domestic disputes in one State. In another State, it may not
even be listed. So it is not even uniformity with the States.
That is why we feel like it would be better to remove that from
the States, because you are not having uniformity on who is
being fingerprinted.
Mr. Meehan. Is there somebody else from the panel that has
a perspective on this unique issue?
OK, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Ms. Windsor, if you have other commentary or other evidence
from the field that would help me understand that issue better
I would enjoy working with the chairman and seeing if there is
some way to----
Ms. Windsor. There was a Safe Trucker Act that was proposed
back in 2009 which would help to work with this; and, yes, we
would love to. Thank you.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you.
Mr. Shuster. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Meehan. Yes. My time is up, Mr. Chairman. I thought you
were going to cut me off anyway.
Mr. Shuster. I would have been happy to yield you more
time.
Mr. Boston, how did the explosive industry become so
dependent on special permits? I mean, I guess we heard the
Administrator say there has been a huge increase in the request
for special permits, and I believe when I had a meeting with
her she said it was mainly due to the explosives industry.
Mr. Boston. Yes, Chairman Shuster. Special permits are the
only way that the explosives industry can transport bulk
explosives such as blasting agents and oxidizers. These types
of materials are much safer, lower sensitivity and that sort of
thing, than packaged explosives, high explosives.
However, the hazardous materials regulations don't
currently provide for transportation of these materials by
truckload. Special permits are a way, as you pointed out, that
the hazardous materials regulations can catch up with
technology or keep up with technology. And, actually, they
serve as sort of an ad hoc R&D program whereby industry
develops new technology and methods to properly and safely
handle it and then test it via the special permit process and,
once completed, look for incorporation into regulations.
Now, how is--30 years ago, when we began using these trucks
to transport blasting agents and oxidizers, that was cutting-
edge technology. As I have said, there are no provisions in the
hazardous materials regulations to allow that, so industry had
to petition for and receive special permits to do that.
They have been transporting now under these special permits
for 30 years, and during that 30 years the record of safety has
been phenomenal. There have been no injuries or fatalities that
have resulted from the use of those special permits. Yet those
special permits still exist, rather than having been
incorporated into the regulations.
Mr. Shuster. And that is bulk explosives versus package.
Mr. Boston. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shuster. The package has much--or they are much more
highly explosive, and that is something you believe needs to be
continued under this process. But maybe we need to figure out a
way to, as I think you are saying, to incorporate in the
regulations where bulk explosives are much safer, in fact, no
fatalities in 30 years. We need to change the way we have
oversight and regulation on bulk.
Mr. Boston. Yes, sir, that is correct. Understand that the
packaged explosives, high explosives, there are provisions
already in the hazardous material regulations that allow for
their transportation. Therefore, special permits generally
aren't necessary for that. The shortcoming or the weak point is
how 95 percent of our explosives are transported now, still
aren't covered by the regulations, and so we have to use
special permits.
Mr. Shuster. Right. So in answer to your question, Mr.
Filner, I am going for less regulation here because it appears
to me that the industry has figured out how to ship bulk
explosives.
What is a bulk explosive? Give me a material.
Mr. Boston. An ammonium nitrate emulsion is one. That would
be a material that has got some ammonium nitrate. Fuel oil,
that is another. So those are the----
Mr. Shuster. And package would be dynamite?
Mr. Boston. A package would be dynamite. It might be the
perforators that my company offers. Detonators, detonating
cord, all of those things are high explosives, and they are
currently already covered by regulation.
Mr. Shuster. And so the bulk explosives we could
streamline, reduce the red tape you have to go through to ship.
And, again, we figured out in the last 30 years how to do it
very, very safely.
Mr. Boston. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate that.
But they don't necessarily need one anymore because they
figured it out. I mean--no, it is because technology--that is
the beauty of technology. You change it, and then all of a
sudden things are much safer, and you can do without as much
regulation and oversight. And that is a good thing.
Anybody have any questions?
Mr. Filner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the courtesy.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania is very eager to compliment
the representatives to prevent us from onerous regulation. I
would just like to compliment that Mr. Byrd is protecting the
safety and health of our working people. Thank you very much.
Mr. Shuster. And I want to thank all the witnesses and
again thank the members. This is a fly-in day for us. I
appreciate Mr. Meehan, Mr. Filner, and others for being here at
the hearing today. And I appreciate the witnesses for taking
the time and help to enter into discussion as we move forward
on this transportation bill. We want to make sure we are doing
the right things when it comes to HAZMAT and making sure to
take into consideration both safety and the economic benefits
that you provide to the economy and the jobs you provide to the
economy. So thank you very much.
And, with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:51 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

