- THE DEBT LIMIT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DEBT LIMIT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JANUARY 22, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-FC01

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-129                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of January 22, 2013 announcing the hearing..............     2

WITNESSES

Lee A. Casey, Partner, BakerHostetler, Washington, DC............     6
J.D. Foster, Ph.D., Norman B. Ture Senior Fellow in the Economics
of Fiscal Policy, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC......    26
G. William Hoagland, Senior Vice President, Bipartisan Policy
Center, Washington, DC.........................................    16
Simon Johnson, Ph.D., Ronald A. Kurtz Professor of
Entrepreneurship, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan
School of Management, Boston, MA...............................    44

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Billy J. Spiva...................................................    91

THE DEBT LIMIT

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 22, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:34 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Sam Johnson
presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Tuesday, January 15, 2013
No. FC-01

Camp Announces Hearing on the Debt Limit

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp (R-MI) today
announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on the statutory debt
limit. The hearing will take place on Tuesday, January 22, 2013, in
Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 1:30
p.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

The U.S. Constitution grants Congress the authority to fund
government, including the power to ``lay and collect taxes,'' and to
``borrow [m]oney on the credit of the United States.'' Congress
provided the President with a limited delegation of borrowing authority
in 1917, and created the first statutory aggregate debt limit in 1939
to pay obligations authorized by Congress.

As of December 2012, the public debt is currently at the statutory
limit of $16.4 trillion, and the U.S. Department of the Treasury
(Treasury) is currently operating under ``extraordinary measures'' that
give it additional, but limited, means to manage funds. According to
Treasury, it is expected that the government's ability to meet its
current obligations will be exhausted between mid-February and early
March of this year.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``The Congress
created the debt limit as a check on the delegated borrowing power of
the President and it is critical that all parties understand the
implications of increasing the debt limit. This hearing will examine
the role and purpose of the debt limit, review past practices regarding
its increase, and explore solutions that ensure responsible management
of the government's finances.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

This hearing will examine the history of the debt limit, how past
Congresses and Presidents have negotiated and raised the limit, and
whether the Constitution provides options to the Executive Branch when
the debt limit is reached.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Tuesday,
February 12, 2013. Finally, please note that due to the change in House
mail policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package
deliveries to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you
encounter technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-
2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. We are expecting votes, so we are
going to go ahead and get started. The Chairman is on his way.
He will be landing in a couple of minutes. But we are going to
get started.
Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing on the debt
limit. The Chairman has been delayed, but given the votes this
afternoon, he asked we go ahead and start the hearing so
Members may have as much time as possible with our
distinguished witnesses.
Before hearing from our witnesses, I will read Chairman
Camp's prepared opening statement and then turn it over to Mr.
Levin for his usual opening statement.
Good afternoon. Thank you for joining us today, all of you.
The topic of today's hearing is the debt limit, which has
increased higher and faster under President Obama than any
President in our Nation's history. Since the President first
took office in 2009, there have been four increases in the
statutory debt limit, totaling more than $5 trillion, a 55
percent increase.
As of December 31, 2012, our Nation reached the current
debt limit of nearly $16.4 trillion, and the Treasury
Department has been using extraordinary measures to avoid
exceeding the debt limit. According to a letter from Secretary
Geithner, those measures will be exhausted between mid-February
and early March.
In the simplest of terms, the debt limit helps hold
Washington accountable to hardworking taxpayers, who ultimately
foot the bill for Washington's spending habits. Without a
limit, Washington would be free to borrow as much as it wanted
without even a review of the bills we have racked up and those
that are still coming due.
Now, as I have said many times before, no one party is
solely to blame. During 8 years of the previous Bush
Presidency, deficits increased by $2.4 trillion. President
Obama ran up twice that much during just his first term.
The debt is not just some number; it has a direct impact on
American families. During the President's fiscal commission, we
heard nonpartisan testimony that stated when the debt is this
large in comparison to the economy, it costs the country the
equivalent of about 1 million jobs. Think about that. If
Washington got its debt and spending under control, 1 million
more Americans would be working today.
As if that wasn't sobering enough, the staggering size of
our debt and lack of a plan to deal with it also threaten to
drive interest rates up. The Fitch Ratings agency recently
warned that the failure to make progress on our structural debt
would likely still result in a downgrade of the U.S. credit
rating. A lower credit rating is sure to mean higher interest
rates, which means families will face higher credit card
payments, higher car payments, higher student loan payments,
and certainly higher mortgage payments.
In 2006, when speaking in opposition to increasing the debt
limit, then-Senator Obama said, ``The fact that we are here
today to debate raising America's debt limit is a sign of
leadership failure.'' Those comments hold true today. That is
why it is disappointing that the President has declined to
engage in a meaningful dialogue to identify a responsible,
balanced approach to reducing spending and, by extension,
reducing the deficit, which the President promised to cut in
half during his first term.
Of course, it is tough to cut the deficit when the Senate,
which is controlled by the President's own party, will not or
cannot even produce a budget. It has been 4 years since the
Democrat-controlled Senate has passed a budget. That is a
disgrace.
I fully expect Republicans and Democrats will disagree
about what the budget should look like. Even when one party has
a majority in both the Senate and the House, the two bodies
often disagree. Disagreeing isn't the problem; the failure to
resolve those differences is the problem. And how can we even
start to find common ground if Senate Democrats won't tell us
where they stand?
In the first place, having the House and Senate pass a
budget is the first step toward getting our finances back in
shape.
I want to thank the witnesses for agreeing to testify today
and sharing your expertise on the debt, the debt limit, and
what it means for the country. I thank you for your being here.
And I would also like to welcome and thank our witnesses
for appearing before us. Before we hear from them, I recognize
now the Ranking Member, Mr. Levin, for his opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Welcome to all four of you.
Today's hearing appears to have been originally designed to
give the veneer of credibility to the notion that it might be
appropriate, thinkable, or manageable to default on our debt.
It is none of these. The debt ceiling is about paying the bills
of the United States of America, for spending that this
institution authorized. Manipulating it today, next week, or in
3 or 4 months damages our economy and our credibility.
In the summer of 2011--and I urge we all try to remember
it--Republicans in this Congress pushed our Nation toward
default. There were clear consequences--clear consequences.
Today, they are prolonging another debt-ceiling showdown
instead of a long-term extension. This continues and increases
the economic uncertainty.
Our Nation's economic wounds from 18 months ago are simply
too fresh to ignore. August 2011 was the single worst month for
job creation in the last 3 years. The Dow Jones plunged 2,000
points in July and August of 2011, including one of its worst
single-day drops in history, tumbling 635 points on August 8th.
The Treasury was forced to spend $1.3 billion more in interest
payments, according to GAO. The Bipartisan Policy Center
estimates that the higher costs will be almost $19 billion over
the next decade.
And, of course, who could forget that the U.S. credit
rating was downgraded for the first time in our history? One
Standard & Poor's senior director said shortly after the credit
agency downgraded the U.S. credit rating that the stability and
effectiveness of American political institutions were
undermined by the fact, and I quote, ``that people in the
political arena were even talking about a potential default.''
The Washington Post unequivocally stated in a story this
week that, and I quote, ``In 2011, the debt-ceiling dispute
traumatized the economy.'' A senior principal economist with
IHS Global Insight was one of the many economists who have
warned against a repeat. He wrote in a report last week, and
again I quote, ``If the political bickering over the debt-
ceiling issue reaches a fever pitch, as it did in the summer of
2011, then consumer confidence will nosedive further into
recession territory.''
We are hearing today that instead of quickly enacting a
clean increase to the debt ceiling, there may be some other
options. Some of the witnesses seem to suggest that it might be
possible to instruct Treasury to pay bondholders while delaying
payments to others. Whose bills should be delayed or cut? The
Social Security checks of 56 million seniors and people with
disabilities? The salaries of more than 2 million American
personnel, many of whom are currently in harm's way?
The idea is so troubling that it drew a strong rebuke from
The Post Fact Checker last week. And he said, I quote, ``By
available evidence, it appears all but impossible for the
Treasury Department to pick and choose among payments.'' It is
reported, as I read, that our Chairman, Chairman Camp, also
cautioned his colleagues last week that such an approach is
unworkable.
I also urge--and I went back and checked it--that it
embellishes history to imply that threatening to default has
historically been used as leverage for deficit reduction, such
as with Gramm-Rudman, which I voted for. In the House in both
cases, the debt-ceiling bill was deemed passed, and the Senate
then used it as a vehicle, not as a threat, for deficit-
reduction legislation.
Over the past 2 years, we have achieved $2.5 trillion in
deficit reduction--I repeat: $2.5 trillion in deficit
reduction--and set an important precedent for future further
balanced deficit reduction that includes both spending cuts and
new revenue. And I close firmly urging we should proceed with
this effort, focusing further on economic growth and jobs, not
damaging this effort by attempting to use the debt ceiling for
political leverage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
It is my pleasure to welcome the panel of witnesses before
us today. We have four witnesses on today's panel.
We will first hear from Lee Casey, a partner at the law
firm of BakerHostetler. Mr. Casey is a former official in the
Department of Justice Office of Legal Policy and Office of
Legal Counsel.
Second, we will welcome William Hoagland, Senior Vice
President of the Bipartisan Policy Center. Mr. Hoagland is also
the former Director of Budget and Appropriations for the Senate
Majority Leader, Bill Frist, and former Staff Director of the
Senate Budget Committee.
Third on the panel is Dr. J.D. Foster, the Norman B. Ture
Senior Fellow in the Economics of Fiscal Policy at The Heritage
Foundation.
Finally, we will hear from Dr. Simon Johnson, the Ronald A.
Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management.
I appreciate all of you being here with us today. The
Committee has received your written statements. They will be
made part of the formal hearing record. Each of you will be
recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks.
Mr. Casey, we will begin with you. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF LEE A. CASEY,
PARTNER, BAKERHOSTETLER, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. CASEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Committee. It is an honor and a privilege to appear here today
to discuss the critical issue of the Federal debt ceiling.
Although there are many important policy questions raised
by the current debate over the debt ceiling, I would like to
address the more fundamental constitutional questions of
whether there must be a congressionally mandated limit to
Federal borrowing and the extent to which the President may
ignore these restraints or simply raise that limit and borrow
money on his own authority.
I believe that the answer is clear: Under the Constitution,
Congress alone has the power to decide how, when, and why
Federal spending should take place, and the extent to which
that spending may be supported by taxation and/or borrowing.
The debt limit is, of course, a statutory device that dates
to the First World War. Although the debt limit in its current
form is not constitutionally mandated, some type of
congressionally controlled limit on executive branch borrowing
is required and, whatever precise form that limitation takes,
it is constitutionally protected. The President can neither
ignore nor alter the debt limit without fundamentally
subverting the Constitution's separation of powers and
violating his oath of office.
There are two principal mechanisms by which the Federal
Government may obtain resources in order to operate: through
taxation and through borrowing. The Constitution makes both of
these mechanisms the peculiar province of the legislative
branch. Congress alone is granted the authority to lay and
collect taxes, to pay Federal debts, and to borrow money on the
credit of the United States. The executive branch then carries
out these functions; that is, its role is to execute what
Congress has enacted in these areas. The President has no
independent authority to raise taxes or to borrow on the
Nation's credit.
This was, of course, the purpose and intent of the
Constitution's Framers. In a basic division of governmental
power, they gave Congress the power of the purse, a grant they
viewed as especially empowering the House of Representatives,
where all revenue bills must originate.
Moreover, as James Madison explained in the Federalist No.
58, the Framers fully anticipated and intended that
congressional power over Federal taxation, borrowing, and
spending would be used as a political weapon. I quote, ``This
power over the purse may, in fact, be regarded as the most
complete and effectual weapon with which any constitution can
arm the immediate representatives of the people, for obtaining
a redress of every grievance, and for carrying into effect
every just and salutary measure.''
It follows, of course, that the President cannot raise the
debt ceiling on his own authority and is bound to respect this
limitation on Federal spending, even if this requires him to
make difficult decisions and take actions he would not
otherwise support. Claims that section 4 of the 14th Amendment
grants the President such power are mistaken. Section 4 forbids
repudiation of Federal debts lawfully incurred. Permitting the
President to raise the debt ceiling on his own authority under
section 4 would upset the Constitution's basic separation of
powers. And it is also plainly inconsistent with the 14th
Amendment's language that, I quote, ``The Congress shall have
power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of
this article.''
It is also important to understand that the public debt
guaranteed by section 4 does not include ordinary Federal
spending programs but extends only to debt instruments issued
in exchange for money on the credit of the United States.
Thus, as a constitutional matter, Congress has the
authority and obligation to regulate Federal borrowing. It can
exercise this power in a number of different ways, including by
voting on individual debt issues as was the case before the
First World War, or by establishing an overall limit on the
amount of debt the Federal Government may incur without further
congressional action.
The President is bound by such limits. He can neither
ignore the debt ceiling, nor can he raise it on his own
authority.
And I would be pleased to answer any questions the
Committee may have. And thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Casey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, Mr. Casey. I appreciate
your comments.
Mr. Hoagland, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF G. WILLIAM HOAGLAND, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. HOAGLAND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Levin, and
Members of the Committee. It is a privilege for me to be here
this afternoon.
Fundamentally, the debt-ceiling discussion emerges from the
most basic tenet of our legislative sovereignty, and that, of
course, is the power of the purse.
I began my career here on Capitol Hill with the
Congressional Budget Office in 1975. Later, as staff on the
Senate Budget Committee and in the Senate Majority Leader's
office, I witnessed and participated in many budget standoffs.
But one of the first and most memorable was the one that the
Ranking Member mentioned, the 1985 Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act. I
believe Mr. Levin and Mr. Rangel were the only two who were
here at that time in 1985. That legislation came about because
of the need to raise the statutory debt limit over $2 trillion
for the first time in the country's history.
The debt-limit bill has always been politically sensitive,
but as the country's debt has continued to increase, the need
to legislate an increase has become more frequent--78 times
since 1940--and more difficult. Further, based on the actions
that the 112th Congress took at the end of the 112th, I
estimate that the debt held by the public will continue to
rise, reaching 77 percent of GDP by 2022, and the debt subject
to limit will exceed $27 trillion.
My statement addresses two issues: First, what we call the
X date, the date at which extraordinary measures will run out
and there will be insufficient cash to pay our Nation's bills;
and, second, one of the foci of this hearing, what options are
available to the Executive when that X date is reached.
On the first question, the cash flows of the past week have
largely been, as we have anticipated, with no large
fluctuations. And we at the BPC base our estimates of those
cash flows on known cash flows and scheduled payments during
this time period and on previous years' patterns of payments.
And at this point, we are projecting the windows of the X date
between February 15th and March 1st, the same as Treasury.
On the second issue, what actions might the Treasury take
post-X date, the President and Treasury officials will face two
potential scenarios: First, the Treasury could prioritize
payments, choosing to pay some and not others. In 1985, the
Comptroller General issued a letter to the then-Chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee, Bob Packwood, concluding that the
Secretary of the Treasury does have the authority to choose the
order in which to pay obligations of the United States. I asked
the GAO general counsel last week if this opinion has changed
and have been told that GAO has not issued an opinion on this
question since 1985. It stands.
Now, while prioritization may be legal, the actual
implementation of it may not be practical. Treasury must make
over 5 million payments on each business day. Treasury's
computer systems are set up to confirm and process all payments
as they come due. Implementing prioritization would be a
dramatic overhaul and extremely difficult. Further, should
Congress take to itself the responsibility of setting payment
dates, possibly having to overturn the Prompt Payment Act or
Title X of the Budget Act dealing with impoundment and other
existing laws, one must be realistic as to how long such a
legislative debate would last.
The second scenario, should the Treasury deem
prioritization to be implausible, the Secretary could instead
announce that the government will make payments on daily
obligations but in the order in which they come due on a
delayed schedule. Assuming, as we do, that the X date is
February 15th, the Treasury enters that date with precisely
enough cash to fund the $30 billion interest payment due that
day, and all other interest payments are prioritized and paid
on time.
In this situation, there would be $22 billion of
noninterest payments owed on February 15th, which include
military pay and unemployment benefits. They would be delayed
until February 20th. Similarly, over $30 billion of payments
due on February 20th, which include Social Security benefits,
would have to be delayed until February 25th. These delays
would continue to cascade. Payments due March 1st, which
include Social Security benefits, military salaries, and
veterans benefits, among others, would be delayed until March
15th, half a month late. The government could face legal
challenges under the Prompt Payment Act, not to mention the
real impact on individuals and businesses across the country.
Finally, under normal conditions, Treasury issues new debt
to the public in order to raise cash to pay off outstanding
securities as they mature. However, in a situation where
Treasury has begun to delay payments on noninterest
obligations, there is a possibility that such auctions would be
disrupted. Investors might demand a significant premium on
their debt purchases or, in the worst-case scenario, Treasury
could find itself with insufficient buyers for an auction.
Were this to occur, it would force Treasury to step in with
enough cash to pay off the redeeming bondholders or face a
default on the U.S. debt, and it would further delay
noninterest obligations--a vicious circle. We expect that there
will be over $500 billion of debt that will need to be rolled
over from February 15th to March 15th.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the Bipartisan Policy Center
strongly believes that the imbalance in our Federal budget
ledger does need to be addressed. Risks are risks, and while no
one can know for sure what ramifications the largely
unprecedented scenario of passing the X date would have, those
risks clearly grow day by day and eventually could become
catastrophic. These are considerations I know the Members of
this Committee will keep in mind as you deliberate this
important issue.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hoagland follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that.
Dr. Foster, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J.D. FOSTER, PH.D., NORMAN B. TURE SENIOR FELLOW
IN THE ECONOMICS OF FISCAL POLICY, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. FOSTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Levin, Members of
the Committee. Good afternoon. It is nice to be back.
My name is J.D. Foster. I am the Norman B. Ture Senior
Fellow at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express today
are my own and should not be construed as the position of The
Heritage Foundation.
Mr. Chairman, once again we find ourselves in dire straits.
The President's position on the debt ceiling I believe could be
summed up simply as: Kick the can, and then we will have a
conversation; we will engage in a dialogue. The Senate's
position can be summed up simply as: Hoping not to be noticed.
And so it falls, as it so often does, on the House to lead.
On the debt ceiling, I believe we face basically three
options--two drastic, and one, which is sound. The first
drastic one: Congress could simply leave the debt ceiling in
place. While perhaps tempting to some, and understandably so, I
think we all know this would be unwise and irresponsible, with
consequences we can only begin to imagine--consequences that do
not include, however, defaulting on the Nation's debt, a
suggestion the President frequently makes in awesome
irresponsibility.
Second, Congress could raise the debt ceiling by some large
amount or repeal it altogether, as the President has suggested,
and do nothing else. Raising it substantially and doing nothing
else would continue a pattern of reckless, irresponsible fiscal
policy with no end in sight and, for this reason, would with
certainty also bring terrible consequences. To be sure, the
date of onset of these consequences is uncertain, which makes
this course so appealing in a political environment often
favoring perfect myopia.
The Federal Government's debt trajectory is dangerous--
dangerous to our economy, dangerous to our future as a Nation.
And surely that, at least, we can all agree on. Fiscally, the
rise in the debt means more of the government's resources will
be crowded out in the future into paying interest expense,
making less resources available for other priorities. Americans
generally are willing to pay taxes, but they expect services in
return. Servicing the government's debt is not what they have
in mind.
Economically, it also means that savings that would
otherwise be available for productive investment in the private
sector have been captured by the government. Less private
saving means a smaller economy and lower wages. Soaring public
debt also means that when interest rates begin to rise--and
rise they most assuredly will--they are now set to rise much
farther and much faster. The consequences of these higher
interest rates will be the most terrible of all, for families,
for businesses, for the economy. And there will be nothing then
that Congress can do to stop them.
What Congress should do is raise the debt ceiling while
enacting concrete programmatic spending reforms, especially to
entitlements, to reduce the deficit in the short run and
especially the long run. There are sound, bipartisan,
commonsense, options for restraining entitlement spending while
ensuring these programs preserve economic security for the
elderly and the poor. Indeed, it is possible through reform to
remedy key failings, such as the woefully inadequate minimum
benefit in Social Security and the lack of a catastrophic
benefit in Medicare, while doing these reforms. Our mantra
should be ``reform and improve'' while slowing the growth of
spending.
If the President led on these issues, he could help shape
these vital programs to ensure their sustainability and
effectiveness and, in the process, transform himself from the
most fiscally irresponsible President to arguably the most
fiscally responsible President in our history.
Which brings us back to the debt limit. Modern history
provides fertile ground for doubt when process solutions
substitute for concrete decisions, such as the House is
considering. Thus, I have my qualms over the course the House
leadership has set. But I understand the difficulties the House
faces, and I accept as sincere assurances that there is a
firmer strategy. I accept this.
I agree entirely that if we are to make sustained progress
in restraining spending and deficits, Congress must return to
the regular order in a budget process, however much the other
body would like to do otherwise. The House is correct to press
for a regular, disciplined budget process.
I don't know whether the House can compel a change in
course. I acknowledge the difficulties. For all our sakes and
the sake of my children and yours, I fervently hope you
succeed.
I do know the House can take a stand to present the
American people a clear alternative to soaring debt and a
dimmer future: To choose to stand with deficits and debt and
decline, or to stand with the economic security and prosperity
of future generations of Americans. The American people deserve
at least to know this much from the U.S. House of
Representatives: Where the Nation is heading and what the House
would do differently.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Foster follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, Dr. Foster.
Professor Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Please
proceed.

STATEMENT OF SIMON JOHNSON, PH.D., RONALD A. KURTZ PROFESSOR OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY SLOAN
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT, BOSTON, MA

Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I find it frightening and also hard to believe that we are
having this conversation in general and that you are having a
hearing on this matter.
Among other things, I am the former Chief Economist of the
International Monetary Fund, and I would remind you that the
United States is not just the center of the world's economy;
our financial assets, our government debt serves as a linchpin
of the world's financial system.
From 1948 to 1968, foreigners held as reserves U.S.
Government debt worth about 2 percent of our GDP. Their
reserves now, their rainy-day funds, the basis of their
financial calculations, are now at least 15 percent of our GDP.
These are assets they hold willingly. They hold them because
this has in the past been regarded as the world's safest asset.
You are calling this into question when you raise the issue of
not increasing the debt ceiling. This, to the world, to the
world's investors, is just unbelievable, that you would even
have this conversation.
Could I show, please, the first slide?
I testified before this Committee and I made these exact
same points in the summer of 2011. And the point I tried to
communicate to you then was that if you continued to have a
confrontation around the debt ceiling, you would create an
unprecedented level of uncertainty regarding economic policy in
the United States.
This chart is taken from the work of Professors Baker,
Bloom, and Davis. The full reference is in my written
testimony. And they have measured policy uncertainty since
1985--not, I would say, at my behest or particularly focusing
on the debt ceiling. But what do they find? What do you see in
this chart?
Matching exactly with what Mr. Levin said at the beginning,
August 2011 stands out as the moment since 1985 when we had the
greatest uncertainty, the most lack of clarity for everyone--
not just for the government, everyone in the private sector.
Consumers, businesses cannot make decisions if they don't know
what is going to happen to the government debt.
And listening to the testimony just now, I was further
frightened by the extent to which leading experts disagree or
vary in opinion with regard to exactly what may happen if we
are to breach or come up against or somehow play with this debt
ceiling.
The United States has never threatened to default, not
since the 1780s. That has been the key element of U.S. fiscal
policy since the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia.
That is actually a lesson that President Madison learned the
hard way in and after the War of 1812, the importance of being
very careful with your public debt and very careful with all
communications around your public debt management.
If you don't raise the debt ceiling now or if you postpone
this conversation, if you say, every 60, 90, or 100 days we are
going to again have the same kind of conversation about the
debt ceiling, you will continue to have this sort of spike in
policy uncertainty, you will continue to undermine the private
sector, you will continue to delay investment and to reduce
employment relative to what it would be otherwise.
I urge you--I understand you have many difficult fiscal
conversations to come. I appreciate that. I realize there is a
range of reasonable opinion here. But I urge you, as I urged
you in the summer of 2011: Take the debt ceiling off the table.
Do it for our sakes. Do it for the world economy. Do it for the
global financial system, which has still not recovered from the
problems of 2007-2008.
If you want to destabilize the European economy, if you
want to put pressure on all those sovereigns in Europe who are
right now struggling fiscally, then you should have exactly
this confrontation, pushing up the yield on risky assets around
the world. But you don't want to do that. You don't want to
destabilize Europe. You don't want another downgrade of U.S.
debt. You don't want another spike in policy uncertainty.
Please, take the debt ceiling, once and for all, completely
off the table.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, sir.
We have a vote going on right now, and it appears to me
that we are not going to be able to continue as we are. So I
think we will recess until the vote is over, which will be
about half an hour, they say, and return. So the meeting stands
in recess----
Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Chairman, let me just mention, there is
going to be a Rules Committee meeting on the bill, so I may not
be here for the questioning. I think my colleagues will be
pressing the issue of a 3-month delay and the potential harm it
can do.
We went through this once, Dr. Johnson. I remember your
testimony so well. And to think of going through it again, my
hope is that there will be questions that can elicit your view
as to why we should not be playing with fire once again.
Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. The Committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairman CAMP [presiding]. The Committee will come back to
order.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today.
And I think we will move into the question and answer
period. I am going to reserve my question time for a minute,
and I will go to Mr. Brady.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all those who were here for the testimony
today. It was very helpful.
First, clearly, America will pay its debts. That has been
made clear by Republicans and Democrats in Congress. We always
have. And I hope that those who choose to be melodramatic about
it these days to gain political advantage, if you could please
stop, that would be helpful.
Second, there is absolutely no chance that the President's
request to have a permanent unlimited debt ceiling will occur.
This is the constitutional prerogative of the House and the
Senate. As we have seen in the past, it has also been a helpful
tool, not only on checks and balances, but to enact spending
reforms and restraints that can be helpful, although, in my
view, have not been as helpful as they have in the past.
And a third point is that the claim we heard earlier today,
that a short-term extension of the debt limit may raise our
U.S. Government debt service cost, that is highly speculative.
The 2011 GAO study showed mixed results, with no significant
impacts in 40 percent of the extensions. So three out of every
five had no impact. The 2012 report was based on only one
event, so it is statistically inconclusive. The Bipartisan
Policy Center estimates are based upon both of these
questionable GAO studies, and they miss the point.
The fact of the matter is, unsustained spending over time,
without doubt, will raise the cost of our borrowing in America.
That is why we are all here today to deal with this issue or
attempt to give our best insight.
I would like to ask Dr. Foster a question because it
relates to the debt ceiling. Many of us see the other side of
that coin as a credit downgrade, a second one, which has
serious consequences not just for our borrowing but for
borrowing of small businesses and consumers at home.
My question to you--and I know there are different
opinions, but what do you think Congress has to do? What steps
should we take to create not just medium-term fiscal
consolidation addressing that issue, but long term, dealing
with our long-term drivers of debt and spending? What do we
need to do to avoid a second downgrade, or a downgrade by a
second credit rating, to be accurate?
Mr. FOSTER. To avoid another downgrade, which on our
current path is almost assured, we really need to do two
things. And they are pointed out in the letter expressing the
first downgrade.
One, don't raise any question about not raising the debt
ceiling; ultimately, we have to do that. And the second is we
have to get our long-term fiscal house in order. That means we
have to get the entitlement programs under control, achieving
two goals: One, the reforms necessary to make sure they achieve
the result intended, which is protecting at-risk populations,
while spending moneys that we can afford to spend and no more.
There are simple entitlement reforms--
straightforward, and well- vetted--that this Congress could
adopt, I believe, fairly quickly. They are not even
legislatively complex. And these are the kinds of reforms that
have received bipartisan support in the past. They are sort of
commonsense changes.
It is frustrating, in fact, that we don't take these
reforms more seriously and move on them because they would have
profound impacts in the long run, where the fiscal problem
really lies. Yes, we have a serious problem with a trillion-
dollar budget deficit today, but, really, as large as that is,
that problem is dwarfed by our long-run fiscal problems from
the entitlement programs.
We know some of the basic reforms, bipartisan reforms that
can be enacted that will go a long way to getting Medicare and
Social Security, in particular, on a more sustainable path. And
that is where the Congress should be looking as we debate
fiscal policy this year, beginning with the debt ceiling.
Mr. BRADY. Do you think investors look beyond that debt-
ceiling issue to those fundamentals you talked about, answering
the question, is America serious about getting its financial
house in order over the long term? Do you think that really
creates the most uncertainty going forward over the long term?
Mr. FOSTER. It is certainly a tremendous source of
uncertainty. There are others, but that is a major source of
uncertainty that credit markets most assuredly look at, as
indicated by the letter transmitting the credit rating
downgrade the last time.
Mr. BRADY. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you. And welcome back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. RANGEL. I am under the impression that the debt ceiling
is to give the authority to the President to assure our
creditors that each and every nickel that we would borrow will
be paid back. I also believe that we have to have some
guidelines on the spending in order to share with creditors and
Americans alike the fact that we are going to reduce
unnecessary spending. Having said that, there are some people
who believe that we have to have to be involved, this debt
ceiling, and with the deficit. And, of course, that is
controversial.
Under the system of prioritizing payments, as some people
are pushing forward, they would believe that we can determine
just who we were going to pay out interest to while we get a
better handle on the spending part of this dilemma. And I just
want to ask Dr. Johnson some questions.
These programs, I think you pay your interest on your debt
as the number-one priority. I think every family would like to
pay off interest; Social Security; and then third, somewhere
active duty military. And I think that is patriotic as well as
political.
But under this scenario, Dr. Johnson, will we be paying the
people that we borrowed from in China, the debt that we owe
China, the biggest creditor, or one of the largest, before we
would pay our American military that got caught, like I did, in
Korea, fighting the Chinese? Does this work out, that in terms
of avoiding the payment of our debt, that we would pay off our
debtors before we pay off our military? Is that part of this
plan?
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, Mr. Rangel, it is hard to know. I mean,
I don't think these plans are very detailed, worked-out,
credible plans. They are vague notions, the ones I have seen.
But, yes, I have seen the notion expressed that the United
States would pay its debts in the form of interest and
principal on bonds, a substantial fraction of which are held by
the Chinese Government, for example, ahead of payments that it
would make of other kinds, which would include, presumably, the
way that is framed, payments to active service military
personnel, for example.
Now, that just seems like a very strange notion----
Mr. RANGEL. It seems to me, if you owed anybody any money,
no matter whether it was the country or your company, and you
were not giving the executive director the authority to pay
what has already been borrowed, that that shouldn't make our
lenders feel comfortable.
But about the question of reducing spending, is there a
vehicle that the Congress can exercise its ability without
jeopardizing the reputation of credit? I mean, we have to deal
with it, but you say and I think most people believe, don't
attack the debt ceiling and integrity of the United States of
America, but use the constitutional vehicles you have. What can
the Congress do to express America's concern about spending?
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, Congressman, as you know far better than
I do, you have a wide range of tools, and, in fact, you have
more than 200 years of fiscal history in which the Congress did
exactly that. Congress exerted for many, many years both a
reasonable tax base that was consistent with the spending that
they wanted, and nobody ever put the debt ceiling or the U.S.
willingness to pay its obligations on the table in the way that
it was placed in the summer of 2011 and the way that I fear it
is now being placed on the table again.
It was a big mistake in 2011 to create this degree of
uncertainty and fear in the United States and around the world,
and it is a big mistake to do it again today.
Mr. RANGEL. Why would any good-thinking, patriotic American
who loves the country as well as we all do want to use the debt
ceiling as a vehicle to reduce spending rather than the other
legislative opportunities we would have? What would their
reasoning be? Certainly not to embarrass the United States of
America.
Mr. JOHNSON. I have no idea, Mr. Rangel. But I can tell you
that----
Mr. RANGEL. Well, if you don't have any, then maybe it is
to defeat the objectives of this President at whatever cost, as
some leaders or so-called leaders have said: That they want to
stop this President, and they were unsuccessful in that
measure. So maybe, maybe they have decided to change tactics.
And maybe this discussion is unnecessary and we find some other
way to get a handle on the deficit.
Let me thank you for your contributions to this hearing, as
you have contributed so many times before.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Foster, in his famous farewell address, President
Eisenhower said, ``We cannot mortgage the material assets of
our grandchildren without risking the loss also of their
political and spiritual heritage. We want democracy to survive
for all generations to come, not to become the insolvent
phantom of tomorrow.''
In your testimony, you say that with respect to our fiscal
future, ``a change of course is inevitable.'' The question is,
what kind of change? You warn that one such change may be
brought by credit markets increasingly intolerant of
Washington's fiscal imprudence.
In essence, you are saying, if we don't do anything, it is
only a matter of time that financial markets will, so to speak,
blow the whistle on Washington and say, ``The game is over.''
In other words, we are on borrowed time here, aren't we?
Mr. FOSTER. Yes, sir, I am afraid we are.
And this is rather an unusual posture for Americans to be
in. We are not used to thinking in these terms because,
traditionally, even though we have had a fair amount of
government debt, it has ranged in the order of 40 percent of
our economy, which is completely manageable. It has since shot
up dramatically and is going to continue to shoot up under
current policies.
And the evidence is very clear in the academic literature;
it is very clear in international observation. There comes a
point where your debt, as a share of your economy, reaches
levels at which credit markets become noticeably disturbed.
They become very worried. And it is expressed, in part, as
rising interest rates, which then spread throughout the
economy. We are not just talking about Treasury interest rates
but mortgage rates and consumer rates and so forth.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Well----
Mr. FOSTER. This is a certainty. And it is a path that we
are on that will have extreme consequences that we are not used
to thinking about in this country.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Well, I ask the question, how much
time do we really have? You know, with the U.S. per-person debt
now 35 percent higher than that of Greece, when do you think we
face our Greek moment if we fail to take meaningful action to
get our fiscal house in order?
Mr. FOSTER. Well, right now we are having a good news/bad
news situation. The good news is that, despite all that we have
done wrong, we are still one of the safest places in the world
to invest. And there are a lot of places around the world that
capital wants to avoid. So it keeps coming into this country,
driving down our interest rates, even as we are raising debt
rapidly.
Well, at some point that is going to reverse, and that
capital will flow out again, and interest rates will rise
rapidly. When that will happen I cannot say because I don't
know when, for example, Europe is finally going to get its
fiscal house and monetary houses in order. But once they do,
this process will reverse and we will see the consequences of
what we have done.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Yeah, Germany is making moves now.
Mr. Hoagland, would you care to comment?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I agree with Dr. Foster that we are probably
the best-looking horse in the glue factory today. That may not
last.
I would also say that I am very worried about, as I said in
my opening statement, the fact that we are looking at debt-to-
GDP that is close to 77 percent. And while in the past we have
had debt-to-GDP after World War II at that level, we didn't
have 50 percent of it being owned by foreign investors. And
that is what scares me in terms of our sovereignty. We think we
have to deal with this going forward.
I agree also that the real issue here is mandatory spending
and putting in procedures, processes, and building upon a
regular-order process up here of getting budget resolutions
adopted, conference agreements, a reconciliation bill, and
working it through the regular order. And that is why I would
say that while this is not the perfect solution in terms of the
3-month extension, it puts you back closer to what would
normally have been a regular-order process. And I think that is
positive.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Well, I would like to know what both
of you think, if we don't get it in order, you know, to our
small-business owners, to our young families, to our aspiring
college students, what kind of future are we looking at for
these folks? Either one of you.
Mr. HOAGLAND. I think the standard of living that we
experienced and enjoyed, we have to be honest with ourselves
that we are lessening that standard of living for future
generations, our children and our grandchildren. I don't think
there is any question that this level of debt would lower that
standard of living that we enjoyed.
Mr. JOHNSON OF TEXAS. Yeah, and people will stop wanting to
come here, won't they?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. McDermott, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have to tell you, listening to this hearing is like we
are living in ``Alice in Wonderland.'' Here we are hearing from
witnesses telling us how to use default creatively or use it to
get some leverage or something. And simply talking about it
here is destructive. The whole world is watching this hearing.
It is the first hearing on this issue.
And the whole point of a society is to create and run a
government in order to make order for people. People don't like
chaos. And this hearing is about how to create chaos to get
what you can't get politically with votes. Businesses and
workers in my district think this kind of talk is crazy.
Today we are talking about a crisis manufactured by the
Republicans, a crisis they have manufactured to achieve
policies that the voters wouldn't vote for at the ballot box.
The Republicans are taking the economy hostage every single
time they get a chance. There are threats for workers and
businesses, investors, retirees. And job growth stops every
time the Republicans have a crisis; the economy falters. This
is the Republican governance and economic policy at work--or
not working, really.
The biggest problem with the Republican arguments that are
before us--and we just heard it again--is that spending and
debt are problems. And this is a misdirection. Republican
Congresses and Republican Presidents were happy to run up huge
deficits to wage wars they didn't pay for, or take tax cuts for
individuals and industry and give billions to oil companies.
Now, deficits aren't what the Republicans care about. What
Republicans want to do is end the guarantees on Medicare and
Social Security. We just heard somebody say it is the
entitlement payments that are the problem. I disagree. I think
this country can have a social safety net that covers people
and pay for it.
And that ought to be happening, but what is happening on
the other side of the aisle here is that they want everybody
who is lucky and doing well to just do well, and if you aren't
doing well, well, you have to deal with it. It is your problem.
It is social Darwinism; it is survival of the fittest put into
public policy in this Committee.
That is the Republican policy. And I respect that they want
a different policy than I do, but we ought to be honest about
the debate. Instead, we just watch people say ``spending'' in
the TV cameras again and again and again. ``Spending'' is just
a term that the polls like. Republicans won't say what they
want to cut because the public doesn't want their policies. But
the word ``spending'' polls very well, so we hear a lot of it.
But we don't hear debate because the Republicans want crisis
but no solution.
If we were serious about having a debate here, we would
start talking about what in Medicare should be cut, or how are
we going to change it, or how are we going to finance
physicians. All those things would be on the table. But we
don't hear that. What we say is, ``Let's just cut.'' And when
you start talking across the board, you are talking about
medical research, and you are talking about NASA, and you are
talking about NOAA, and you are talking about all these
government agencies as though they don't do anything that add
anything to this society.
So when we are spending our time here talking about this
deficit stuff and raising the debt limit, we are simply saying
to the world, for the first time, America is not going to pay
its debts.
Now, my question to you, Mr. Johnson, is this: If this was
such a good idea, why haven't we done it before? We could have
saved a lot of money by not paying our debts. Why have we
suddenly decided that this is the time to do it?
Give me some understanding so the American people can
understand why, after all these years since the First World
War, we have paid our debts under Republicans and Democrats. I
voted under George Bush--both of them--to raise the debt limit.
But now we are going to stop paying. Please tell me why they
are doing it.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, Congressman, it is not a good idea, and
it is not the way fiscal policy was run not just since World
War I, but going back to 1789, after the initial assumption of
debt at the Federal level and the restructuring of debt with
which Alexander Hamilton began fiscal policy in this country;
policy has absolutely been to always pay your debts and your
other obligations. And it took a long time to convince the
world that the United States was the safest place to put your
reserve assets or your rainy-day money. And it was a great
achievement. And now it is being squandered and thrown away
for, I presume, some negotiating purpose. It makes no sense
from a broader economic perspective.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Time has expired. I would ask
unanimous consent to place in the record a Statement of
Administration Policy on H.R. 325, the temporary suspension of
the debt ceiling, where the Administration says, ``For these
reasons, the Administration would not oppose a short-term
solution to the debt limit and looks forward to continuing to
work with both the House and the Senate to increase certainty
in the stability for the economy.''
Without objection, so ordered.
[The submission of The Honorable Dave Camp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tiberi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for coming and testifying.
Let me expand a little bit on Mr. McDermott's line of
questioning and just get a quick response from the four of you.
Back in 2006, speaking on the Senate floor, then Senator Obama
announced that he intended to vote no on the debt-ceiling
increase. He went on to say, and I quote, to oppose the
effort--``I oppose the effort to increase America's debt limit.
We now depend on ongoing financial assistance from foreign
countries to finance our Government's reckless fiscal policies.
Over the past 5 years, our Federal debt has increased by $3.5
trillion dollars to $8.6 trillion.'' Oh, to have those numbers
today. Since then, we now have a $16.4 trillion debt, nearly
doubled in 6 years. In fact, since this President has become
President in 2009, he has added more than four times, more
than--more debt in 4 years, excuse me, than the previous
President did in 8.
So, to the four of you, a quick question. Was the President
right, is this a failure of leadership? And is there a better
direction?
Mr. Casey.
Mr. CASEY. Well, I certainly think he was right that we
oughtn't to continue to run the store based on borrowing. There
is a lot of ways you can pay your debts, and they don't all
include incurring----
Mr. TIBERI. But since he made that speech, it has gotten
worse; we have done nothing to change the trajectory.
Mr. CASEY. I agree.
Mr. TIBERI. It has gotten worse. So is the President right,
it is a leadership failure?
Mr. CASEY. Yeah, I would agree with that, it is.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Congressman, it didn't say that he was right
to say what he said. I would be careful to point out that some
of that increase in that debt that took place was a result of
obligations that were incurred long before he was ever
President of the United States or he----
Mr. TIBERI. Oh, right.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Or wherever. And I just would make that very
clear.
Mr. TIBERI. Oh, sure.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Also, I would simply say, the House-passed
budget resolution last year under Congressman Ryan, which was
going in the right direction of controlling spending, still had
a debt for the end of this year at $17.1 trillion.
Mr. TIBERI. Right. It is getting worse.
Mr. HOAGLAND. It is--and getting worse. It is built into
the pipeline.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you. Agreed.
Mr. Foster.
Mr. FOSTER. Yes, sir, thank you. There is no question that
allowing debt to continue to build more rapidly as a share of
GDP is reckless; it is irresponsible. Under some circumstances,
it is inevitable. Those circumstances are not what we have
today. We should be getting it under control and doing so
quickly.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Congressman, figures 2 and 3 in my written
testimony address this issue directly; where did the debt come
from? These are the Congressional Budget Office numbers. This
is figure 2, and you can see the impact of the tax cuts; the
two foreign wars; Medicare Part D, which was not paid for; the
2008 Bush tax cut; and then, of course, the financial crisis.
The largest swing, if you move to figure 3, this shows you the
swing in medium-term debt projected by the CBO before and after
they realized the severity of the financial crisis.
Mr. TIBERI. Let me ask you a quick question.
Mr. JOHNSON. That is a 50 percent of GDP increase in debt.
Mr. TIBERI. Was the President right, yes or no?
Mr. JOHNSON. The President was right when he spoke of the
reckless fiscal policies at the moment. What he didn't realize
was how bad it was going to get as a result of reckless
financial policies----
Mr. TIBERI. And so the President is right today, then, you
are saying as well. Even though the debt has nearly doubled and
we had a deficit actually that was on the decline with what you
talked about, two wars, prescription drug benefits, tax cuts,
it was actually less than $200 billion the year that Rob
Portman, now Senator, was budget director and has now since
gone over a trillion dollars 4 years in a row.
Mr. JOHNSON. Congressman, we had the largest financial
crisis since the Great Depression.
Mr. TIBERI. I have heard this before.
Mr. JOHNSON. We lost a huge amount of revenue, according to
the Congressional Budget Office that is 70 to 80 percent of the
swing in debt. These are the CBO's numbers.
Mr. TIBERI. We are not going to solve it. I have another
question for Mr. Hoagland.
Mr. Hoagland, I notice that you have some experience on
budget issues in the Senate. How many years did you work in the
Senate, and when you worked in the Senate on budget issues, did
they pass budgets when you were there? How many times? Or did
they fail to pass a budget 1 year, 2 years, or maybe 3 years?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I was with the Senate Budget starting with
the CBO in 1975, with the Budget Committee since 1982, and left
the Senate after Majority Leader's Office in 2007. Over the 33
years that we have had budget resolutions, beginning in 1979,
seven times have we failed to get a conference agreement on a
budget resolution. Unfortunately, over that 33 years, three of
those times have been in the last 3 years. There is one time
when I
was staff director of the Senate Budget Committee with Chairman

Pete Domenici that we did not get a concurrent resolution on
the budget, and that had to do in 1998 when John Kasich was
Chairman of the House Budget Committee, and we had just
finished the 19--but one time.
Mr. TIBERI. One time.
Mr. HOAGLAND. The Senate not----
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I know opinions clearly differ about where we are headed in
the future, but I think as Mr. Johnson's chart demonstrates,
when we concluded the Clinton Administration, we had a surplus
for the first time in recent memory, and a huge tax cut, where
Alan Greenspan sat where you are sitting, Mr. Johnson, and told
us that the justification for this tax cut in part was that we
were reducing the debt too fast, that we would create some
uncertainties in the bond market because we were moving so
quickly, but an unpaid tax cut, unpaid prescription benefits,
two unpaid wars. Now we are told we can no longer afford, by
some of our Republican colleagues, to provide health security
for people at 65 or 66 that you just--you would like to do it,
but we just can't afford to do it anymore.
And as it relates specifically to the proposal we just
heard the Administration's statement on, I gather your opinion,
Mr. Johnson, is, you know, better than have a Valentine's Day
cliff to at least have some additional time to help resolve
this, but if we keep moving in 3-month or 1-month or 6-month
spurts, the effect on economic growth will be very damaging.
Mr. JOHNSON. Absolutely, Congressman. If we could pull up
figure 1 from my written testimony----
Mr. DOGGETT. Please.
Mr. JOHNSON [continuing]. What you would get is the spike,
this is the spike from August 2011, you are going to have that
every 3 months. That was a disastrous month for hiring because
who wants to hire when you don't know if there are going to be
payments made by the government or if various other disruptions
are going to take place? These are big numbers for the U.S.
economy. You are going to do this every 3 months, for how long?
Until you have another election? That is far too long for the
health and sanity of the American people.
Mr. DOGGETT. And at the same time we had that phenomenon, I
believe the General Accountability Office has estimated that
the direct cost of Republicans taking us right up to the brink
on the debt, on the full faith and credit of the United States
last time was over a billion dollars in increased interest
costs. We could also expect to see an increase in borrowing
costs for taxpayers if we don't get this debt ceiling resolved.
Mr. JOHNSON. That is a definite possibility, Congressman.
To the extent we disrupt debt markets, if we worry investors,
if we create risk, and we are hurting not just the Federal
Government; this has implications for State governments and for
local governments that, of course, do not generally borrow at
the low interest rate the Federal Government borrows at, so
they have a risk premium in there. You are driving up risk
premia around the world when you generate this kind of
uncertainty.
Mr. DOGGETT. Your written testimony indicates that, for a
decade, actually for a couple of decades, we have seen income
inequality increase dramatically with little change in income
for 90 percent of wage earners and a 50 percent increase for
those at the top. What are the policies that you think we most
need to address other than getting stability on this full faith
and credit of the United States to change that and to ensure
that there is a more equitable share in the success of the
American economy?
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, the evidence is completely compelling
that education, human capital, the ability of people to work
with information technology, these are huge determinants of
what has happened to income inequality. And many people in
American society today cannot afford by themselves to get that
kind of education.
To the extent that you can make resources available to support
younger people, support families in the pursuit of high
productivity human capital, that is good for them, that is good
for the economy, and that is good for the tax base, so over the
medium term, that is absolutely going to strengthen the budget.
Mr. DOGGETT. And in terms of competitiveness worldwide,
building a stronger workforce from, as you mentioned, early
childhood education to access to a college education is really
vital to American competitiveness, isn't it?
Mr. JOHNSON. It is the number one determinant of both our
competitiveness, the extent to which we can compete with other
countries, and our productivity, how much do we actually
produce per person in this economy. The number one determinant
looking forward is human capital; that is about education. It
is about ability to innovate, ability to work with those new
technologies.
Mr. DOGGETT. And over the short run, what is the effect of
across-the-board cuts on early childhood education, on Pell
grants, on research funding for medical research and other
basic scientific research?
Mr. JOHNSON. It is all going to be negative for growth and
for human capital, and it is going to impact equality, and to
the extent that you don't have a progressive tax system, it is
also going to give you negative impact on the budget.
Mr. DOGGETT. While the most immediate concern, I know, and
the main focus of your testimony is upholding the full faith
and credit of the United States, is it your feeling that at
this time in our economy, we need to see a contraction of
government spending?
Chairman CAMP. All right, time has expired, I am sorry.
Mr. Reichert.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is to all the panelists. Thank you for
being here. There are a lot of--there is a lot of talk across
the aisle about raising revenue to solve our debt problem. Is
it possible to raise taxes enough to permanently sustain
programs such as Social Security and Medicare without reforming
the programs themselves? And what sort of tax increase would
this be on the middle class, and what would this sort of tax
increase do to our broader economy?
Mr. CASEY. I would ask the Committee if I may pass on that
since it goes beyond my legal expertise. I will defer to the
economists.
Mr. HOAGLAND. I believe that it would require a balance
between both spending, controlling entitlement spending,
mandatory spending, and revenue increases to lower the debt-to-
GDP figure to a goal of about 60 percent. I believe the last
proposal that was on the table before the fiscal cliff
discussion was that the House Republican leader's proposal was
$800 billion in tax increases; the President's was $960
billion. You get $600 billion; there is $200 billion there that
you are still looking at for this next 10-year window, but I
think that has to be coupled with changes to mandatory spending
programs.
To Mr. McDermott's position, there are specific proposals
as it relates to changing the Medicare program that does not
harm current recipients of Medicare but protects the program
for the future beneficiaries out there.
Mr. FOSTER. There is an illusion that you can solve all
these problems with tax increases without getting into the
question of whether or not you should, or that you could. The
answer is you can't. The costs in these programs are rising so
rapidly over the next decades, not 2014 or 2015, but over the
near future, that you can't solve them with tax increases. We
would not have much of an economy left if we tried that.
So you must understand, the starting point for getting our
fiscal house in order is reducing the growth in the entitlement
spending, just as Mr. Hoagland suggested. Then it is a
political point, a debatable point, as to whether or not you
want to mix in tax increases as part of that solution. That is
a political decision at that point, not an economic decision,
understanding that the tax increases we tend to enact tend to
be those most harmful to the economy, thereby slowing the
growth of the economy as well as the tax base. But you have to
start with the entitlement reform, slowing the growth of that
spending. That is a necessary and unavoidable component of
getting our fiscal house in order.
Mr. JOHNSON. Congressman, I actually wrote a book on this
topic, which I would be happy to send you.
Mr. REICHERT. Congratulations.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. And the bottom line is that Social
Security you could rebalance relatively easily with new
revenue, and some relatively minor----
Mr. REICHERT. What kind of impact would that have on the
middle class, just using revenue, just taxing people?
Mr. JOHNSON. The impact on the middle class would be
relatively small, and again, I can send you the numbers. The
key issue there is that they are raising the cap on earnings
subject to Social Security, which was not indexed last time
that was changed by this Congress in the mid 1980s.
The big problem is healthcare spending, Congressman, but it
is not Medicare, per se, it is healthcare spending. If you
shift that, the responsibility of health care from Medicare on
to families, individuals, and companies, you will raise
healthcare spending as a percent of GDP, that is the CBO
scoring of that issue. And that is not going to help American
families. You need to find a way to control, limit healthcare
spending as a percent of GDP. That is the key variable to focus
on, how the healthcare system functions, how it delivers, and
what it costs.
Mr. REICHERT. If tax increases were the only solution that
you are talking about here, you are just relating the tax
increase to Social Security. Medicare, Medicaid, what is the
impact there? What is the impact of just raising taxes on the
broader economy totally?
Mr. JOHNSON. The problem, Congressman, is the healthcare
spending. If healthcare spending increases, you can either pay
that out of the budget, in which case it would be very high
cost, or you can shift that on to individuals, in which case it
ruins them. Either way, it doesn't make much difference. It is
the healthcare costs that you have to focus on.
Mr. REICHERT. I want to go to some of the discussion that
was occurring earlier. Why are we focusing on spending today,
now? Why now? I may not have enough time to get to that
question. I see the yellow light is on. So, Mr. Chairman, I
will yield back before. It is a long question.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Okay.
Mr. Larson, you are--I am sorry, Mr. Neal has come back in.
Mr. Neal is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we debate increasing the debt ceiling this afternoon, I
think a bit of history is important as we acknowledge the
current fiscal situation. In January 2001, CBO estimated that
the total budget surplus for 2002 to 2011 would be $5.6
trillion, surplus. Instead, after years of reckless spending
and tax cuts, the Federal Government ran deficits from 2002
until 2011. The total deficit over that 10-year period amounted
to $6.1 trillion, a swing of $11.7 trillion from January 2001
and its projections.
We began down this path by enacting tax cuts that cost the
government $2.3 trillion. The other major expenditure during
those years that contributed mightily to these deficits is the
engagement in two wars. By the time we got to January of 2009,
the debt was $10.6 trillion, setting a record for debt for any
Administration. Pursuing two wars and massive tax cuts was the
reason, and Mr. Johnson, while he was temporarily holding the
chair for Mr. Camp, indicated that we were all responsible for
many of those positions. Having voted against the war in Iraq
and having voted against the Bush tax cuts in 2001 and 2003, I
think I have earned an element of credibility on these
questions.
So today we are debating another increase in the debt
limit. I don't understand how anyone who voted for the Iraq war
could now vote against raising the debt ceiling. In reality,
arguing over the debt ceiling is essentially an argument over
whether or not we should pay our bills. We should pay our
bills.
This debt is about the past, not about the future. If you
voted for the war in Iraq and the Bush tax cuts, the bill is
here. Remind our colleagues and friends: 1.7 million new
veterans, 45,000 of whom have served us honorably, as the other
1.7 million have, but they have been wounded. Half of the
45,000 have claimed disability.
So we hear from some of our friends, the default deniers,
that they think hitting the debt ceiling is no big deal, that
we could raise the debt ceiling only if we cut government
spending as well. But where were they during those years, those
very difficult years? And incidentally, I have compiled the
voting records on the debt limit increases that President Bush
requested during those years.
And I hope, Mr. Chairman, I could insert that into the
record.
Chairman CAMP. Without objection.
[The submission of The Honorable Richard Neal follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Many of the most senior Members of this Committee routinely
voted to raise the debt ceiling during those years, even though
the money for the tax cuts and the wars was put on emergency
basis for the purpose of hiding the costs. So I am pleased that
we are coming around to a more reasonable position today, and I
hope that we are going to find a common path forward on many of
these issues.
Mr. Johnson, you state in your testimony that low--
unemployment depresses tax revenue, and this is the major
reason for our current deficits and why they are so large. Once
the economy recovers fully and the unemployment rate is
lowered, it certainly will take some of the pressure off of
these discussions, acknowledging there are long-term challenges
that we have to address. I have been making this point inside
of my own caucus, not to overreact to the situation in which we
find ourselves, and if we could only find that common path
forward that I referenced, we would find that you could have a
conversation that would be worthwhile past the political
talking points.
Now, getting Americans back to work should be the number
one priority, and as we address this fiscal situation, toying
with the debt, considering that American companies are
estimated to be sitting on $1 trillion domestically and more
than $1.8 trillion offshore. If we offered a picture of
stability, and again a conversation worth having, we might be
able to ameliorate some of the tension that surrounds this
issue.
Would you comment, Mr. Johnson?
Chairman CAMP. You have 8 seconds. You can follow up with a
letter, but we are going to stay on time here.
Mr. JOHNSON. We should pay our bills. That is the number
one priority. If we don't pay our bills as a government, we
will disrupt the economic recovery and push unemployment
higher.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Boustany, Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to put this in perspective for a moment. The former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mullen, was
quoted as saying the debt of the United States is a threat to
our national security, and while it might not rise to that
level acutely immediately, it certainly is a serious strategic
restraint on the ability of the United States to operate in an
international environment. And it is clearly a threat to our
economic prosperity.
I want to make it clear, nobody on this side of the aisle
is talking about default, none of us are talking about default.
We are talking about a serious solution going forward with a
big problem, which is widely acknowledged to be a spending
problem.
Now, several of you made a number of points. Mr. Casey, you
talked about Congress having the power of the purse and using
it wisely, with discretion, to enact spending reforms which are
desperately needed.
Mr. Hoagland talked about going back to regular order,
something we all believe needs to happen. You also mentioned
temporary extraordinary measures that are currently being used
and talked a little bit about prioritization, and I want to
bring that up again in a moment.
Mr. Foster, you spoke about process not being a substitute
for real policy reforms. We all agree with that, I think both
sides could agree with that.
But the bottom line is this: We have a spending problem,
and we have to also recognize that in the context of how it
plays out in the economy, it is not just spending, but it is
also a need for growth. This is why we want to do tax reform,
real tax reform, fundamental tax reform that puts our Tax Code
on a 21st century basis that promotes American competitiveness
and growth.
Now, historically, and I went back and I read a CRS report,
short-term debt limit increases have been used just to buy time
in order to get to a point where you couple it with real
spending reforms. This has happened historically. Am I correct?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes, sir.
Mr. BOUSTANY. So we are not talking about something out of
the ordinary as we talk about this current proposal on the
table.
But I want to go back, Mr. Hoagland, to prioritization
because we know there are extraordinary measures already being
done by Treasury, and prioritization, we wouldn't have to be in
this crisis if the President had come forward with a real plan.
He has had opportunities with four budgets and hasn't done that
and has continued to perpetuate the problem.
Now we are caught in a situation where we are waiting with
the budget and the timing, but the bottom line is this: We
don't need to be in this. We didn't need to be in this crisis,
but we find ourselves in it. Now if prioritization is going to
be used as one of these extraordinary measures, talk a little
bit more, elaborate a little more on the fact that we have
uneven receipts coming in and how this plays out. I want this
to be real clear for the public that might be paying attention
to this.
Mr. HOAGLAND. The Treasury has estimated that the cash
flows in are very unprecise. Even in a 1-week forecast out, the
estimate is that varies on statistically plus or minus $18
billion, just 1 week out, just estimating the receipts coming
in. Two weeks out, the estimates are a $30 billion variation
plus or minus. When you combine that with the requirements, in
terms of statute, the payments going out, you create a
tremendous level of difficulty in terms of being able to set
the timeframe in which you should pay those when you don't know
exactly, when you are doing prioritization, paying with income
coming in with the degree of variation that exists in the
receipts coming in. It is just very, very difficult.
Mr. BOUSTANY. For the interest payments, there is a
different computer system, right, than what is used for the
other payments?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Correct. The interest payments is a separate
computer system. It is possible that you could just prioritize
those interest payments, but I think the Fitch report last week
said that you could avoid an actual default, default being
defined as paying the interest, but then those other
noninterest obligations will be looked at as another form of
default, which would also affect Fitch's rating.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I see. How much time do you think we would
have with prioritization? How much time could be bought?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Congressman, I mentioned in my report that we
are talking about the pay-fors, the Prompt Payment Act, the
Impoundment Act; I think you have a long time in terms of you
determining prioritization.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. Larson, you are recognized.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and it's
always good to see you back here and in good health. Let me
start by saying thank you to our panelists for their testimony
and thank you for your service to your institutions and the
country and I thank the Chairman for this hearing.
I think it is a good news/bad news story. On one hand, the
good news is that we have avoided yet another immediate crisis.
The bad news is that we are just kicking the can down the road
for 3 months and, in essence, then are dealing with default and
not paying on our bills just 3 months later. That creates an
enormous problem and one I think that--I would hope that this
Committee, above all others, could solve because I do believe
in this Committee and its bipartisan membership in our ability
to address this issue. We know that what we have to do is both
stabilize this economy, invest in this economy, reform this
economy, and grow it in terms of what everyone has testified
and what the people on this Committee believe in.
No less than Speaker Gingrich said on ``Face the Nation''
that, look, take the debt ceiling off the table, at least
provide the American people with a modicum of security that
they know we are not going to hold this hostage, too. We ought
to be adults about it, as the former Speaker said, and take
that off the table. That doesn't mean to desert the issue or
back away from the issue of dealing with debt. And there are
still appropriate opportunities, as he pointed out, whether
through sequester or continuing resolution to do it, but we owe
it to the American people to make sure we take this uncertainty
away from them. We saw what that uncertainty does in terms of
impacting their pensions and their 401(k)s, and they look to
this Congress, and frankly, I think the Congress looks to this
body to return to regular order. And I know we have the
leadership on this body to do that, and by returning to regular
order, we can go after the difficult things.
Mr. Johnson pointed out that the issue is healthcare costs.
That is true. Mr. Ryan, who serves on the Budget Committee and
this Committee, has pointed out the issue is healthcare costs.
How do we go after those costs? It just simply isn't
entitlements, aka insurance that people have paid. They have
paid for that; that is their insurance. What are the actuarial
assumptions around that? What do we have to do to change and
alter that? We ought to be able to carry that out in regular
order, not in meetings in the White House, not in meetings in
the Senate, where they won't do a budget and where they will
wait to do some kind of bill themselves. We ought to be doing
it in this Committee.
Mr. Johnson, I was confronted in my hometown by our CFO,
who said, ``Listen, if you guys don't provide us some certainty
again, we have to go out to the bond market again in this very
difficult time, and what happens to us is we end up in a
situation where we have to raise people's property taxes
because Congress twiddles and diddles and plays hostage
politics.'' What is your experience with respect to the impact
that this will have on local municipalities, our cities, and
our communities?
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, Congressman, the impact is going to be
bad, and it could be dramatically bad, depending on what
happens in 3 months. I don't agree with Mr. Gingrich on many
fiscal issues, but I think on this one, he is right. Take the
debt ceiling off the table permanently. Investors around the
world are watching this hearing. They are looking at your
words. They are trying to understand, what does prioritization
mean? How does this not involve default? The degree of
uncertainty that is being multiplied by this conversation is
extraordinary, the impact on municipalities is going to be
tough. They will face higher borrowing costs to the extent that
risk premia rise in the United States and around the world and
that means either they are going to fire people or they are
going to raise property taxes or they are going to face some
other problems. So this is a very bad route to go down from
that perspective.
Mr. LARSON. I have great respect for Dr. Boustany, but we
are talking about default. And whether we are talking about
immediate default or default 3 months from now, that is a
policy issue.
Mr. Hoagland, you also talked about bringing balance to
this issue. I thought that was an excellent point, and you said
that it ought to be done through regular order. How do you see
that proceeding?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I see that proceeding by the President
submitting a budget. I see that proceeding by the Budget
Committee passing budget resolutions. I see that by a
conference agreement between the House and Senate on a budget
resolution. I see that by including a reconciliation
instruction to achieve the savings over the time period, and I
see that working through the normal course.
Mr. LARSON. I have been in Congress 14 years; we have not
completed that once since I have been here in full complete
order.
That is why I think it is incumbent upon our Committee, and
I know the great integrity that our Chairman and Members of
this Committee have. I think that we can achieve those goals. I
know my time is up.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Paulsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, also for holding the
hearing.
I want to thank each of the witnesses for being here. You
know, it is pretty clear to me that there is actually broad
bipartisan consensus that our country is on a fiscally
unsustainable path right now. The 2010 report by the Bipartisan
Policy Center's Debt Reduction Task Force--Mr. Hoagland, I
believe you were a member of that Task Force--included the very
sobering warning that the Federal budget is on a dangerous,
unsustainable path. Federal spending is projected to rise
substantially faster than revenues, and the government will be
forced to borrow ever-increasing amounts. Federal debt will
rise to unmanageable levels, which will push interest rates up,
endanger our prosperity, and make us increasingly vulnerable to
the dictates of our creditors, including nations whose
interests may differ from ours. We have talked a little bit
about that earlier from some of the other questions.
My constituents are, quite honestly, very perplexed that
Washington continues to borrow 40 some cents of every dollar it
spends. They can't get their arms around that. And there is a
recognition now that without significant changes to our fiscal
policy, the national debt itself is going to become an
existential threat. I would like each of the panelists, if you
could, just comment what are the implications of current debt
levels? What are the consequences of increased levels? And what
really is the turning point where our debt becomes
unmanageable, where it becomes an unmanageable situation?
Mr. Casey.
Mr. CASEY. Well, I think on most of that question, I will
defer to the economists, but I will say that one thing I think
we need to keep in mind is that we are not--we fling around the
term debt ceiling. What we are talking about here is Congress'
power to borrow money and how we should be paying our bills
based on that or based on some other method of raising revenue,
so I think it is very important to keep that clearly in mind.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Hoagland, you were a member of that Task
Force as well.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes, and in fairness, Congressman, that Task
Force also recommended a balanced plan that included tax
increases as well as spending cuts going forward, more on the
spending side than on reduction of the rate of growth. The
implications of the debt level, that we are headed at 77
percent going into the future, I think has a major--will
jeopardize, quite frankly, our standing in the world. When we
have about 40, 50 percent of this debt owned by investors
outside of the United States, we are questioning, we are
raising questions about the sovereignty of this country going
forward.
In terms of, where is the turning point, I think that is
the problem; most economists would say they can't answer that
question. Who knows when that last drop into the test tube
turns the water blue? But it will turn at some point, and that
is the problem. When it turns, it will turn fast. That is why I
think you have to have a plan going forward to avoid that date
coming. I don't know. There is a book out on this called,
``This Time is Different.'' This time is not different.
Something will happen. We just want you to control that so it
has some process behind it.
Mr. PAULSEN. Now, knowing that the United States is still a
safe haven in terms of money flocking here, based on what is
happening in Europe, I mean, can we learn anything of what is
happening in Europe basically on how capital----
Mr. HOAGLAND. We are not Greece. We are not Italy. We are
not Spain, but I think when you look at the level of spending
there relative to their assets, I think you end up with a
situation where you do create social disorder which is very
dangerous.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Foster.
Mr. FOSTER. There are three basic things. The first is that
with all that debt, you are going to see in the future a lot
more of government's resources, the Federal Government's
resources being used just to pay off the interest on the debt
from the past. As I said in my testimony, Americans expect
services from the taxes they pay; they don't expect just that
you service the debt from previous deficits.
Second, interest rates are going to rise. We have now
increased the debt sufficiently that all previous debates about
whether deficits matter for interest rates can be set aside. It
has now risen enough that it will matter, and it will matter a
lot. Interest rates will rise and they will rise a lot faster
and further than they ever would have otherwise.
Third, as my colleague was just saying, it is like a family
or any business, if you take on far too much debt, you lose
control of your own future. You lose control of your path
forward. Somebody else is going to be able to dictate the terms
to you as to what you are going to do. The dictator in this
case will be the bondholders and the credit markets. We lose
control of our future as a Nation. Ask these countries in
Europe, Mr. Hoagland knows, we are not Spain or Italy or
Greece, but we will have one thing in common if we keep this
path: We will lose control of our future as they have lost
control of theirs.
Mr. PAULSEN. Can you comment in terms of if there is even a
1 percent or a 2 percent increase in interest rates what the
effect is going to be on interest payments, on a dollar amount?
Mr. FOSTER. Well, if you think about it, 1 percent payment,
and you have $15 trillion out there, that's $150 billion----
Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you, time has expired.
Mr. Kind is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you for holding this hearing and thank the
panelists for your input and your discussion today, which is
important. I think we all understand what the ultimate solution
is of the debt ceiling: We need a long-term, bipartisan deficit
reduction agreement in this place that is comprehensive and
that will get our fiscal house in order, especially dealing
with the demographics and the aging population. That is the
answer. I equate this to the Middle East peace plan. We all
know where we need to end up; it is just finding the political
process and the will to get there. Every bipartisan commission
that has met and been tasked to come up with a solution has
reached the same conclusion, there is going to have to be some
additional revenue and some major spending reforms in the
budget for this to make sense in a balanced and a fair fashion.
Mr. Foster, I appreciated your testimony here today where
you said there is some additional room on the revenue side,
even given where we ended up with the fiscal cliff, a little
over $600 billion over 10 years in new revenue, but that was
short of where things stood during the previous conversations.
But, Mr. Johnson, in your written testimony and also your
oral testimony here today, I think you have been fairly clear
that the greatest if not the chief contributor to the deficits
and the fiscal shortfall today has been the underperforming
economy and the high unemployment rate, so I would assume then
that one of the responses if not the response to help with the
fiscal situation is to get the economy back fully functioning
with good-paying jobs and lowering the unemployment rate. Is
that right?
Mr. JOHNSON. Absolutely, Congressman, and it would be, in
that context, disastrous if you were either not to extend the
debt ceiling or create a lot of uncertainty about who is
getting paid and how they are getting paid because of the debt
ceiling or because of the sequester or because of some sort of
government shutdown. All of those things are bad for the
recovery. They are bad for revenue, and all those things would
tend to push up interest rates, which has the adverse
consequences that my colleague just described.
Mr. KIND. So I really don't understand the argument for
holding the debt ceiling hostage and jeopardizing the full
faith and credit and possibly defaulting on our financial
obligations for the first time in our Nation's history, given
the safe haven that we have enjoyed. In fact, the great irony
in this recession is the fact that people have been willing to
pay us to take their money, which is, in effect, what has been
going on. It has been a lifesaver for us economically, and all
that, I assume, would be in jeopardy overnight if we do default
on our financial obligations. Would you agree?
Mr. JOHNSON. Absolutely. The most obvious risk we face is
that we will, through our own deliberate irresponsibility,
undermine the safe haven status of the United States. The world
is a complicated, dangerous place; people look to the United
States as a safe place to keep their reserves, keep their
money, but we can throw that out the window very, very quickly
if irresponsible actions are taken around the debt ceiling.
Mr. KIND. I would also submit that, you know, both sides,
both political parties need to be a little more realistic in
our approach to this whole discussion, and not to sound too
partisan, but we have just come off two national campaigns
where my colleagues on the other side accused Democrats of
taking $700 billion out of Medicare and promising to restore
that money while at the same time promising to increase defense
spending by $2 trillion over the next 10 years. Those are the
two largest spending programs we have in the Federal deficit,
and that is a $2.7 trillion proposition of new spending that
they were offering in two national campaigns, and now they want
to sit back and criticize the President for not being realistic
in his budget choices? They lose me on that argument.
But, Mr. Hoagland, you have had a lot of experience and
especially with Dr. Frist, and we do understand that the
largest and fastest growing area of spending is rising
healthcare costs. I think there is a solution to getting
enhanced quality of care but at a better price. We need to
change the way we pay for health care in this country, so it is
value- and outcome-based and no longer volume-based, which fee-
for-service brings. Would that help improve the fiscal outlook
if we can make that conversion to a different payment system?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes, Congressman. I don't want to scoop my
bosses. Senator Frist, Senator Daschle, Senator Domenici, and
Alice Rivlin will be coming out with a report here in the
middle of March, where we are looking specifically at this
question, and one of the areas where we are focusing, we have
to move away from the fee-for-service payment system to a more
orderly system and move it away, and we believe that in the
long run will help control costs overall in the Medicare area,
but that also some 50 percent of health care is----
Mr. KIND. Well, I knew you guys were involved in that work
because the Institute of Medicine is doing a comparable report
coming out in a couple months. I also appreciated Mr. Brady's
comment, he is going to be the new Chair of the Health
Subcommittee, about getting away from SGR and moving to a
quality-based physician reimbursement system, too. I think that
is going to be key to the fiscal outlook as well, but there is
a lot here we can follow up on.
But, Mr. Chairman, thanks again for this hearing and the
feedback here today. Thank you all.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Reed is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have been listening to this testimony all afternoon, and
I just have to say, I am embarrassed to hear some of the
comments that have been made today about what I believe to be
the biggest threat to the future security of our country, the
security of our country, when it comes to our kids and our
grandkids, and that is the debt. So I am going to ask you,
point blank, each and every member of this panel, is the
present debt path sustainable? Does anybody think that it is?
Mr. HOAGLAND. No.
Mr. REED. Mr. Casey.
Mr. CASEY. No.
Mr. REED. Mr. Foster.
Mr. FOSTER. No, sir.
Mr. REED. Mr. Johnson. It is a yes or no question.
Mr. JOHNSON. No, sir, not over the long term, Congressman.
Mr. REED. Thank you. Why is it not sustainable? Can each of
you briefly answer that question?
Mr. Casey, starting with you.
Mr. CASEY. Well, frankly, as a layman, there comes a point
when they start cutting up your credit cards, and we will reach
it.
Mr. REED. Mr. Hoagland.
Mr. HOAGLAND. And when the rate of growth in terms of
payment on the interest of that debt is faster than the rate of
growth of the economy, then you are, the country is defaulting.
Mr. REED. Mr. Foster.
Mr. FOSTER. That is the heart of it, sir, when your
interest expenses are growing faster than your income, you are
in trouble.
Mr. REED. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Healthcare costs, Congressman, it is the
failure to control healthcare costs, as just discussed.
Mr. REED. So that is the debt, but the debt crisis, why it
is not sustainable, is eventually the interest on the debt
becomes so large that you can't pay that payment, correct?
Okay, because I have done some calculations on that point,
and I have looked at, what is our--if our present debt at $16
trillion, just close to 3 percent, what is the debt service
payment on that for our interest costs? Do you guys know that
off the top of your head? Well, it is $492 billion. Let's say
it goes to 6 percent. Does anybody know what that is?
Mr. FOSTER. Twice.
Mr. REED. That is $985 billion. Do you know what that
means? What are we presently paying on our debt service
payment? Do any of you know that number off the top of your
head?
Mr. FOSTER. It is about $250 billion I believe.
Mr. REED. Yeah, so if you take the difference between the
two, it goes up to 6 percent, you have $765 billion of
additional need for cash payments to service the debt. What do
we pay on our national defense budgets in an annual year?
Mr. HOAGLAND. We pay about $700 billion.
Mr. REED. So overnight, because that is an annual number,
we are going to have to find the amount that we pay on our
national defense lines in our Federal budget, an equivalent
amount of dollars to service our debt. Is my understanding
correct? Does anyone disagree with that math?
Mr. JOHNSON. You are right, Congressman, but if you have a
big fight over the debt ceiling, that is going to push up
interest rates and cause exactly the effect you are worried
about.
Mr. REED. So if we just take care of the debt ceiling, put
our head in the sand and say, we are never going to worry about
the debt ceiling, at what point in time does the debt become so
large that our creditors say, you know what, we are going to
charge you a little bit more interest, and that interest then
goes up to 6 percent on the $16 trillion. Don't we just get to
the same problem that you are concerned about in the short term
on a long-term approach by not dealing with the underlying
problem at all?
Mr. JOHNSON. Congressman, I am totally in favor of dealing
with the budget, that is the point of the book we wrote called
``White House Burning,'' a dramatic enough title I hope, but
the point is you need a balanced approach, as Mr. Levin said at
the beginning, and you have the forces to do it----
Mr. REED. Mr. Johnson, if I could, it is my time, it is my
time. And I have heard the balanced approach now for a year and
a half, and I heard it today from the panel. There has been
$600 billion of additional revenue that--as a result of the
fiscal cliff negotiations. A balanced approach to me was if you
gave revenue, you got spending reforms. Has the President
offered any spending reforms as of yet in regard to that $600
billion of additional revenue?
Mr. FOSTER. We are hoping to see some in the budget, sir.
Mr. HOAGLAND. When he, when the President put--when
Secretary Geithner put forth his proposal on November 29th, he
had spending reductions of like $400 billion.
Mr. REED. So $400 billion in relationship to $600 billion
of new tax revenue, and the President offered $400 billion in
spending cuts.
Mr. HOAGLAND. In fairness, the President proposed $1.6
trillion in revenues for $400 billion in spending cuts.
Mr. REED. That doesn't sound too balanced to me, in my
opinion. So I will just end with this. It is clear that Admiral
Mullen had it right; this debt--and I could care less about all
the people here in Washington, D.C.--I am really concerned
about the people back at home, my constituents, my kids, my
grandkids. This isn't sustainable, and to have this bickering
over these issues without putting a real concrete proposal in
front of the American people to say these are the visions of
how we deal with this problem, that is why I wholeheartedly
support this 3-month extension, and I am glad to hear the White
House supports it also because at least now we will put in
black and white hopefully in the Senate and in the House a
vision to deal with this number one threat to our national
security. Thank you.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Three-quarters of the deficit reduction to
date has been spending cuts, and I would rather err on the side
of what Roosevelt said in his second inaugural, and that was,
``The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the
abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide
enough for those who have too little.'' He said that in 1937 in
the second inaugural.
I am more concerned about one-fifth of our children living
in poverty, and I am more concerned about the guys who are
working out there--male income compared from 1969 to the
present, and what do we have? We have people making, males
making $1,000 more back in 1969. That is what I am concerned
about. We have had a redistribution of wealth, all right, in
this country. It was all upward. It was all upward. Let's get
our facts straight here.
This storied Committee, Mr. Chairman, is even discussing
the idea that America will not pay our bills, that we will be a
deadbeat Nation, as the President said, and that is
unbelievable to me. Certain things are unbelievable to you.
That is unbelievable to me because if you read Article XIV and
Section 4, questioning whether or not to pay the public debt
may be unconstitutional from this body. It is not a long
section. It is the public debt. It is right there.
And about the public debt, it also says--Mr. Foster, you
didn't read the whole section. It says, if the House--if the
Congress doesn't do it, the Executive must do it. It says that
right in the bill. Am I not correct?
Mr. FOSTER. I will leave that to the constitutional
scholars.
Mr. PASCRELL. I will read it to you.
Mr. FOSTER. Go ahead.
Mr. CASEY. No, sir, it doesn't say that, but please read
it.
Mr. PASCRELL. I will. If Congress won't pay them, then the
Executive must.
Mr. CASEY. In Section 4 of the 14th Amendment.
Mr. PASCRELL. Well, I am talking about the interpretation
of Section 4 of Article XIV.
Mr. CASEY. Okay.
Mr. PASCRELL. You disagree with that?
Mr. CASEY. I disagree most wholeheartedly.
Mr. PASCRELL. So the Executive has nothing to say about the
debt?
Mr. CASEY. Well, the Executive has no power to raise the
debt, certainly. He has an obligation to pay the public debt,
which is to say pay the amounts of money that have been loaned.
Mr. PASCRELL. And how is he going to do that if the
Congress does not give him the ability to do that? That is a
little problem, isn't it?
Mr. CASEY. It is obviously a problem.
Mr. PASCRELL. Okay. Well, let me go on here. We are not
going to default on our obligations and not just to our
bondholders, because another thing that we are talking about,
which is questionable, is whether we can prioritize the
payments to make everybody happy. I have heard that here. Go
ahead.
Mr. HOAGLAND. I just want to be clear that I was not
proposing prioritization. I was just pointing out the
difficulties of prioritization.
Mr. PASCRELL. So you understand it is questionable under
the Constitution?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes, sir.
Mr. PASCRELL. We all saw the economic impact that the last
debt ceiling had on the economy. The Dow dropped 2,000 points.
We added $18.9 billion to our deficit just in that time, and
for the first time in our history, we were downgraded for our
credit rating. That was all when we didn't default, either. The
mere threat of default and irresponsible discussions of default
is what I am talking about right now, like the one we are
having today, were enough to do significant damage to our
economy, just the discussion of it. And we saw that.
So let's give the American people some certainty. We have
been saying that for the last 2 years. You have heard that.
When are we going to solve that problem? When we solve this
problem. How are people going to invest if they don't really
know what is coming toward them? So let's end the talk of
default, the irresponsible discussion. Responsibly default,
could we responsibly default? Let's get an end to that
discussion. Let's pass a long-term increase in the debt ceiling
so that the phrase ``backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States of America'' continues to mean something, and I
believe it does mean something to all of you, and thank you for
coming today.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. I would just note for the record
that this discussion may not be as harmful as we think as the
Dow S&P 500 just hit a 5-year high today. With that, I will----
Mr. PASCRELL. I am sure it is because of our discussion,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Yes, I am sure it will be.
With that, I would recognize Mr. Young for 5 minutes.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I thank all our panelists for being here today.
It is clear, based on all your testimony, that really the
big issue here, I think Mr. Hoagland put it most succinctly,
the real issue is mandatory spending, and, you know, we are
entering budget season, what ought to be budget season here in
Washington, D.C., and I am just curious. First, Dr. Foster, I
will start with you. As the President submits his budget for
fiscal year 2014, what do you anticipate the likelihood is that
his request will include any reforms of significance to make
sustainable Medicare and Social Security in that budget
request?
Mr. FOSTER. Well, sir, despite being an economist, I am
also an optimist, so I am going to say I think he may take the
opportunity and really choose to lead on this, and until he
proves otherwise, that is what I am going to believe.
Mr. YOUNG. Well, good. I share your hope. I spent a couple
of years on the Budget Committee before being on this Committee
and was hopeful then, too, so I think that is the most
important thing that certainly could be done because it is
important that we act quickly. There is a cost to waiting, and
perhaps, Mr. Hoagland, you could discuss the important benefits
of acting quickly here, coming up with a clear, specific,
comprehensible, and comprehensive plan to make these largest
unsustainable programs of government sustainable.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Congressman, I think it is necessary that a
plan be put together that shows a path toward regaining
sustainability in the Medicare program long term and in the
Social Security program. The President back in November had
proposed about $400 billion in spending reductions. I am, like
Dr. Foster, I am optimistic he will come forth with that. The
proposal here by the Republican leadership was $600 billion.
This is over a 10-year period. The only comment I would have,
Mr. Young, would be that the issue of controlling healthcare
costs in a 10-year window is difficult. What we really should
be looking at is a much longer window because some of the
fundamental changes we have to make in the healthcare delivery
system will take time to implement, such as Mr. Ryan's proposal
last year.
Mr. YOUNG. Well, fair enough, and I supported Mr. Ryan's
proposal last year. I was encouraged that it received some
bipartisan support. I would hope in the future it might get a
bit more.
But, Mr. Hoagland, to continue with you, the road map, if
you will, in order to arrive at a spot where we can get
concrete ideas from Democrat leadership, from the President of
the United States about how to make these largest programs of
government sustainable is through regular order. Could you
bring us through that regular order as we have articulated it?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I am a regular order guy. I have spent my
career up here. I believe the power of making legislative
decisions lies with committees such as this very powerful
Committee here, and I think it is better that the decisions in
terms of what legislation could flow forward come out of the
committees. Therefore, that is why I believe a budget
resolution that is put together that sets the broad parameters
for how much you are trying to achieve in the way of deficit
reduction worked through the committees of jurisdiction is the
most salient way of achieving a goal and expressing to the
American public we really are serious about a fiscal blueprint
that puts us on a path of sustainability, and we are lowering
that level of debt to GDP in the future.
Mr. YOUNG. It strikes me as an orderly approach, a
collaborative approach, one that ought to receive bipartisan
support, and one that by design is set up to come together with
some degree of consensus about what our Nation's priorities
are, and then give the markets a degree of certainty about what
is going to happen in the future, allowing us to create more
jobs, et cetera.
Incidentally, this is exactly the approach that the House
Republican Conference has taken with respect to the debt limit
increase. We have tied increasing this debt limit contingent
upon the Senate finally producing a budget for the first time
in several years. It strikes me as eminently reasonable. It
happens to also be very popular among the American people. So I
do agree that talk about default is irresponsible to
characterize this hearing as about something other than an
effort to bring us back into balance and to try to get a budget
out of the U.S. Senate and a clear budget out of the President
of the United States. I think it is irresponsible to
characterize it otherwise.
And I would just say to Mr. Johnson, I will give you a
brief opportunity to respond, sir, that you spoke a great deal
about policy uncertainty, but really it strikes me the greatest
uncertainty longer term exists when you have Medicare,
Medicaid, and Social Security unsustainable and no plan to make
them sustainable.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Johnson will have to respond
to that question in writing as time has expired.
Mr. Davis is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I certainly want to thank our witnesses for coming. You
know, it appears to me that as we continue to raise the specter
of possible default, that we undermine the confidence of our
citizenry, and we certainly do a disservice to our country. You
know, if you are living every day with the idea wondering, are
we going to be able to make it until next week, or are we going
to be able to make it for the next 3 months, I am not sure that
that is the most effective way of convincing our citizenry that
we are a stable, viable government, able to solve its problems,
to meet its needs, and bring resolution to whatever crisis
there might be facing us.
Dr. Johnson, let me ask you, after the 2011 crisis, we had
the worst job creation month in 27 months. Why? Why did that
occur?
Mr. JOHNSON. That occurred because of the additional
uncertainty created for everyone, including companies that make
the hiring decisions about what is going to happen next week or
next month. This is a classic problem many countries have, but
those are usually countries much poorer and less well organized
than the United States. It was in 2001, extraordinary and
unbelievable to people that we would come so close to default,
and it is extraordinary again today that you would put the debt
ceiling on the table in these negotiations when the last thing
you surely want to do is get into any of these complicated
games about prioritization, nonpayment or this or that creditor
or potential default.
Mr. DAVIS. Let me ask, how do business interests, how does
a company respond to this short-term kick the can down the
road, when they have to make decisions about their company,
people they must hire, or products they must develop? How does
the business community respond to that?
Mr. JOHNSON. They delay decisions; they wait. That is the
finding, overwhelming finding, for example, by Baker Bloom and
Davis but also other people who studied uncertainty, the
effects of uncertainty. We don't know what is going to happen;
therefore, we hesitate to make commitments. We are not going to
buy that new equipment. We are not going to expand. We are not
going to hire people. Let's wait and see. And while uncertainty
remains elevated as it is today, there will be hesitation in
hiring and hesitation for the overall macroeconomic recovery.
Mr. DAVIS. It is my position that one of the great needs
that we have to get out of the economic crisis that we have
been facing and creating and wondering about is to create jobs.
I mean, it seems to me that if more people were working, that
that means more people would be paying taxes; they would be
putting more money into the Treasury. And if jobs are not being
created, then I don't think we can just keep dallying around
and dallying around and still there is no bottom line. How does
this impact job creation and really provide the kind of
assurance that people are going to be able to work and
contribute significantly to further development of our economy?
Mr. JOHNSON. Job creation is going to be impacted
negatively by the uncertainty around fiscal policy,
particularly any discussion of the debt ceiling, any of the
debt-ceiling-related points that have come up today. Those are
negative in terms of increasing uncertainty. Those are going to
cause more hesitation in hiring. Those are going to slow
employment growth below what it would otherwise be. And those
are not helpful to the economic recovery or, as you say,
Congressman, to the budget.
Mr. DAVIS. So, in essence, we are kind of kidding ourselves
about being able, without creating jobs, to solve economic
problems; that just making decisions to shift thoughts and
ideas and processes, and at the end of the day, there are still
no more people working.
Mr. JOHNSON. You need an economic recovery, Congressman,
for everything else that you want to do. And that requires jobs
to come back to where they were. We are still at least 3
percent below peak employment pre-financial crisis. This is the
longest, worst recession in American history since the 1930s.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Griffin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for testifying today. I want to be really
clear as well. I haven't heard any talk on this side of the
aisle about default, wanting to default, using default as
leverage. That is a straw man. The only people I have really
heard a lot about default from are on the other side of the
aisle. So I just want to make that abundantly clear.
And it reminds me of what now Majority Leader Reid said
back in 2006. He is the one that was talking about default. He
said, ``Americans know that increasing debt is the last thing
we should be doing. After all, I repeat, the Baby Boomers are
about to retire. Under the circumstances, any credible
economist would tell you we should be reducing debt, not
increasing it. Democrats won't be making argument to support
this legislation, which will weaken our country, weaken our
country. We are being asked to do what shouldn't be asked of
us, to increase the debt to almost $9 trillion.''
So there is a lot of politics going on here. And what I
would like to do--and most of the questions I had to ask have
been asked. So I would like to just go over a couple of things
to clarify. We have heard a lot of talk about the Bush tax cuts
and the wars adding to our debt. And I was looking here at
revenue as a percentage of GDP. And it is interesting that in
the mid-1990s, when taxes were higher--1995, for example--
revenue as a percentage of GDP was 18.4 percent. During the
Bush years, in 2007, after the economy recovered from 9/11, it
was 18.5 percent. So the idea that revenue dipped significantly
during the Bush years because of tax cuts is just not true.
Sure, it went down after 9/11.
I didn't see 9/11 labeled on this chart, Mr. Johnson.
But I think that that is a critical part of the equation.
The other thing that I would point out, a key change--and
Majority Leader Reid referred to it--the key change has been
demographics. We all agree we have spent too much in Congress,
a lot of it long before I got here. But the issue now is not
who spent too much. The issue now is, who is willing to fix the
problem and who is not? That is ultimately the issue.
And we have heard a lot about a balanced approach, and we
just had an agreement here in the House, in the Congress, that
raised taxes.
Now, from my calculations, before the taxes that were
raised on the American people recently--a few weeks ago--we had
a deficit of about $1 trillion. After those tax increases, we
have a deficit of about $1 trillion. Does anyone disagree with
that?
Mr. Casey, do you agree that it had no significant impact
on our deficit?
Mr. CASEY. I agree.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Mr. Hoagland.
Mr. HOAGLAND. I agree that the deficit for fiscal year 2013
will still be about $1 trillion.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Even after the tax increases?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes. But of course those tax increases phase
in over a longer period of time.
Mr. GRIFFIN. If you take $60 billion a year and subtract it
from a little over $1 trillion, you are still right at $1
trillion. Correct, Mr. Foster?
Mr. FOSTER. That is the simple math, sir.
Mr. GRIFFIN. And Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. No, Congressman. Look, the way that you have
discussed the budget and the way you argue about the budget
is over a 10-year timeframe. Those were insufficient, I agree,
to completely address the budget issue. I supported larger,
stronger strengthening of revenue--not immediately, though.
Phasing it in over time is the right way to do it. You don't
want to shock the economy too much. Phasing it in over 10, 15
years.
Mr. GRIFFIN. I am running out of time. The bottom line is,
I understand you look at things over 10 years. And we all know
that in 10 years, there is no control over what is going to be
spent and what is going to be coming in. But the bottom line
is, the tax increases we got with no cuts did nothing to impact
the deficit of any significance--it is still about $1 trillion.
You could say it is $910 billion. Okay. It is still about $1
trillion. The bottom line is, we still are about $1 trillion in
the red every single year. And I will be waiting with optimism
to see the President's budget.
Again, thank you all for coming today. And I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Hoagland, in your 33-plus years of
dealing with budget issues in the Senate on the Senate Budget
Committee and in other areas, have you ever known in the
history of our country of four successive years of trillion-
dollar deficits?
Mr. HOAGLAND. No, sir.
Chairman CAMP. So it is an unprecedented position we are
in, in terms of the annual deficits?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I never thought I would see trillion-dollar
deficits.
Chairman CAMP. And the debt--and I tend to use gross debt
as a percentage of GDP.
Have you ever seen the gross debt as a percentage of GDP at
the level that we are seeing right now?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Only after World War II. But then we owed it
to ourselves, and we brought it down rather substantially
there.
Chairman CAMP. So since World War II, the level of GDP----
Mr. HOAGLAND. Has averaged about 40 percent.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. And I was on the President's fiscal
commission. And at that time, it was about 90 percent. Now it
is over 100 if you look at gross debt. And we had a
presentation there by doctors--it was by Drs. Carmen Reinhart
and Kenneth Rogoth--who indicated that a country's economic
growth would--and I am using their words--deteriorate markedly
when its debt-to-GDP ratio was above 90. And obviously, we are
at that point now.
Mr. HOAGLAND. Correct.
Chairman CAMP. What impact do you believe that will have on
the economic growth and job creation in the United States in
the future?
Mr. HOAGLAND. I believe, again, that has a very negative
impact upon the growth of this country going forward in terms
of our credit rating around the world, in terms of our economic
growth pattern will be negatively affected by that level of
debt to GDP. While it is not a good example, all we have to do
is look at what is happening in Europe and see the consequences
that that has had over there.
Chairman CAMP. We recently got a Fitch ratings report. And
I am quoting from their report that said, ``In the absence of
an agreed and credible medium-term deficit reduction plan that
would be consistent with sustaining the economic recovery and
restoring confidence in the long-run sustainability of the U.S.
public finances, the current negative outlook on the AAA rating
is likely to be resolved with a downgrade later this year, even
if another debt-ceiling crisis is averted.''
How do you think the financial markets and the broader
economy would react if Congress simply increased the debt limit
and there was no credible commitment to addressing the current
fiscal situation, as we have just discussed?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Mr. Chairman, I think that the debt limit
bill does not control or limit the ability of the Federal
Government to run deficits or incur obligations. But I do
believe there is a limit on our ability to pay obligations. So
I think that while this is not the perfect solution, at least
you do have the opportunity here by--if you simply raised it
without some form of a process, which I hope would come about
through going back to regular order, I think that would be
looked upon very favorably. But if you simply raised it with no
process involved, I think that would be looked upon negatively
by the market.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Dr. Foster, any comment on that?
Mr. FOSTER. I think that is exactly right. The markets are
looking. They understand something of Washington and how
Washington works. They understand there are only a few moments
in a given year or 2- or 4-year period in which we have a
forcing moment, a time when Congress must actually do
something. And the critical value of the debt limit and the
debate around the debt limit that is a simple enough issue that
the American people can understand it. The budget is
complicated. They don't understand the budget. They do
understand debt. They have debt. They understand. They don't
understand trillions. But the concept, they get.
The second value is that it is a forcing moment. It forces
Congress to act when the regular order of the budget process
has failed. Mr. Hoagland talked about this--and I completely
agree with him regarding the importance of the regular order.
But Congress has a regular habit of ignoring the regular order.
This is a forcing moment, and it is a critical time to take
action.
Chairman CAMP. And Mr. Hoagland, again, given your
experience on budget, we have had other short-term extensions
of the debt limit in the history of this country, have we not?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Yes, we have a number of times. Looking it
up, I think it was at least--in my career up here, we have had
it at least seven or eight times, we have had a short-term
limited increase.
Chairman CAMP. And we have also had extensions of the debt
limit that have had policy reforms attached to them as well,
have we not?
Mr. HOAGLAND. Oh, I think the most important one--I said my
first experience here was with the 1985 Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
Act, which was tied to debt limit increase because we were
going over $2 trillion.
Chairman CAMP. So when the President and many Democrats
call for a so-called clean increase in the debt ceiling, which
they mean has no other reforms or other proposals attached to
that or changes in spending behavior, how do you see the path
forward? And what should advocates of lower spending expect
from the Administration? Or other budget reforms that might be
attached with it? You mentioned Gramm-Rudman-Hollings. And I
would like you to comment and then Dr. Foster.
Mr. HOAGLAND. As I say, I don't think the debt limit bill,
per se, it controls spending. It controls--it is a limit. But I
do think that there are other tools. And they are not pretty.
But you do have a sequester. I would certainly argue--and this
is just myself speaking, not BPC--that you would look at the
sequester as something that really does reduce spending. And I
would also argue that one thing to do there would be to modify
the sequester so that it actually does affect more than just
the discretionary portion of the budget and maybe, and with
some trepidation, also tax expenditures.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Dr. Foster.
Mr. FOSTER. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, the debt limit is a
forcing moment. And one of the things it can force is a shift
in budget processes to make them more effective, to get
Congress to take actions that it might not otherwise take under
the regular order as it then stands, Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
being the great example.
One of the things we should be looking for in this current
debate is, how do we tighten up, make more rigorous the budget
process regular order so Congress takes it seriously and then
puts forward the kinds of resolutions and reconciliation bills
that Mr. Hoagland was talking about?
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
And Mr. Casey, I just want to clarify this point before we
adjourn. The Constitution grants Congress the sole authority
over fiscal powers to tax, spend, and borrow; is that correct?
Mr. CASEY. Absolutely correct.
Chairman CAMP. And because the power resides in Congress,
the debt limit is not actually a limitation on the Executive's
power to borrow; is that correct? It is the statute that
contains the debt ceiling is actually a grant of authority to
the President.
Mr. CASEY. It certainly can be read that way. I mean, it is
a limit on the amount that Congress is permitting the Executive
to borrow.
Chairman CAMP. But it would be authority he would not
otherwise have----
Mr. CASEY. Absolutely. Absolutely. Without it, he cannot
borrow a nickel.
Chairman CAMP. So when that authority runs out, it is
actually the Constitution of the United States that is
preventing the President from attempting to borrow on the
credit of the United States?
Mr. CASEY. Yes.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
I want to thank all of our witnesses and certainly the
Members for participating in this hearing today.
And with that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:36 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Submission for the Record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
