- CURRENT HOSPITAL ISSUES IN THE MEDICARE PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CURRENT HOSPITAL ISSUES IN THE MEDICARE PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 20, 2014

__________

Serial 113-HL12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-998                    WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of June 20, 2013, announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Jim McDermott, Representative from the State of
Washington.....................................................     7
Panel 1:
Sean Cavanaugh, Deputy Administrator and Director, Center of
Medicare, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.........     9
Judi Nudelman, Regional Inspector General for Evaluation and
Inspections, NY Region Office of the Inspector General,
Department of Health and Human Services (OIG-HHS)............    21
Panel 2:
Amy Deutschendorf, Senior Director of Clinical Resource
Management, Johns Hopkins Hospital and Health System.........    94
Toby S. Edelman, Senior Policy Attorney, Center for Medicare
Advocacy, Inc................................................   131
Ellen Evans MD, Corporate Medical Director, HealthDataInsights.   102
Ann Sheehy MD, Member, Public Policy Committee, Society of
Hospital Medicine............................................   118

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Wisconsin Hospital Association, Statement........................   156
Watertown Regional Medical, Letter...............................   161
Walter F. O'Keefe, Letter........................................   163
Thomas M. Horiagon, MD MOccH, Letter.............................   165
Texas Organization of Rural & Community Hospitals, Statement.....   168
Sherry Smith, LCSW, Letter.......................................   171
Pocono Medical Center, Statement.................................   173
Patricia Windle, Letter..........................................   176
Patricia Klaiber, Letter.........................................   180
New York StateWide Senior Action Council, Statement..............   182
National Senior Citizens Law Center, Statement...................   186
National Kidney Foundation, Statement............................   187
National Association of Urban Hospitals, Statement...............   190
Nathan Marra, Statement..........................................   193
MRC, Statement...................................................   194
Missouri Hospital Association, Letter............................   201
Meridian Health, Letter..........................................   202
Medicare Advocacy Project, Statement.............................   204
Marion P. Cunningham, Statement..................................   209
Knollwood Retirement Community, Statement........................   211
Kirkland Senior Council, Statement...............................   213
Karen L. Buckley, Letter.........................................   215
Gundersen Health System, Letter..................................   218
George L. Marra, Statement.......................................   222
Doreen Grossman, Letter..........................................   224
Diane Walter, Letter.............................................   226
Denise Broccoli, Letter..........................................   229
Connecticut's Legislative Commission on Aging, Statement.........   231
APTA, Letter.....................................................   233
AOPA, Statement..................................................   236
American Coalition for Healthcare Claims Integrity, Letter.......   240
America's Essential Hospitals, Statement.........................   244
AMA, Statement...................................................   250
Alliance for Retired Americans, Statement........................   255
AHCA, Statement..................................................   257
Advocate Physician Partners, Statement...........................   259
ACMA, Letter.....................................................   266
AARP, Letter.....................................................   269
AAMC, Letter.....................................................   273

CURRENT HOSPITAL ISSUES IN THE MEDICARE PROGRAM

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 20, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:39 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Kevin
Brady [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. Thank you all for joining us this morning.
In every dollar hospitals spend on inaccurate Medicare
audits and appeals, are dollars lost that should have been used
to care for seniors. We are here to discuss the problems facing
the hospitals today but also to find solutions to bring sense
to our Medicare program and improved care for America's
seniors. Today's hearing will examine hospital issues including
those related to CMS's Two Midnight Policy, as well as audits
and appeals. This is a bipartisan concern shared by many
different stakeholders, the Medicare program itself, and
lawmakers on this committee.
In order to understand why CMS chose to pursue a Two
Midnight Policy, we have to first explore the events leading up
to the policy. After we review those events in today's hearing,
Congress will be able to make an informed judgment about the
merits of the policy and potentially pursue alternative
solutions.
Our first panel will educate us on the different aspects of
inpatient and outpatient payments and services for hospitals.
If we want behavior to change and improve outcomes, we need to
change the incentives.
Our second panel will feature national experts commenting
on how Federal laws affect everyday medical practice. We will
be hearing perspectives from across the spectrum of providers,
auditors, researchers, and beneficiary advocates. As I have
talked to stakeholders about current issues in the Medicare
program, the Two Midnight Policy comes up over and over again.
In listening to a variety of different perspectives, I have
come to understand the following. There are misaligned
incentives in CMS's inpatient and outpatient payment systems,
but hospitals are not doing anything wrong. They are simply
responding to the incentives. No matter if the service is
inpatient or outpatient, hospital still uses the same equipment
and the same medical staff to deliver care. Yet there are two
vastly different payment systems, and the systems don't relate
to each other in any way. They are based on different coding
rubrics, and they pay for different things. And often all this
is decided after doctors have provided care.
Take for example, reimbursement for medical education. If
the service is billed inpatient, the hospital qualifies for an
extra medical education payment. However if the same service is
billed to outpatient, the hospital doesn't receive any medical
education money. So if you are a large teaching hospital and
you could bill under either payment system, why would you ever
submit the bill for anything other than inpatient
reimbursement. It is all about the underlying incentives.
Now let's examine the next piece of the puzzle, audits. I
have heard from hospitals that audits are causing undue
burdens. I have here from recovery audit contractors, or RACs
as they are known, that they are simply responding to what CMS
has defined as improper payments. Their emphasis on short
hospital stays is due to, well, you guessed it, the underlying
incentives. RACs are able to keep a percentage of any improper
overpayments they recoup. Prior to the Two Midnight standard,
there were no definitive rules governing which payment system
was correct for short stays. I think we can all agree that RACs
are an important program integrity tool. They are focusing on a
legitimate discrepancy of Medicare payment. They, too, are
responding to the incentives.
Although an important tool, auditing also causes unintended
behavior changes. We will hear from several of our witnesses
today that around the same time the RAC short- stay audits were
in full swing, there was also an unprecedented spike in
outpatient observation services. Observation is meant to be a
temporary tool allowing clinicians to closely monitor patients
without using full-blown inpatient hospital resources. However,
observation services are now being used as a tool to avoid
certain adverse effects, including RAC audits, in some cases
avoiding readmission penalties.
The saga continues when we turn to the appeals process.
Hospitals disagree with RAC audit denials for short stays. As a
result, they appeal the decision. Hospitals have found a high
level of success at overturning RAC denials at the
Administrative Law Judge, or ALJ level. Same thing, responding
to incentives, ALJ equals more likely to have an appeal
overturned, so appeal every time. So much activity at the ALJ
level has led to an extensive backlog of appeals.
Earlier this year the Obama administration suspended the
assignment of new appeals at the ALJ level. Again we see
unintended consequences, denying providers their basic due
process rights occurring as a result of poor incentives. We
intended to have a witness from the Department of Health and
Human Services here today to testify on behalf of the Medicare
appeals process. Unfortunate Chief L.J. Nancy Griswold was
unable to join us, but HHS is committed to briefing the Ways
and Means member bipartisan manner on this important topic.
At the conclusion of today's story, lies the heart of the
issue, the Two Midnight Policy. In response to the inpatient-
outpatient payment predicament, RAC audits, increase in
observation stays, and backlog of appeals, CMS took its best
shot at a solution, Two Midnight. Today we will hear from all
of our witnesses on whether the Two Midnight solution is
solving all or any of various problems identified in this tale.
I commend my colleagues on this committee, members on both
sides of the aisle who have introduced bills to pursue
different alternatives to the Two Midnight Policy. My
colleague, Mr. Gerlach, along with original co-sponsors, Mr.
Crowley, Mr. Reed, Mr. Roskam, Mr. Kind, have offered a sound
proposal for our committee to work from.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Dr. McDermott for the
purposes of an opening statement, I ask as always unanimous
consent that all members' written statements be included in the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman BRADY. I now recognize ranking member Dr.
McDermott for his opening statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This hearing today is really about serving the greater
good. When this rule was proposed, the Two Midnight Rule, I
submitted on the 22nd of July last year my comments about it,
and much of what I thought was going to happen is now here, and
we are going to hear about it today; and I am pleased that you
are having this hearing.
I would like to enter into the record that letter so that
it gets in the record.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
[Document not provided]

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JIM MCDERMOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. MCDERMOTT. In recent years hospitals have been asked to
do more with less. We have slowed the rate of growth of their
payments and asked them to work harder to improve quality and
decrease unnecessary readmissions. Furthermore although
Congress just delayed yet again the transition to the ICD-10
classification system, hospitals have had to take steps to move
to the new system while continuing to implement the meaningful
use requirements and participate in delivery system reform
efforts.
Many of these activities support the noble goal of
improving care for patients that they serve, such as the
accountable care organizations and the patient-centered medical
home, while reducing long-term costs, but they require up-front
capital investments. Hospitals are employing people and
providing good and stable benefits for their employees,
something other sectors should emulate. Hospitals are doing all
of this in the face of a number of regulations and justifiable
scrutiny.
The Administration recognizes the sacrifice this sector has
put forward. As an example, the Administration has made efforts
to reduce the unnecessary regulatory burden. Just this month
the Administration released Part 2 of the final rule to reduce
unnecessary, obsolete, or excessively burdensome regulation on
health care providers and suppliers.
I commend CMS for walking a fine line between regulating
provider conduct and attempting to make these things easier
from a burden standpoint. This is the agency's second foray
into the ensuring that regulations make sense and they serve a
purpose.
Unlike some of my Republican counterparts, I believe some
level of regulation is necessary to ensure that we protect
Medicare's finite resources for future generations. I think
everyone in this room would agree that protecting Medicare as a
bedrock institution of American life, thereby serving the
greater good, does require some sacrifice. This necessary
sacrifice must be shared and proportional. To that end I am
among the first to call for reforms to the Medicare recovery
audit contractor audit program, and I mentioned the letter that
I put in.
As a result I suggest CMS reconsider the policy in this
regard. Now, of course, several stakeholders have raised
concerns that the recovery auditor contractors will be
overzealous in pursuing recoveries related to this policy.
People knew it when it was put in. It is not that I believe
that the RAC should disappear. They perform a critical role in
protecting taxpayer dollars, but I do believe that the program
needs reform from a fairness and equity standpoint, and I am
pleased CMS has taken some affirmative steps in this regard.
I have also been among the loudest voices calling for
reform of some of the fraud and abuse laws to allow broad
participation among providers and suppliers to participate in
innovative partnerships that promote care coordination such as
gain sharing and other shared saving programs while ensuring
programmatic protections under the fraud and abuse laws remain
in place.
I have also introduced H.R. 4658, which would make a
modification to the civil monetary penalty law to allow
providers to more easily participate in care coordination
programs. I have also introduced H.R. 3144, the Fairness For
Beneficiaries Act, which recognizes that the three-day stay
often has negative ramifications for the Medicare beneficiaries
and would eliminate that requirement.
Finally, as the author of the self-referral disclosure
protocol provision included in the Affordable Care Act, I have
been deeply involved with urging CMS to make certain changes to
ensure overpayment disclosures made pursuant to the protocol
can be settled in a timely and efficient manner.
All in all, hospitals are making shared sacrifices. They
are going through a period of unprecedented change. They have
demonstrated a willingness to work with us as we move to new
delivery system models, and they have taken some financial
hits. I appreciate the work that hospitals do but also
recognize that giving the improper payment rate on the Medicare
fee for service program and the Medicaid programs, they must be
subject to some scrutiny by various contractors including the
recovery auditors.
I think we would like to ensure that going forward, we will
alleviate the regulatory burden where appropriate and ensure
that Medicare dollars are being used in a way that sustains the
Medicare program for future generations. Hospitals have
demonstrated a willingness to work with us as a pursuit of
these goals, and I think that we will hopefully from this
hearing today be able to evolve some legislation.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Today, we will hear from witnesses on two
panels. Sean Cavanaugh, Deputy Administrator and Director of
the Center for Medicare at the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services.
Jodie Nudelman, the Deputy Inspector General for Audit
Services at the Offices Inspector General of the Department of
Health and Human Services.
And on the second panel we will have Amy Deutschendorf,
Senior Director of Clinical Resource Management at Johns
Hopkins Hospital Health System.
Dr. Ellen Evans, Medical Director of HealthDataInsights.
Dr. Ann Sheehy, faculty on behalf of the Society of Hospital
Medicine, and Toby Edelman, Senior Policy Attorney, Center for
Medicare Advocacy.
Mr. Cavanaugh, congratulations on your new position at the
CMS. The Ways and Means Committee is happy to welcome your
first congressional testimony in your new role, and Mr.
McDermott promises to take it easy on you.
You are now recognized for five minutes.
And I should say both to those testifying and the members
today, we have two panels. We are going to be tight on time. We
are going to hold real fast to the five-minute rule.
So, Mr. Cavanaugh, welcome.

STATEMENT OF SEAN CAVANAUGH, DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR AND DIRECTOR,
CENTER OF MEDICARE, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

Mr. CAVANAUGH. Thank you, Chairman Brady. As you point out,
I just became Deputy Administrator at CMS a few weeks ago.
However, I point out that I started my career in health care in
this committee room working for a member of the Health
Subcommittee. I have great memories of working in this room
with colleagues from both sides of the aisle to improve the
Medicare program, and I have deep respect for the role Congress
plays and this subcommittee play in setting Medicare policy and
doing appropriate oversight of the operations of the program.
So it is an honor to return here today to this committee room
representing the agency that administers Medicare.
When a patient arrives at a hospital needing care, one of
the critical decisions that physicians or other qualified
professionals must make is whether to admit the patient for
inpatient care. This decision is often a complex medical
judgment taking into account the patient's medical history,
comorbidities and other factors. However, as Chairman Brady
pointed out, because of statutory requirements, Medicare pays
hospitals different rates for inpatient and outpatient
services. So the decision about whether to admit a patient has
implications for provider reimbursement, for beneficiary cost
sharing, and also for post acute care benefits the beneficiary
may qualify for.
Two years ago hospitals and other stakeholders were
requesting that CMS provide additional clarity regarding the
definition of inpatient care. Hospitals were growing frustrated
with the administrative and financial burden incurred when
recovery auditors denied a claim for services after care had
already been provided. At the same time, CMS was hearing from
its contractors that Medicare was reimbursing hospitals for
inpatient care that should have been provided in a less costly
outpatient setting.
Some hospitals reacted to the scrutiny of auditors by
treating more patients on an outpatient basis, often in an
observation status. Some observation stays lasted three, four
or even more days. This caused problems for beneficiaries
because it subjected them sometimes to higher cost sharing
under the Medicare Part B benefit, and it also disqualified
them from the post acute skilled nursing facility benefit since
they weren't accruing the three inpatient days they need for
that benefit.
In 2012, we solicited public feedback on possible criteria
that could be used to determine when an inpatient admission is
reasonable and necessary. We received a large number of
responses, but there was not a consensus around any single
approach. Last year CMS finalized a proposal that has become
known as the Two Midnight Rule. The rule sets a physician
expectation based benchmark for when CMS and its contractors
will consider inpatient hospital admission and payment
appropriate.
CMS, as we crafted that policy, we were seeking to balance
several principles that I think many of us share. We wanted
criteria that were clear to providers. We wanted criteria that
were consistent with good, sound clinical practice and
respected physician judgment. We wanted criteria that reflected
the beneficiaries' medical needs, and finally, we wanted
criteria that were consistent with the efficient delivery of
care to protect the trust funds.
In November of last year, CMS announced a probe and educate
strategy around the new standard in which the MACs are now
conducting prepayment reviews on a sample of short stay
inpatient claims from each hospital to determine compliance
with the Two Midnight Rule. Claims for inpatient admissions
that are not reasonable and necessary are denied, and the MACs
work with the hospitals to educate them on this criteria.
As part of this strategy, we also prohibited the recovery
auditors from conducting any post-payment reviews of claims for
the medical necessity of the inpatient status through March of
2014. We used this opportunity to engage in a dialogue with
stakeholders on the Two Midnight Rule. As we began hearing from
stakeholders that more time was needed to understand the
policy, we extended the probe and educate strategy through
September, and Congress subsequently extended it through March
31, 2015. We believe these extensions are allowing hospitals
time to fully understand the benchmark and for CMS to learn
more about how this policy is being implemented and understood
by hospitals.
In fact, preliminary data suggests that as a result of the
Two Midnight Rule, the proportion of long outpatient stays is
beginning to decline. However, in recognition of the continued
calls from stakeholders for additional clarity around short
stays, this year CMS is soliciting public input on two related
issues.
First, we solicited comment on the advisability of creating
a Medicare payment policy for short stay inpatient cases.
Specifically we requested public comment on how to define short
stays and how an appropriate payment might be designed. These
comments are due to the agency at the end of June.
Second, we reminded the public that we are inviting
feedback on creating additional exceptions to the Two Midnight
Rule. We look forward to reviewing stakeholders' suggestions on
these two subjects. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, I look
forward to hearing this subcommittee's ideas regarding the Two
Midnight Rule and the Recovery Audit Program. CMS is always
looking to improve our policies and procedures, so we welcome
this opportunity to hear from Congress and stakeholders.
With that I would be happy to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cavanaugh follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Nudelman, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JUDI NUDELMAN, REGIONAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR
EVALUATION AND INSPECTIONS, NY REGION OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (OIG-HHS)

Ms. NUDELMAN. Good morning, Chairman Brady, Ranking Member
McDermott and other distinguished Members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Office of
Inspector General's work to improve the Medicare program.
My testimony today has three key takeaways. One, the Two
Midnight hospital policy must be carefully evaluated.
Two, CMS should enhance its oversight of the recovery audit
contractors; and, three, fundamental changes are needed in the
Medicare appeals system.
I will begin with the Two Midnight Rule. The new policy
provides guidelines for when hospitals bill for inpatient stays
and outpatient services such as observation. These decisions
have significant impact. They affect how much Medicare pays the
hospital, how much beneficiaries must pay, and beneficiaries'
eligibility for skilled nursing facility services.
Prior to the policy, OIG evaluated the hospital's use of
observation stays and inpatient stays. Our findings continue to
be relevant. We found that beneficiaries were in observation
and short inpatient stays for similar reasons, but short
inpatient stays were more costly. On average Medicare paid
nearly three times more for short inpatient stays than
observation stays. Beneficiaries paid almost two times more.
We also found that hospitals vary. Some hospitals use short
inpatient stays for less than 10 percent of their stays. Others
use them for more than 70 percent. Lastly, we found that some
beneficiaries spent three nights or more in the hospital but
did not qualify for the skilled nursing facilities under
Medicare. That is because their stays did not include three
inpatient nights.
Switching to our work on recovery audit contractors, or
RACs, we found that these contractors play a critical role in
protecting the fiscal integrity of Medicare. In fact, in fiscal
years 2010 and 2011, RACs identified improper payments
totalling $1.3 billion. Most of the recovered improper payments
came from hospital inpatient claims. However, we also found
that CMS needs to enhance its oversight of RACs.
Finally, OIG has found that the Medicare appeals system
needs fundamental changes. We reviewed the third level of
appeals which is handled by administrative law judges, or ALJs.
Although this work predated the recent surge in appeals, our
findings and recommendations are relevant to the current
challenges. We found that ALJs decided fully in favor of
appellants in over half of the cases and Part A hospital stays
were most likely to receive favorable decisions.
Several factors led to ALJs reaching different decisions
than the prior level. One is that some Medicare policies are
unclear. This leads to more favorable decisions for appellants
and to more variation among adjudicators. In fact, there is
wide variation among ALJs. Their rate of favorable decisions
range from 18 to 85 percent. We also found that improvements
were needed such as ALJs moving to electronic files and CMS
increasing its participation at hearings.
In closing, clear payment policies, strong oversight, and
an effective appeals system are critical for Medicare to work
well. CMS policy, the RACs, and the appeals system must each
fulfill their important purposes. If they do not,
beneficiaries, taxpayers and the Medicare program suffer. OIG
is committed to continuing our efforts to improve Medicare.
Thank you for your interest and for the opportunity to
discuss some of our work. I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nudelman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Ms. Nudelman.
I think both witnesses have made the point that Two
Midnight Policy, the inpatient, outpatient, the audits and the
appeals all really work together, which is why we are doing
this hearing all together.
So, starting with Mr. Cavanaugh, I am interested to hear
your thoughts on the barriers to compare inpatient and
outpatient services. Obviously we should be trying to find the
best quality of care at the right site with the most cost
effective payment.
So can you give me an example of a reimbursement
difference, for a service that can be billed both inpatient and
outpatient by a teaching hospital in a major city; what would
be an example?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well Chairman, as you pointed out in your
opening statement, the outpatient payment system and the
inpatient payment system are fundamentally different, and they
start with different coding; so it is often hard to compare
payments because we can't put the same claim through the
outpatient system and the inpatient system. They are coded
differently.
But on the inpatient system, we tend to pay a fixed amount,
meaning a DRG-based payment. That DRG-based payment will
include adjustments for possibly IME, for DSH. It could include
a readmissions penalty or a hospital-acquired condition
penalty, but it tends to be a fixed payment for the types of
patient and the types of service being delivered.
On the outpatient side, it is more disaggregated, where we
tend to pay per service. I think you heard from the OIG, and I
think it is similar to data we have, that the magnitude of the
difference in payment is quite substantial. The OIG mentioned
that the short stay inpatient payments tended to be three times
as costly to Medicare as the outpatient observation stays. That
is consistent with data we have seen at the CMS. So that gives
you a sense, that the systems for deriving the payment are
different, and the magnitudes are quite different.
Chairman BRADY. How do you address that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am not entirely sure how we address it.
One idea that we received from stakeholders, and I know that it
had some support in Congress, is to create a payment system
that splits that difference, a short stay inpatient payment
system and as I mentioned in my opening statement, we are
soliciting comments on how to create such a payment system. I
would say there are challenges.
Some of the cases that come in as short stay inpatient
payments already have very low lengths of stay. Chest pain DRG,
for example, has a two-day average length of stay. So the
question is how would you create a short-stay payment around a
type of case that is already fairly short. Those are the sorts
of technical questions that we are asking for public input in
the proposed rule this year.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Nudelman, you know, in your analysis do you think the
Two Midnight standard will reduce observation stays or increase
them, the length of them?
Ms. NUDELMAN. Again, our analysis is prior to the Two
Midnight stay, and it is difficult to predict how things will
look. What we did find is that hospitals extremely vary and,
therefore, it is important to look at all of the data because
their starting point is very different, and so it may impact
hospitals very differently.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Cavanaugh, thanks for your emphasis
describing the different cost-sharing implications affecting
our Medicare beneficiaries. It often gets lost in this
discussion and the difference between inpatient and outpatient.
It is unfortunate the Medicare program has such vastly
different cost-sharing rules for our seniors or Medicare
beneficiaries between the two benefits.
This committee has focused earlier on the advantages of
combining Medicare Parts A and B with the out-of-pocket costs
to make sure we protect seniors in part because we are
concerned about what seniors pay for cost sharing.
So, can you give us your thoughts on combining Parts A and
B and how that might be helpful in trying to contain those cost
sharing challenges for seniors?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I recognize that one of the goals is to
speak to one of the problems that we have here, which is that
inpatient versus outpatient generates very different
liabilities for the patient. I would want to hear more about
the proposal that the subcommittee is considering, and we have
technical staff at CMS who can come provide assistance to you
in the drafting of the bill if required and if that would be
beneficial to you.
Chairman BRADY. So you have not taken a look at the
proposed combining Part A and B in the President's budget or in
earlier health care proposals?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. We don't have a proposal on that at this
time, but like I said, if the committee has a proposal, we
would love to see it and learn more about it.
Chairman BRADY. Okay. Okay, final question. Mr. Cavanaugh,
even though CMS doesn't have a direct role in the ALJ level
Medicare appeals that Ms. Nudelman talked about, CMS must still
be part of the solution to solve the backlog.
Does HHS have a working group to address Medicare appeals,
and if so has HHS crafted recommendations to solve the backlog
issues going forward?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, Mr. Chairman. As you point out, there
is an HHS-wide work group to address the backlog. CMS is part
of that. I would be glad--we are in the process of coming up
with recommendations. I don't believe they are finalized yet.
Chairman BRADY. What is the timetable on that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I think we could brief the committee on them
fairly shortly.
Chairman BRADY. Right. Thank you Mr. Cavanaugh and Ms.
Nudelman.
I now recognize Ranking Member Dr. McDermott for five
minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
From a patient's standpoint you walk into the emergency
room or whatever, and you get put in one of these statuses or
the other. Does it make any difference to the patient, to the
beneficiary, which status they are put in, as to how they are
treated?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. As to how they are treated, not from a
benefit perspective; Is that the question?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Yes, I am talking about how they are treated
as a patient.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I would hope not. I would hope that the
patient is receiving all the services they need medically, that
are medically indicated.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So then the difference is in the payment
that is received by the hospital or that the patient has to
make depending on which category they are in; is that correct?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly the statute creates a stark
difference between inpatient and outpatient care, yes, sir.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Give us the amount of difference for a
hospital, what they receive and what the patient has to pay, so
we get some idea of who is bearing the weight here.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. The amounts both that the hospital will
receive and that the beneficiary would be liable for would vary
tremendously on individual circumstances, so I can't give you a
precise answer. I would say that when we did a rebilling
initiative where we had hospitals take short inpatient cases
and rebill them as outpatient, which involves some work, we did
find that the outpatient payment to the hospital was about 30
percent of what the inpatient payment would have been.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So they are getting 70 percent more if they
bill them as an inpatient. Is that in Medicare payment for the
DRG, the diagnosed-related group, or is it the indirect medical
education payment and the DSH payment on top.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. It includes everything.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay. So you are saying you are including
everything?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, sir.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So it is to the hospital's best interest to
bring them in as an inpatient?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly it generates more revenue.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. From a revenue standpoint. Because we said
it doesn't make any difference how they are treated as people
and as patients, so the only difference is how much money the
hospital makes off of it; is that correct?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Again, it certainly makes a significant
financial difference.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Now, I have heard, and I think almost every
member on this committee has heard from their hospitals, the
usual assumption is that the RACs are overzealous and that
somehow when we take them up to appeal, when we finally get to
the appeal process, almost always it comes down in our favor.
Could you give us the numbers of how many are overturned on
appeal?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly, Congressman. We had a report to
Congress on the RAC program in the year of 2012, and in that
report we showed that when the RAC denies a claim, when a RAC
denies a claim, only 7 percent of those are ultimately
overturned at some level of review all the way up through the
ALJs.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Only 7 percent are overturned.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. That is correct.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Where do the hospitals get the figure that
they say, well, they are all overturned. When we finally go
through this long, arduous process that is backlogged and
everything else, it is always overturned. Where do they come up
with that.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. There could be two sources of the difference
in these numbers. The first is any individual hospital's
experience may vary tremendously. Some may have a better
success rate. The other is, some of the numbers that I have
seen quoted by the industry, they are using as the denominator
only those that they choose to appeal, not all those that were
denied, which a lower denominator would generate a higher rate
of success.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Does it get to more than a half?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. In the numbers that we have seen that CMS
has generated, I haven't seen anything that would get that
high, no sir.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. The number I saw, I mean, you are holding
back on the numbers you got. The ones that I have seen say 27
percent are the number that are overturned.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. So, again, I don't mean to hold back the
numbers. These are numbers that are in our public report to
Congress, ultimately, and I will just state it as clearly as I
can, of all the ones the RACs deny, only 7 percent are
ultimately overturned.
If you took a low number of the ones the RACs denied and
the ones the hospitals chose to appeal, it would generate a
higher overturn number. I just don't happen to know that
number. 14 percent.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Fourteen percent?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am being helped, yes.
So it essentially doubles the rate, but it doesn't get as
high as some of the numbers you may have heard from others and,
again, an individual hospital's experience may vary.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Can you give us an explanation for why this
problem? I mean, generally Congress doesn't run in and pass
laws, and you don't make rules and regulations without there
having been something to generate that. What is it that drove
this in the first place?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I think it was a confluence of a number of
factors. We were hearing from hospitals and beneficiaries who
were really concerned about these long observation stays. That
was causing confusion for beneficiaries including they didn't
understand their status, and they also thought they were
qualifying for the skilled nursing facility benefit.
We were hearing from hospitals who thought just dealing
with the RACs, with what the hospitals would characterize as an
unclear standard for inpatient care was a difficult situation
to put them in and all these forces came together, and that is
why CMS solicited input and tried to make a clearer policy.
Because our goal is not to have a successful RAC program or to
drive down the number of overturned appeals. Our goal is to
have hospitals understand the rules, agree with the rules, and
bill correctly at the outset.
Chairman BRADY. Time is expired.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cavanaugh, the value-based purchasing program which was
enacted as part of ObamaCare is the Federal Government's most
extensive effort yet to hold hospitals financially accountable
for patient outcomes. Medicare compared hospitals on how
faithfully they followed basic standards of care and how
patients rated their experiences. In the first year of CMS
value-based purchasing program, physician-owned hospitals
demonstrated they thrive in delivering high-quality, low-cost
care. Amazingly 9 of the top 10 and 53 of the top 100 hospitals
were physician-owned hospitals.
CMS also recently released data that summarizes the
utilization and payments for procedures and services provided
to Medicare. Based on this release of information, we have now
confirmed what many of us have known for some time, and that is
that, physician-owned hospitals are costing Medicare less than
hospitals without physician ownership.
And that doesn't consider all the cost savings associated
with the higher quality of care they provide. The irony of all
this is that the very law that created the hospital value-based
purchasing program, ObamaCare, bans the same hospitals. This
new accountability measure says they are some of the very best
in the country. ObamaCare prohibits any new physician-owned
hospitals from treating Medicare and Medicaid patients. This
clearly discriminates against some of the most vulnerable
patients in our health system.
While the law permitted those physician-owned hospitals
that received Medicare certification to be grandfathered under
the law, it prevents these same hospitals from being able to
expand to meet the access and quality demands in their
community. This makes no sense, and it flies in the face of the
Administration's own benchmarks for quality of care and cost
savings.
Mr. Cavanaugh, do you stand by the results of the value-
based purchasing program which validates the quality of
physician-owned hospitals?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, the agency stands by the results of the
value-based purchasing program.
Mr. JOHNSON. Do you stand by the data released by CMS
showing the cost differential between treating patients at
physician-owned hospitals versus hospitals without any
ownership by physicians?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I apologize, Congressman. I am not familiar
with those data, but I am happy to look at them and review
them.
Mr. JOHNSON. I appreciate it if you would. I hope you all
can support a bill that I have out there, H.R. 2027, which
would establish a level playing field for physician-owned
hospitals and ensure that patients will continue to have a
choice in where they receive their health care.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly we look forward to reviewing that
legislation.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing today. I think this is something, as Mr.
McDermott said, we are all hearing a lot about in our district.
Mr. Cavanaugh, I would like to just revisit the issue of
the reversed audits, and you had mentioned 7 percent. Mr.
McDermott said that he hears from his constituents that every
one of them are overturned. I am hearing that it is in the 40
percent from my hospitals, 40 percent and change and is there
any way to qualify how these missed billing are done? Are they
intentional? Are they mistakes? What is your experience?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly my experience, which actually
predates my time at CMS, as I mentioned in my opening statement
I have only been the Director of Center for Medicare for a few
weeks, but I do have experience working in the hospital
industry. My experience has been most of them are not
fraudulent. It is misinterpretation----
Mr. THOMPSON. So they are honest mistakes, or they find the
process is confusing, have trouble getting to where they need
to be?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly that is what I have heard from
much of the industry. I would also say by monitoring these very
closely, the agency has at times found suggestions of fraud in
some areas; but I don't think that is generally what is driving
this.
Mr. THOMPSON. And is it pretty easy to recognize the
mistakes vis-a-vis the fraud?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I would have to defer that question to my
colleague who runs the program integrity side of CMI, CMS
excuse me.
Mr. THOMPSON. I would like to know that if you could.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. We would be happy to circle back with you
after the hearing.
Mr. THOMPSON. Whichever it is, when a hospital has to go
through the process of defending their claim, there is a lot of
expense associated with that.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. That is true.
Mr. THOMPSON. Are you able to qualify that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well, we don't collect data on what the
hospital's expense is, but certainly my experience----
Mr. THOMPSON. They hire, what, lawyers?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. At times.
Mr. THOMPSON. And they hire consultants----
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Or consultants. There is also just the time
and----
Mr. THOMPSON. And all the opportunity cost. They are
defending their billing practices rather than providing health
care to patients?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, Congressman. And, again, that is why we
feel perfecting the appeals process is important, but what is
more important is having very clear guidelines at the outset of
how these cases should be billed.
Mr. THOMPSON. And is there any way to minimize the cost to
hospitals if their claim is reversed? They have to pay one way
or the other, I guess.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, if it is reversed. There are some
things that we are doing. The recovery auditor contracts are
being recompeted as we speak, and we hope to award new
contracts this summer. In that process, as we set new terms
with the appropriate auditors, we are trying to take steps to
make things less burdensome for the hospitals. We are trying to
revise the requests the auditors do for documents from the
hospitals to try to limit that burden somewhat.
We are trying to ensure that there is an exchange of
information between the auditors and the hospitals so the
hospitals can make their case before they have to file a formal
appeal, that they can work with the auditor to explain why they
think it was appropriate as an inpatient case. So we are always
looking for ways to improve this. And I think there is----
Mr. THOMPSON. Does the process incentivize the auditors to
go after more than they should?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I don't think there is an incentive for them
to go after more than they should, and I think the very low
overturn rate that I quoted suggests that they are largely
going after the right types of cases, but again I would rather
they have----
Mr. THOMPSON. That's its overturn rate that you quoted, the
7 percent.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Correct.
Mr. THOMPSON. But if it is closer to what Mr. McDermott
said, where they are all overturned, or even if they are what
my hospitals are experiencing at about 40-some-odd percent, it
is not quite as low.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. If I believed that----
Mr. THOMPSON. They say there is lies; there is damn lies,
and there is statistics.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I just wanted to agree with you, though,
that if there were overturn rates of 40 to 50 percent, I think
that would be indicative of a larger problem than just the
guidelines.
Mr. THOMPSON. What would that problem be?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I think it would indicate that the recovery
auditors were not going after cases that were----
Mr. THOMPSON. Auditors are what?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. That the recovery auditors, if they were
getting over turned 40 or 50 percent of the time, it would
indicate they were probably going after cases that were
appropriately billed to start with but, again, that is not what
we see in our data.
Mr. THOMPSON. So Mr. Chairman, can we further examine that,
because if that's the case, they are being incentivized or for
some reason they are going after cases they shouldn't.
Chairman BRADY. At some point today, I am going to
recognize Mr. Roskam, but at some point today I would like Ms.
Nudelman to weigh in. I want to reconcile the differences in
the numbers. I may be missing something here. And at some
point--I don't want to take Mr. Roskam's time.
Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cavanaugh, I just want to pick up on one of the themes
that Mr. McDermott articulated in his opening statement where
he said that he wanted to protect Medicare's finite resources,
and I agree with that and you agree with that. I think one of
the challenges is that there is a zero-sum game element to
Medicare reimbursement right now, and so I want to draw your
attention to an issue that I am sure is familiar with you.
That is Nantucket Cottage Hospital. As you know, that was
part of the process by which the Affordable Care Act was
passed. There is I don't think any celebration in this in that
it is a zero-sum game proposition. I come from Illinois, and my
home state is losing under this equation. Massachusetts, based
on this manipulation, will essentially get $3.5 billion over 10
years. You recognize that that is a problem, don't you?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am familiar with the provision you are
talking about, and I would just simply say CMS is faithfully
executing the law as written.
Mr. ROSKAM. You don't think that is a good allocation of
resources, do you?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Again, I would just say that we are
implementing the laws as required.
Mr. ROSKAM. Well, if it takes from my state and gives to
another state, and what it does is it manipulates the
definition of a rural hospital so that now Nantucket is now
defined as rural, which boosts everybody up, because you know
these rules better than I do, the entire state of Massachusetts
is the beneficiary of one hospital in a particularly luxurious
area, is now redefined as rural and therefore poor. That is a
manipulation, isn't it?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Congressman, I think you have accurately
described the mechanism of what is happening; and, again, we
are bound to implement the law.
Mr. ROSKAM. But it is not a good idea, is it?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. We are faithfully executing the law in this
regard, sir.
Mr. ROSKAM. Well, you recognize there is bipartisan support
to repeal this, don't you? This is one of these areas where
there is a tremendous amount of bipartisan interest in trying
to get back to this.
Senators McCaskill and Coburn have come alongside with one
another. There is dozens of members of the House of
Representatives, who have recognized this, and this is a
situation where one state based on one statute is getting a
disproportionate benefit, and it is not getting a
disproportionate esoteric benefit. In other words, this isn't
just simply borrowing from a future generation. This is saying,
well, we are going to take from Illinois, and we are going to
give to Massachusetts. That's a breakdown, isn't it? Isn't that
a failure?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. So, Congressman, the provision does involve
some of the technical aspects of Medicare rate setting, and we
have a lot of experts at CMS who we would be happy to bring
down and provide you technical assistance if you have a
legislative proposal in this request.
Mr. ROSKAM. Well, is a technicality when a luxurious
vacation area is categorized as rural, thereby boosting every
other hospital in the state and having an adverse impact on
many other states?
I mean, so Massachusetts according to our staff that put
this together in 2013 and 2014, is going to be receiving a
benefit of $425 million. My home state of Illinois is down $62
million. Congressman Price's home state of Georgia is down $30
million. You just go on and on through the list. Congressman
McDermott's home state is down $12 million. This is beyond just
a technicality, wouldn't you say?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. What I was suggesting is that it is a
function of very technical parts of the rate setting within
Medicare, and we are happy to look further into it and look at
your bill and provide----
Mr. ROSKAM. Isn't that an over characterization to say it
is a technicality? It is not just technically taking millions
of dollars from my home state and these other states across the
country to benefit one state through the boosting of this sort
of hospital definition.
And if that is a technicality, then I shudder to think what
is a big deal. It is more than a technicality. Wouldn't you
acknowledge that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I didn't mean to suggest it was a
technicality. What I was trying to say is that it was a
function of technical aspects of the rate setting system. As
you said, the provision has a meaningful impact on Medicare
rates.
Mr. ROSKAM. And wouldn't you technically think it is a bad
idea?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Congressman, we are faithfully executing the
law. If you have a provision to change it, we are happy to
provide any technical assistance you might need.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we can work
together, I really do, to find solutions that work for
hospitals and for patients.
I have been hearing from hospitals in my state, Mr.
Cavanaugh, about the various reporting requirements in programs
that impact the work that those hospitals do. I don't think
anyone here will disagree that there is much room for
improvement in the RAC program, in policies related to short-
term, as well as observation stays. However, we need to strike
the right balance between ensuring that hospitals can comply
and that Medicare has the ability to ensure program integrity.
It sounds easy, but it is not.
One area of particular interest to me is the increased use
of observation stays and how it impacts the beneficiary. So I
cosponsored along with Joe Courtney and Tom Latham, it is
bipartisan, the Improving Access to Medicare Coverage Act which
would allow observation stays to be counted toward the three-
day mandatory inpatient stay for Medicare coverage of skilled
nursing facility services.
So here's my question then, Mr. Cavanaugh. A number of
independent reports from Medpac, the HHS Inspector General,
Brown University, very interesting study, indicated that there
has been a substantial increase in the number of observation
stay claims and a decrease in the number of inpatient stays.
According to Medpac, outpatient observation claims grew by
88 percent from 2006 to 2012. A Brown University study found
that the average length of stay in observation increased by
more than 7 percent. Could you tell me what is contributing to
this trend and the rise in observation stays?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly. CMS is aware of the growth in
observation stays as well. One of the things we believe is
contributing to it is the behavior of some hospitals that want
to avoid auditors reviewing whether an inpatient stay was
appropriate.
Mr. PASCRELL. Do you want to write that on the record
please?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Excuse me?
Mr. PASCRELL. What do you mean; what are the hospitals
doing?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. And again, this is anecdotal having talked
to some hospital associations and some individual hospitals
that some hospitals have decided they would rather take the
patient in observation status as an excess of caution rather
than risk having an inpatient admission subsequently denied.
Mr. PASCRELL. And what does that lead to?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well, first of all, what I think is
unfortunate, as you point out, is if the patient should have
been receiving inpatient care, they are not accruing the days
they need to qualify for the post-acute skill nursing facility
benefit.
Mr. PASCRELL. And that is pretty troubling. Under the
current law, under what exists right now, Medicare requires
that a patient be classified as an inpatient during a hospital
stay for three days in order to qualify for coverage in a
skilled nursing facility after they leave the hospital.
So, a number of Medicare beneficiaries have been cared for
in the hospital on outpatient observation status rather than
admitting them as inpatients, which has caused problems for
Medicare coverage. That is serious.
Mr. Cavanaugh, do you believe that the three-day inpatient
stay requirement for Medicare coverage of skilled nursing
facility services is appropriate?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Congressman, I think CMS shares your
interest in trying to find ways to improve the use of skilled
nursing facility benefit. I am pleased to tell you there is two
examples of where we are exploring very specific alternatives
to this.
In the Affordable Care Act, the Secretary and CMS were
given the authority to waive certain provisions of Medicare in
order to test new payment and service delivery models. In the
pioneer ACOs, which is run by the Innovation Center, and the
bundled payments for care improvement also run by the
Innovation Center, were running tests where participants in
those models have waivers from the three-day prior
hospitalization rule. We chose those environments in which to
test this because we feel in those environments the providers
have both a clinical and a financial, heightened clinical and
financial responsibility, so we feel that it is the best
possible environment to waive the rule without having excess
utilization.
Those tests are fairly new, and we are going to evaluate
them very closely, and when we have data to share, we would be
happy to share them with this committee.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Gerlach is recognized. We will move to two-to-one
questions so we can balance questions from now on.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for testifying this morning to both of you.
On this Two Midnight Rule issue, in staying with the
questions that my predecessors here have just posed, I think a
lot of this can be boiled down to some of the information that
we get from our subcommittee staff that summarizes the issues
for the hearing today, and let me read if I can from that
because, again, I think it crystallizes on the Two Midnight
Rule where we are, and ``For fiscal year 2014, CMS maintains
751 diagnostic-related group bundling codes for inpatient
hospital payment. The outpatient payment system is focused on
current procedural terminology, or CPT codes, that are
maintained by the American Medical Association. The CPT codes
map to ambulatory payment classifications, or APCs, for
outpatient service reimbursement. For calendar year 2014, CMS
maintains 813 APCs. There is no one-to-one matching of DRGs to
APCs nor international classification of disease codes to CPT
codes. Hospitals are responsible for knowing two different
coding systems and two different payment systems for Medicare
reimbursement.'' Seems to me that's the problem, isn't it? A
patient comes into a hospital, presents with certain symptoms
and certain complaints, but there is two different coding
systems that a hospital is then required to utilize in terms of
the reimbursement it will ultimately receive for whatever
service is provided to the patient.
So does not the answer lie obviously to a new methodology
that somehow blends these codes or smoothens these two
different payment systems, one outpatient, one inpatient, so
there is a fair way to reimburse for the service provided, not
the length of stay on an arbitrary basis. Mr. Cavanaugh?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Thank you for that question, Congressman. I
do think in this year's rule in which we requested input on a
short-stay inpatient payment system, we were suggesting that we
are open to the kind of thing you are talking about, which is
trying to see if the solution here is to minimize the payment
differences. I don't want to prejudge the result of that. We
are waiting to receive public comment on how that might look,
but I think it is an openness to a step in the direction you
are discussing.
Mr. GERLACH. Is that openness towards getting to a system
where again the reimbursement to the hospital is based upon a
more simplified methodology, and the methodology that is tied
to the nature of the service that is provided, not an arbitrary
time period for which that patient is in the hospital?
And I would also, Mrs. Nudelman, if you would also reply to
that as well.
Ms. NUDELMAN. I mean I defer to CMS and to Congress to make
the policy, but I think the overall objective is going back to,
you know, not paying vastly different amounts for beneficiaries
that receive similar care. At the very least, a standardized
crosswalk that crosswalks the outpatient and the inpatient
procedures would be a useful tool.
Mr. GERLACH. Well, typically an inpatient reimbursement
would be about three times what an outpatient reimbursement
would be, so there would be a fundamentally unfair situation
where somebody is discharged from the hospital at 10 p.m.
before the second midnight and therefore the hospital receives
a third of the reimbursement for the services that were
otherwise provided or could have been provided if you just kept
the person three more hours and discharged him or her at 1 a.m.
after the two midnights had passed by and get three times the
reimbursement.
So isn't there a fundamental flaw in just arbitrarily
setting up a Two Midnight or any particular time period for
determining reimbursement versus just the nature of the service
that is needed to treat the patient, as Mr. Cavanaugh you
alluded to some moments ago, that is the goal here, getting the
patient properly cared for in the hospital setting, based upon
the symptoms and problems and then the diagnosis that is made
to deal with that.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I think, Congressman, it is fair to say CMS
shares your goal. What I would caution you is anytime we create
a new payment, there is a lot that goes into creating payment
systems, and what you are articulating, I think, is a very
worthy goal of a seamless payment system. It presents many
technical challenges. However, again, we have expressed
openness in our proposed rule to exploring payment solutions to
this, so we look forward to hearing any ideas this subcommittee
has, and we look forward to working with you on this.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you both.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panelists here today.
It would seem the more regulations we have, the more
difficult it becomes, at least to medical providers that tell
me that it is more difficult to do their job and especially
to--it becomes more difficult to do the right thing.
And Mr. Cavanaugh, similar to concerns raised about the Two
Midnight Rule, there is another regulation CMS announced it
will begin enforcing this year pertaining to the 96-hour rule
at critical access hospitals. This regulation requires, as you
know, physicians to certify at the time of admission they do
not believe a patient will be there more than 96 hours or must
transfer the patient or face non-reimbursement. I understand
CMS has walked back this rule, allowing more time to file the
certification. Is that true?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. That is true. We have provided guidance to
some of the hospitals that we will allow the certification to
occur anytime up to 24 hours before the bill is submitted, and
I think that will be coming out more formally sometime soon.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. I assume that you have received a good bit
of feedback, as have I, from hospitals and physicians. Can you
reflect a little bit briefly, if you might, on the kind of
feedback you received that would have prompted walking the rule
back a bit?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly we got a lot of input about the
timing and the burden and whether the trade-off between what we
were seeking and what the hospitals were requesting, whether
there was any loss in the assurances we needed that the patient
was seeing the appropriate level professional, and I think
hospitals made a convincing case that there was room for some
adjustment in the policy.
Mr. SMITH. It would seem that the rule is unnecessary and
even arbitrary. How did you arrive at the actual number of 96
hours?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Sir, that part is in the statute. The
statute requires that the physician make a certification that
the expectation, when the patient arrived, was that they would
need no more than 96 hours.
Mr. SMITH. What is the background on that 96 number?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I apologize. I don't know the story there. I
just know it is statutory based.
Mr. SMITH. And CMS has not enforced it up until they
finally decided to start enforcing that, is that accurate? They
had not been previously?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Again, I apologize. I have been in the job
for just a couple of weeks. I do know that the requirement does
trace back to the statute.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. I have introduced a bill, H.R. 3993, the
Critical Access Hospital Relief Act of 2014, which would repeal
the regulation, and I would certainly encourage the agency's
support of that. I think it might even make a lot of folks'
jobs more easy to carry out, and I know that we have got other
burdens on the critical access hospitals such as the physician
supervision, again arbitrary, hard to determine how that ever
even came about in terms of a rule or regulation, and it is
very discouraging for medical providers to be facing all of
these regulations that, like I said earlier, make it difficult
for the good actor to do the right thing.
I know we have seen advertising on television about
addressing fraud in Medicare/Medicaid and other areas, and yet
I still think that all of these regulations are making it more
difficult for the provider to do the right thing. I am not
convinced that it is actually preventing fraud. I can
appreciate the fact that there are limited resources, that you
acknowledge that and that we are all trying to operate in a
world of limited resources, and yet I think that many of these
regulations are accomplishing the exact opposite of what they
were intending to accomplish, and it is a huge burden and I
would hope that the agency would really reflect on that fact as
we do move forward.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. I want to thank our panelists for your testimony
here today.
Just to maintain the momentum of some of my colleagues,
especially my friend from Pennsylvania. As I have been talking
to a lot of our providers back home in Wisconsin over the Two
Midnight Rule, their sense is that it is awfully arbitrary, and
they are having some definitional problems too, as far as what
constitutes inpatient care versus observational status,
outpatient care.
Has CMS, Mr. Cavanaugh, been working with the provider
community to provide better definition or clarity in regards to
those type of services, and what is the difference? I f they
are in there under on observational status versus inpatient
care, is there things you can point to that clearly
distinguishes between the two types?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. So, first on the first half of your question
about whether we are working with providers. I would say we
certainly are. I think it was a big part of our attitude, going
into this year, as you recall, we suspended the recovery
auditors looking at these cases for these purposes because we
wanted to work with providers and we wanted to do it. So we
have, as I said, the MACs going into each hospital and taking a
small sample of cases and seeing whether they are complying
with the rule.
And in instances where hospitals are, they are left alone
for the rest of this year. In instances where hospitals are
having trouble understanding or in implementing the new rule,
the MACs are working with them to educate them.
So, I do feel like we have taken this pause in the recovery
audit program, looking at these types cases, for the very
reason you say which is to work with the hospitals and again,
the origin of the rule was to respond to the request from the
NG4 clarity. One of the things we may be look learning is that
additional clarity is needed, or as we discussed, perhaps
additional payment solutions are needed. We will wait to see
how these discussions go. But I do think you raise an important
point, that this is dialogue between us and the industry, and
we do hope to learn quite a bit during this time.
Mr. KIND. Well, are there clear distinctions that can be
made between inpatient and outpatient status, observational
status within the hospital setting?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Certainly observation status is supposed to
be used for a short period for the purposes of determining
whether a patient needs an inpatient level of care, and during
that time, there ought to be diagnostic and other monitoring
being conducted. I would hesitate to go any further into
distinctions because I am not a clinician, but I think your
point is well taken, which oftentimes these are based on
complex medical judgments that are difficult to translate into
payment policy.
Mr. KIND. You mention that CMS is moving forward on a short
stay payment rule right now, and you are starting to get some
feedback, some comments on that. What are the various factors,
just for the committee's benefit, what are the various factors
that you are taking under consideration in putting that rule
together?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. The two questions we posed specifically in
the proposed rule were, one, how would you define short stay
cases, and there are examples of this. There are other payment
systems out there that do use short stay payments, so it is not
unprecedented, but it is a bit challenging here, as I mentioned
earlier, in that some of the cases that are inpatient that are
subject to RAC review are often already very short stay, even
when they are legitimately inpatient, meaning they have an
average length of stay of 2 days, so how do you--cases are
typically 1, 2, or 3 days already, how do you carve out a short
stay.
And the second, and this has been the subject of several
questions. The second question we posed to public was, how
would you construct this new payment? I think questions have
arisen, would it include the IME and DSH adjustments, and
learnings like that, and I think these are real important
issues where we need some pubic feedback before we move
forward.
Mr. KIND. Is uncompensated care or underinsured
individuals, is that going to be a factor, too, in the short
rule?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well, the way that currently gets into
Medicare payment is typically through the DSH adjustment, and I
think that is the fair question of whether it should be part of
this as well.
Mr. KIND. Let me take you in a different direction.
Obviously, recently, CMS did their physician reimbursement data
dump that received a lot of attention, a lot of articles, a lot
of focus, especially on some reimbursements that seemed outside
the norm or other parameters than that.
We hear from the doctors in the follow-up questions that it
wasn't just them. There were multiple docs or whatever using
the same code in order to submit the billing information. Does
that sound plausible to you that, that is what, in fact, what
is taking place and why some doctors are being reimbursed 12 or
$14 million in a single year?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. It is true that in certain instances
multiple providers can bill under the same identification
number.
Mr. KIND. Why are we allowing that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I will have to look into at that and get
back to you, but I think there are legitimate reasons for that.
Mr. KIND. I would like to follow up. It just seems if we
are trying to bring greater transparency, allowing multiple
providers to use the same code seems to work against that
issue. It is something that I think we are going to have to
address.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Be happy to look into that.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the panelists as well. I think this is an
incredibly important topic, and as a physician for over 20
years, know that we often times don't put the patient at the
center of these discussions, and it is sometimes hard to do,
especially when we are talking about money.
Mr. Cavanaugh, I was struck by the difference in the
numbers that we hear recounted on the number of appeals that
are either overturned or not, and your number of 7 percent
astounds me because it is one that I have never heard before,
so I suspect that includes all RAC audits that are done
throughout the entire country. I don't want the answer to that,
but I would like it in writing later.
But I think the question that we really need to ask is, of
those cases that hospitals have appealed, that are inpatient
stays denied due to medical necessity, what percent of those
are overturned at the QIC level and then at the ALJ level. Do
you have those numbers?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I don't believe I have them handy, but they
are, we can get them, and we will get them to you soon.
Mr. PRICE. I would appreciate that. One, there is a
hospital system in my area where 72 percent are overturned. 72
percent. So I would urge you to look at your testimony that
says when you are however 40 percent or thereabouts, something
is wrong, something is wrong with the system.
I want to revisit that in a minute, but I want to touch on
the Two Midnight Rule. When does--when a patient presents to
the emergency room and is being admitted, when does the
physician--when is there a physician that has to sign that says
that this admission is medically necessary?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. That says the admission is medically
necessary?
Mr. PRICE. And would qualify for the inpatient, for the Two
Midnight?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. The physician can give the order--or other
qualified professional can give the order verbally but has to
countersign it at some point. It doesn't----
Mr. PRICE. But the order has to be given at the time of the
admission?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes. For a patient to become officially an
inpatient, a physician or other qualified personnel has to give
an order.
Mr. PRICE. So we are asking our doctors to predict what is
going to happen to that patient over the next two midnights; is
that right?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. It is based on a physician, the Two Midnight
Rule is based on a physician's expectation, which this is
expectation based on what they know at that time, and if a
physician's expectation isn't fulfilled, meaning if the patient
recovers or something else intervenes, the rule is not what
happened but what the physician reasonably expected.
Mr. PRICE. Wouldn't we be better off if we said that
doctors and patients and families ought to be making these
decisions and not CMS?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well, again, CMS, we are trying to leave it
largely at to a doctor's discretion, but we are also, as I said
in my opening statement, we are trying to balance many goals
here.
Mr. PRICE. No, I got you. I got you. But many physicians
out there will tell you that they don't feel that you are
trying to allow them to practice medicine. Are there clinical
studies or reports that back up the Two Midnight Rule?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am not sure I understand the question,
sir.
Mr. PRICE. Are there any clinical studies, scientists that
have done studies, and say, yeah, this Two Midnight Rule makes
sense from the patient's perspective and being treated?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Again, we crafted the rule----
Mr. PRICE. Is there any clinical studies?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. The Two Midnight Rule is relatively new. I
am not aware of any studies of it at this time.
Mr. PRICE. If you are, I would love to hear about it
because I am not aware of any either. CMS contracts with these
recovery audit groups to go get that money, right?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. CMS contracts with recovery auditors to
review improper----
Mr. PRICE. And you pay them a percent.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. A contingency fee, yes.
Mr. PRICE. And when they--when an appeal is overturned, do
you go get that money back?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, we do.
Mr. PRICE. From the RAC. How much is that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am sorry?
Mr. PRICE. How much money is that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. In total or any individual case?
Mr. PRICE. Total.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I would be happy to go back and find that
number. I don't know it off the top of my head.
Mr. PRICE. Good. Okay, can different RACs have different
criteria for what's medically necessary?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. They are all supposed to tie to Medicare
policy.
Mr. PRICE. And what is the clinical input that RACs are
required to have to define what is medically necessary?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. If you mean, the RACs are required to have a
medical director who is supervising all of their medical
policies.
Mr. PRICE. And do medical specialty societies have an
opportunity to review all of that?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Of the work of the RACs?
Mr. PRICE. Yes.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Not directly, sir.
Mr. PRICE. All of this money that is used to comply with
all of these rules and regulations cost money, doesn't it? The
hospitals, it costs money?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Yes, sir.
Mr. PRICE. Millions of dollars, maybe more. Where does that
money come from?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Well, Congressman, I think you are getting
at a point that I would concede right away, which is our goal
is not to have a lot of these cases reviewed, not to have a lot
of cases overturned. Our goal is to have clear policies that
hospitals agree with and can comply with.
Mr. PRICE. Comes from patient care though, right? Doesn't
it? If the hospital has to put that money into complying with
the rules from CMS that get more and more laborious, then that
money is not going into caring for that patient, so when we
hear one of our colleagues here say this really isn't affecting
the patient, that is really not true, is it?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. It is not a productive use of money, and it
is why we are trying to reduce the need for this type of
review.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you very much.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel.
Mr. Cavanaugh, Mr. McDermott asked you a question about--
talked a little about three people entering the hospital, and I
just was interested in a response. You said, ``I would hope
that the patient receives all the benefits they are entitled
to.'' I want you to keep that in mind when we go through a
couple of questions I have for you.
Due to the increase in the length of observation days, more
and more Medicare beneficiaries are losing out on skilled
nursing coverage. The OIG found beneficiaries had over 600,000
hospital stays that lasted three nights or more but did not
qualify them for SNF services, skilled nursing facility
services.
I have spent the majority of my career, almost 25 years in
the long-term care industry. I recognized the barrier to access
that the current 3-day inpatient requirement has created for
our seniors. For this reason, I have actually introduced
legislation, H.R. 3531, the CARES Act that not only removes
this barrier but also encourages hospitals and nursing
facilities to communicate with each other before discharge.
Mr. Cavanaugh, the seniors in my district are often unaware
of the 3-day inpatient requirement, and furthermore, seniors
and their caregivers are unaware whether or not their hospital
stays was billed as inpatient or observation. So I want you to
think about that patient that enters the hospital, and they are
entitled to long-term care under Medicare, and they end up in
this quagmire of in observation day, not an inpatient day, and
quite frankly, they probably could go directly to a nursing
home in many cases because the doctor is only sending them to
the hospital because that is a requirement, and it is actually
costing the Medicare system dollars to send them through to
that hospital just to get them the path to that nursing home.
So, if you think about that patient, and again, going back
to your comment, ``I would hope the patient receives all the
benefits they are entitled to,'' you send the, we send this
patient into a hospital because it is a requirement, they go
through 3 days, they have to, you know, to get to the nursing
home. The doctor already says they belong in a nursing home.
Again, I was in the industry for 25 years. I can tell you these
patients belong in that nursing home, and they get caught up in
this observation day, but here is the problem. Then they are
sent to the nursing home, and when they are sent to the nursing
home, for 2,000 of the hospital stays, Medicare did not pay for
NSF services, and the beneficiary was charged an average of
$11,000.
So now we have this patient who started in the hospital,
ended up in observation day, probably should have never went in
the hospital if we had a different system that actually my bill
would allow, lets them go directly into the nursing home
because the doctor says that is the care that is needed.
So, has CMS implemented any policies that would really
decrease the instances in which seniors, and again, that is
what I am talking about, that person you talked about, the
benefits that they are entitled, where there were seniors who
were caught off guard and left off on the hook for thousands of
dollars in medical bills.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Congressman, I think you raise a very
important issue and one that was one of the driving factors to
us looking at the Two Midnight Rule. I tell you two things.
One, one of the impacts we are seeing, at least preliminarily
of the effect of the Two Midnight Rule, is we are seeing a
decrease in these long observation stays, and I believe those
are probably shifts to inpatient status so potentially helping
the beneficiaries you are talking about, but you are also
talking about a larger issue of whether these patients need to
go through the hospital in order to--or should need to go
through the hospital in order to access the skilled nursing
facility benefit and as I mentioned to an earlier question, we
are interested in exploring alternatives to that, too.
We currently have a subset of the pioneer ACOs, several of
whom have had the 3-day hospitalization rule waived so they can
test whether there are safe and effective ways for patients to
be admitted to the SNF without the prior hospitalization, and
we are, this year, also allowing some of the participants, both
hospitals and post-acute care providers to do that as well in
our bundled payment initiative. So we are hoping we will gain
clinical and financial evaluation results from that, that we
can share with this committee and maybe apply to broader
Medicare policy.
Mr. RENACCI. You would then agree--it sounds like these
studies will give us some of those answers, but you would agree
sending somebody to the hospital and having the cost, the
burden of that person in that hospital when it really could go
to a nursing home might be a way of saving some dollars if we
sent them directly to the nursing home?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. We do feel there is potential there, but
again, we are testing it, and I don't want to prejudge the
results of these tests.
Mr. RENACCI. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Crowley.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Chairman Brady and Ranking Member McDermott for
allowing me to join with you all at this hearing today.
And welcome, Mr. Cavanaugh. Good to have you here. I know I
speak for all my colleagues when I say we look forward to
working with you in your new capacity, new role at CMS.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Thank you.
Mr. CROWLEY. So, I represent parts of New York City, Queens
and the Bronx. I know you are familiar with those areas quite
well. We are fortunate to have a number of highly regarded
hospitals and medical institutions, many of which are also
academic medical centers, and I know you are familiar with all
those as well.
These hospitals and others across the country are
struggling with the implementation of the Two Midnight Rule,
and while I appreciate CMS' efforts to try and clarify when the
patient should be admitted as an inpatient, I have serious
concerns about the overall policy. Our New York hospitals
focused primarily on providing the best medical treatment with
great efficiency rather than on what time the patient is
admitted. The Two Midnight Policy sets an arbitrary standard
that does not always reflect the clinical judgment of the
treating physician.
Several months ago, Representative Gerlach and I introduced
legislation to delay the enforcement of the Two Midnight
Policy. I am glad that this delay was included in the most
recent doctor's payment fix, and I thank the committee for all
of its work in achieving that delay. But the problems with the
underlying rule remain, and they need to be addressed. That is
why our bill also orders the CMS to implement a new payment
methodology for short inpatient stays that don't fit neatly
into the divides of the Two Midnight Policy.
I was very pleased to see that CMS' proposed Medicare
inpatient rule for next fiscal year includes requests for
feedback on establishing a short stay inpatient methodology,
which could help both providers and beneficiaries. I hope that
CMS will continue to work closely with hospitals and patients
in establishing this process and in taking into account the
costs associated with operating, teaching, and safety in our
hospitals. It is important a new payment system protect
graduate medical education and disproportionate share hospital
payments.
Now, I know the rulemaking process is under way, but can
you comment at all on how you see this issue being addressed as
you move forward, if there are any possible methods you have
considered and are willing to consider?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
your kind words. I do know New York and the hospital industry
there quite well, having worked there, and in one hospital and
closely with many of the others.
You are correct. First of all, you are correct that
Congress extended, and based on your legislation, the pause in
the RAC review of medical necessity of inpatient stays until
March of next year. I think that does give us all, both
Congress and the administration, some time to think about how
the policy is working and whether there are additional steps
that are needed to make a clearer payment policy that we can
all agree on.
One of those areas that we are going to spend a significant
amount of time and resources on is exploring the possibility of
a short stay outlier. I don't want to prejudge how we would do
this because we are soliciting public input, but as I have said
in response to several other questions, it is an intriguing
idea, but it also poses, you know, real conceptual challenges.
We are up to those challenges, but I don't want to under
estimate them.
One of the things I would point out is, if it is going to
be an inpatient short stay thing, we are still going to need a
definition of when inpatient care is necessary because you will
still have a distinction between inpatient and outpatient. We
are going to have the challenge of how do you create short stay
payment when certain DRGs are already very short stay. But I
know, as I said, there is some very great minds up in the New
York hospital industry that I know are working on this, and
they have been in touch with us, we have been in touch with the
other association, so we eagerly await their input.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Cavanaugh. I look forward to
continuing to work with you in your new capacity, and I hope
that you have that same open mind approach when you are dealing
with the committee and the chairman and the ranking member as
well, so thank you for being here today.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. Thank you, sir.
Chairman BRADY. Thanks. Mrs. Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for allowing a non-committee member to be here to listen to the
testimony and have an opportunity to be able to ask a question.
Ms. Nudelman, in your written testimony, you talk about
some hospitals use a short stay inpatient for less than 10
percent, excuse me, of their stays and others use it over 70
percent. Did you find any tends when you were looking at these
vast differences between how hospitals use these and whether
there is any type of hospital, in particular, that uses them
differently?
Ms. NUDELMAN. Thank you for your question. As you know, we
did see a lot of variation, but we did not look at whether
there are certain types of hospitals that are more likely to
use short inpatient stays. If the trend continues under the new
policy, you know, this is a really important question to look
into further.
Mrs. BLACK. I certainly think that, that is one that would
give us a lot of information because if you are using it for
certain types of hospitals is it cardiac hospitals, were they
looking at orthopedic, I think it would be very interesting to
take a look at the wide variance that is there between 10 and
70 percent.
And let me go to another area that seems to be a lot of
variance, and that is, in your testimony on page number 5
underneath of the appeals, you note that about 72 percent of
those who appeal are successful and yet we keep on hearing this
number of 7 percent. There is a real disparity there. Can you
break that down? There is something else there that we are not
exactly understanding.
Ms. NUDELMAN. Sure. Let me try to do that. I think what we
are seeing is there is about six, most of the appeals from RACs
are not appeals. Most of the RAC decisions are not appealed, so
according to our statistics, about 6 percent of the RAC
decisions are appealed. Now, once those are reached higher
levels, about half of those are overturned, so that maybe can
help reconcile some of those issues.
Where the 72 percent comes into play is when we looked at
the third level of appeals, the ALJ level, they overturn about
72 percent of hospital claims. That would include both RACs,
that would include other issues than just the inpatient.
Mrs. BLACK. So, just to be clear.
Ms. NUDELMAN. Sure.
Mrs. BLACK. About 7 percent, 6 or 7 percent, depending upon
who is talking about that number, but somewhere in that range
of those decisions that are made by RACs are appealed, and of
those that are appealed, in this case of Part A hospitals, 72
percent of those prevail, correct?
Ms. NUDELMAN. Overturn.
Mrs. BLACK. Overturn.
Ms. NUDELMAN. At the ALJ level.
Mrs. BLACK. ALJ level. Okay. Well, that makes a lot more
sense because there is a lot of disparity between 6 percent and
70 percent, and so that helps me to understand a little bit
better about where those numbers are coming from. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mrs. Black.
I am now confused about the appeal process. Can I, I don't
mean to intervene here for a minute before I go to Ms. Jenkins.
But, so 94 percent of the claims identified as overpayments on
appeal, 6 percent left half, almost half are decided in favor
of the appeal, is that right? So the over payments, 97 percent
of them, at the end of the day, are considered accurate.
Ms. NUDELMAN. Just repeat that last part of your sentence.
I just didn't hear that.
Chairman BRADY. Of the RAC decisions on claims identified
as overpayments, 94 percent aren't appealed. Of the 6 percent
that are left, half are overturned, so----
Ms. NUDELMAN. That is according to our numbers.
Chairman BRADY [continuing]. You are saying 97 percent of
those overpayments are upheld?
Ms. NUDELMAN. Yes.
Chairman BRADY. Half of 6, 3, 94.
Ms. NUDELMAN. Yeah. And that is prior to the surge, and
that is in fiscal years 2010 and 2011, so that could also be
part of the issue.
Chairman BRADY. Is there a dollar figure attached to that?
For example, you may not appeal a $10 overpayment but you would
a $10,000 one. Does your analysis show of those that were
appealed a higher dollar value of those?
Again, Mrs. Black, I don't mean to jump, but you were
leading down the right road. What do you know about that?
Ms. NUDELMAN. I don't have the dollar values in terms of
what is appealed in terms of dollar amounts.
Chairman BRADY. Can you try to figure that out?
Ms. NUDELMAN. We can.
Chairman BRADY. Give us a little more texture about----
Ms. NUDELMAN. Absolutely.
Chairman BRADY. Of that 6 percent, what do they look like,
you know, and are the higher dollar values, are they in a
certain area. And then 72 percent, tell me about that?
Mrs. BLACK. That is of the hospitals, the Part A hospitals
are 72 percent. So, according to what I am reading here, at the
ALJ level, appellants were most likely to receive favorable
decisions for Part A hospital appeals at 72 percent.
And if I may, Mr. Chairman, just interject one other thing
that I thought about that I keep hearing from these hospitals.
Is the length of time it takes them to go from the original
decision that is made by the RACs, to the time that they reach
the ALJ level, can you give us an idea about how much time
period there is in that typically?
Ms. NUDELMAN. Sure. I mean, particularly now with the
postponement of assigning appeals, which the--Omaha just put
into place, and they are projecting just from what is publicly
available that cases will not be assigned for at least 2 years,
so that is pretty significant.
Mrs. BLACK. So there is a cost to the facility in that time
period where they are trying to appeal it and the payments,
they have been taken back, so thank you very much.
Chairman BRADY. No agreements, so Mrs. Black, thank you.
And Ms. Jenkins, you probably never thought we would get to
you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I just thank you for
allowing me to join you at today's subcommittee hearing, and I
appreciate this panel for being here.
These issues affect hospitals all over the country, and I
have heard countless stories from Kansas hospitals, about the
difficulties they face surrounding the Medicare program.
Lawrence Memorial Hospital in Lawrence, Kansas has asked that I
share their perspective on recovery audit contractors.
The hospital currently has $4.7 million being withheld
because of RAC audits. It has appealed nearly all RAC audits,
and so far has demonstrated a 96 percent success rate in the
appeals process. So, Lawrence Memorial has brought to my
attention what is a valid concern that I am hoping you will
take into consideration. The hospitals are forced to disallow
Medicare days and discharges that are currently held up in the
RAC audit process because of the massive backlog at the ALJ
level of appeal, and the hospital is concerned that these
audits, which are likely to be resolved in their favor, will
not be completed within the 3-year window during which it can
reopen a cost report window and count towards their meaningful
use requirements. This is just one of countless hospitals in
Kansas that is experiencing the immediate and similarly effects
of the current flawed system.
As we continue to discuss a way forward on this topic,
please take this problem into account. Secondly, I would like
to highlight a program with the 83 critical access hospitals in
Kansas and others around the country and what they are
experiencing. I received a letter from the Anderson County
Hospital in Garnett, Kansas, and I would ask that chairman's
consent to insert the letter into the record.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
[The information follows: The Honorable Diane Black]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. JENKINS. This letter details the hospital's problem
with CMS' final OPPS rule for 2014 regarding outpatient
therapeutic services at critical access hospitals and supports
legislation that I have introduced to delay enforcement of the
rule until the end of 2014. This rule, while well intentioned,
is creating a regulatory hardship in rule setting. So the
letter notes that CMS has disallowed physicians at a hospital
based rural health clinic from meeting the direct supervision
requirements, which makes it very difficult for Anderson County
Hospital to be reimbursed by Medicare for services rendered.
The most troubling part of the letter is that the hospital
notes, that the physician supervision requirements have no
impact on the quality of care and that the hospital will
administer the outpatient therapy even without the Medicare
reimbursement. This is a tale-tell sign of a misguided rule
that has missed the point.
So, Mr. Cavanaugh, is it your opinion that requirements on
physician's supervision of outpatient therapy services at
critical access hospitals are feasible and would CMS benefit
from a delay in enforcement in order to revisit this rule?
Mr. CAVANAUGH. First of all, thank you for telling us about
the experience of these two hospitals.
I don't have an opinion on the delay, but I am interested
in the issue, and I am happy to look into it further outside of
this hearing if you are willing to share that experience with
me.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. We will follow up with you and would
like to work with you to give these folks some relief and
better care for Kansans.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. I am more than happy to look further into
it.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Ms. Jenkins.
And before we dismiss the witnesses, Dr. McDermott and I
would love to have both of you give us more perspective by
letter of the 6 percent that are appealed for overpayments, the
value of them relative to the other base of them, which are
related to the two payment, Two Midnights Rule, any other
insight you can give us on those. The numbers seem very low
compared to what we have heard anecdotally, and we really would
like to have more light shined on those areas if you don't
mind. We'll follow up with you by letter, but we would love to
have, I think the members would love to have that perspective.
Mr. CAVANAUGH. We would be happy to do that.
[The information follows: The Honorable Lynn Jenkins]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. With that, thank you very much, both of
you, for testifying, and let's line up for a second panel.
Thank you very much. I made the introductions earlier, so
we will, for the sake of time, go right into testimony.
Ms. Deutschendorf, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and
welcome to all the second panel.

STATEMENT OF AMY DEUTSCHENDORF, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF CLINICAL
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, JOHNS HOPKINS HOSPITAL AND HEALTH SYSTEM

Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member
McDermott, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank
you so much for this opportunity to testify today and share the
Johns Hopkins experience on these important issues affecting
hospitals in the Medicare program.
I am Amy Deutschendorf. I am a nurse. I am responsible for
assuring the appropriate utilization of clinical resources for
our patients in the right care setting, and that includes care
coordination in the readmissions reductions initiative. My
remarks today focus on two major changes, the CMS definition of
an inpatient the Two Midnight Rule, and also the agency's
recovery audit contractor program, both of which are draining
precious hospital resources which need to be redirected to
quality patient care delivery.
We know that the Two Midnight Rule was spawned out of an
attempt to limit lengthy observation stays and add clarity to
the definition of an inpatient, but unfortunately, the rule
adds a new layer of complexity that not only does not meet that
CMS objective but has created confusion and stress for our
providers and our patients and has been operationally extremely
difficult to implement.
Our observation rate has increased by 33 percent as a
result of the Two Midnight Rule. It has taken away physician
judgment in the determination of hospitalization as an
inpatient and has instead required our physicians to become
soothsayers as they try to project whether or not a patient who
presents to the emergency department with a myriad of symptoms
and comorbidities and determine if they are going to require a
greater than a Two Midnight stay.
More importantly, under the Two Midnight Rule, we have
patients who require the services that only a hospital can
provide, sometimes in the intensive care setting, yet we are
calling them outpatients in this new world. This concept belies
any rationality and has created safety and quality of care
concerns.
Medicare patients are being billed differently than other
patients for equivalent services. They are subject to paying
deductibles and copays associated with Part A benefits which
could be up to 20 percent of their hospitalization. They think
they are coming in for hospital care and their Part A benefit
covers that. We have had patients who have actually left and
refused important diagnostic studies and medications as a
result of increased financial risk.
The Two Midnight Rule is especially devastating for
academic and safety net hospitals. There has been a reduction
in inpatient volumes as a result of the Two Midnight Policy
which has redirected dollars for necessary hospital care to the
outpatient system, causing a loss of payments for critical
community programs, indirect medical education, general medical
education, and disproportionate share payments at a time we
need them the most.
Since its inception, RAC has created enormous financial and
administrative burden on hospitals as we struggle to respond to
the plethora of medical record requests and to the denials and
mount appeal processes. RAC has targeted short stays, again,
the assumption that these stays are medically unnecessary. In
truth, short hospital stays are good and reflect the efficient
and appropriate management of care, some of which can be very
intensive.
Even though Hopkins has a rigorous compliance process for
which we review every day of every single Medicare patient stay
for medical necessity, RAC denied 50 percent of the medical
records that were requested. We took 239 of these to discussion
and immediately 135, almost 60 percent, were overturned at
discussion even before the first level of appeal. The rest of
our 92 percent are in the appeal process.
The RAC program is costing American hospital millions of
dollars in the administrative burden to manage the RAC
requests, denials, and appeals processes, as well as the
financial hit for revenue losses for care that was provided to
patients.
There are a lot of smart and committed legislators and
policymakers who have put their heads around these issues to
come up with solutions that are workable. Unfortunately, with
each iteration and layer of new ideas come complexities and
unintended consequences that seem to yield the opposite result.
In the case of the Two Midnight Rule, Congress and CMS should
consider reverting to an earlier time, that before October 1st,
2013, and should reinstate the determination of inpatient
hospitalization based on physician judgment with one caveat,
the patients who are hospitalized for greater than two
midnights for medical necessity and medically necessary
hospital services should be presumed to be inpatients. If we
are thoughtful about RAC reform, the short stay problem goes
away and alternative short stay payment policies become
unnecessary.
Congress should consider the formation of a multi-
stakeholder collaborative working group to develop a sound
alternative to the current Medicare audit program. We
appreciate Congressman Gerlach's and Congressman Crowley's
leadership as the lead sponsors of H.R. 3698 and Chairman
Brady, thank you for your attention to this issue and holding a
hearing on it. Having nearly half the members of this committee
support this needed reform sends an important message to your
hospitals and to CMS that this issue must be addressed.
The Two Midnight Rule and the RAC program are draining
precious time, resources, and attention that need to be more
effectively focused on patient care. Johns Hopkins and
hospitals around the country stand ready to work with Congress
and CMS to support these efforts.
Thank you so much for allowing me to testify.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Deutschendorf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Evans.

STATEMENT OF ELLEN EVANS, MD, CORPORATE MEDICAL DIRECTOR,
HEALTHDATAINSIGHTS

Dr. EVANS. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member Dr. McDermott,
Members of the Committee, thank you very much for this
opportunity to testify before you today.
I am Dr. Ellen Evans, lead physician with
HealthDataInsights, the Region D CMS recovery auditor. I am a
proud graduate of the University of Texas Medical School,
residency trained, board certified licensed family physician,
with a certificate of added qualifications in geriatric
medicine. I joined HDI during the RAC demonstration program. At
HDI, I oversee all of our medical and clinical recovery audit
activities.
The recovery audit program is not focused on fraudulent
payments. We review claims to ensure compliance with Medicare
practices and also identify underpayments that are returned to
the providers. This program is a critical component of Medicare
operations because over $30 billion are improperly paid by
Medicare every year. Since the recovery audit program was
passed and implemented in a bipartisan fashion in 2006, over 8
billion improperly paid Medicare dollars have been recovered,
as well as over $700 million in underpayments returned to
providers.
Recovery auditors identify the types of claims that are
most at risk of improper payment by employing vast auditor
experience and using Federal publications such as HHS, OIG,
GAO, and CERT reports. Every issue a recovery auditor seeks to
review is submitted first to CMS for a rigorous evaluation and
approval process. Issues that are approved are posted to the
recovery auditor's provider portal in advance of any activity.
CMS has limited the recovery audit medical record request
to 2 percent of Medicare claims for any given provider. All
medical reviews are conducted by licensed and experienced
clinicians who undergo extensive screening and comprehensive
training. When a provider disagrees with an audit finding, the
provider can initiate a discussion period before formally
appealing the denial. This is in addition to the usual CMS
appeals process.
Though the program has proven to be cost effective, recent
constraints have caused a significant decrease in recovery
audit reviews. First, as part of the implementation of the Two
Midnight Rule, a moratorium was placed on recovery auditors
preventing auditing of short stay hospitals for 18 months.
Second, CMS announced the program would be suspended until new
contracts are in place. The award date is currently unknown.
These two changes will result in over $5 billion of improper
payments not being restored to the Medicare trust fund.
Now, let me provide you some facts about the program.
First, a recovery auditor is required to return all of its fee
when a refinding is reversed upon any level of provider appeal.
This means recovery auditors are incentivized to work
accurately and precisely. Second, according to the most recent
CMS report to Congress, only 7 percent of all recovery audit
determinations have been overturned on appeal. Third, recovery
auditors are accurate. An independent CMS validation contractor
gave recovery auditors a cumulative accuracy score of over 95
percent. Finally, recovery auditors target improperly paid
claims of all types, yet Medicare data has noted consistent
high dollar errors for inpatient short stays.
Based on this data, it is imperative to the longevity of
the Medicare trust fund to correct inpatient short stays. That
being said, we understand the frustration expressed by the
hospital community surrounding the Two Midnight Rule. We want
to work with CMS and the providers to bring clarity to the
rules. As the committee moves forward on this important issue,
I offer the following recommendations for the program.
First, we support the ALJ appeal reforms outlined in the
November 2012 HHS Office of the Inspector General report.
Second, we support continued effort by CMS to offer providers
front end education to increase provider knowledge of Medicare
policies, and lastly, we support increased dialogue among
recovery auditors, providers, policymakers, to improve the
direction of the program. We are pleased to be a part of the
dialogue today.
The recovery audit program must continue to play a role in
the Medicare program, especially in light of the recent
increases in an improper payment rate. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you all today and would be pleased
to answer any questions that you may have.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Evans follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Dr. Sheehy.

STATEMENT OF ANN SHEEHY, MD, MEMBER, PUBLIC POLICY COMMITTEE,
SOCIETY OF HOSPITAL MEDICINE

Dr. SHEEHY. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member McDermott, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on observation status, the Two Midnight Rule, and
related issues.
My name is Ann Sheehy. I am a physician at the University
of Wisconsin Hospital in Madison, Wisconsin. I am a
hospitalist, which is a physician who cares for patients
primarily in an acute care hospital setting. I am also a member
of the public policy committee of the Society of Hospital
Medicine, an association that represents the Nation's more than
44,000 hospitalists.
Observation care is often provided in the same hospital
beds as inpatient care, and to a physician and a patient, the
care provider is indistinguishable but is considered outpatient
not covered by Medicare Part A. Many Medicare beneficiaries ask
how they could be outpatients when they are staying overnight
in a hospital. Many ask me to change them to inpatient, which
is something I cannot do under current policy. The centers for
Medicare and Medicaid services describes observation as a well
defined set of services that should last less than 24 hours,
and in only rare and exceptional cases, spend more than 48
hours.
We published our University of Wisconsin Hospital data in
JAMA Internal Medicine last summer. The average observation
length of stay at our hospital was 33 hours, and almost 1 in 6
of our observation patients lasted longer than 48 hours. We
also had 1,141 distinct observation codes. We concluded that
observation status for hospitalized patients was markedly
different from the CMS definition I just stated as mean length
of stay was longer than 24 hours, observation stays beyond 48
hours were common, and the number of diagnoses codes showed
that this was not well defined.
These numbers demonstrate that observation care in real
clinical practice is vastly different than how CMS intended
observation to be. Any attempt to reform observation policy
must recognize how far observation status has strayed from what
observation should truly mean, and this problem is getting
worse with more beneficiaries disadvantaged by observation. The
most recent MedPAC report documented 28.5 percent increase in
outpatient services from 2006 to 2012 with a 12.6 decrease in
inpatient discharges over the same time period.
As the committee is aware, CMS recently established a new
policy to determine observation and inpatient status. As of
October 1, patients staying less than two midnights with some
exceptions were to be observation, and those two or more
midnights would be inpatient, although full enforcement has
been delayed through March 31st of 2015.
The Two Midnight Rule has presented new challenges in
observation care. For example, a Medicare beneficiary may be
hospitalized with pneumonia and is improved enough to leave the
hospital after 40 hours of care. If that patient happens to get
sick and present to our hospital Tuesday at 1:00 a.m., this
means I would discharge them at 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday, a one
midnight stay, but if the same patient becomes ill at 10:00
p.m. on Tuesday and needs the exact same 40 hours of care, I
would discharge him at 2:00 p.m. on Thursday, a two midnight
stay. Thus the time a patient gets sick, not different clinical
needs, may determine the patient's hospital status and
insurance benefits.
This is not just a theoretical finding. In a second JAMA
Internal Medicine publication last year, we found that almost
half of our University of Wisconsin Hospital less than two
midnight encounters would have been assigned observation status
instead of inpatient by virtue of time of day of presentation.
Clinically, the Two Midnight Rule hurts the new population
of patients, those staying less than two midnights. As an
example, a patient with diabetic ketoacidosis may be sick
enough to require intensive care unit admission and an
extraordinary amount of services that can be lifesaving,
certainly a level of care that cannot be delivered safely as an
outpatient. Yet these patients can improve quickly, sometimes
in 24 to 48 hours. Now a short stay, even in the intensive care
unit, can be considered outpatient.
The RAC program was well-intentioned, and Medicare fraud
and abuse cannot be tolerated, yet we need more transparency
and oversight of Medicare's current auditing programs. The
reality is the RAC program costs all of us. In a recent 1-year
period at the University of Wisconsin Hospital from October of
2012 to September of 2013, we appealed 92 percent of RAC audits
for medical necessity, and we have won every single appeal that
has been cited as of May 14 of 2014, which is already two-
thirds of these cases.
Essentially, our hospital pays to repair these cases in
order to prove we were right the first time, but the RAC pays
no penalty for generating this work. These are Medicare dollars
that hospitals spend not on direct Medicare beneficiary care,
but on a process of defending themselves against RAC auditors.
In addition, the Federal Government ultimately pays for
unchecked RAC activity in the appeals process as evidenced by
the current OMHA case backlog. The RAC system generates a large
number of these payment denials at no consequence to the RACs
but at a direct cost to the Federal Government.
To again consider the patient with diabetic ketoacidosis
needing intensive care for less than two midnights, why would I
not just claim inpatient status? Because this case is counter
to the current observation rule of two midnights and is highly
vulnerable to audit. This means an auditor who never met the
patient in question, a year or more after the patient
discharges home, may decide to question my judgment as a
physician and audit. Provider autonomy and ability to do what
is right can be trumped by the RAC system.
In conclusion, observation status certainly merits reform
and the Two Midnight Rule is not the answer. The Two Midnight
Rule and observation status in general negatively impacts the
delivery of good patient care. We need common sense solutions
that most importantly consider the original intent of
observation policy. I would caution, however, that observation
reform will not be successful unless there is concrete reform
of the Federal auditing programs that enforce observation
rules. The Society of Hospital Medicine looks forward to
working with the committee on identifying workable solutions to
problems associated with observation care and the Two Midnight
Rule.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sheehy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Edelman.

STATEMENT OF TOBY S. EDELMAN, SENIOR POLICY ATTORNEY, CENTER
FOR MEDICARE ADVOCACY, INC.

Ms. EDELMAN. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, my
name is Toby Edelman. I am a senior policy attorney with the
Washington, D.C. office of the Center for Medicare Advocacy.
The center is a not-for-profit, nonpartisan public interest law
firm based in Connecticut that provides education advocacy and
legal assistance to Medicare beneficiaries.
We are very pleased to be invited to testify today about
the impact on Medicare patients of outpatient status and
observation status. Six years ago, a woman called our office
with a Medicare problem. She had spent some time in the skilled
nursing facility, but the facility told her that Medicare Part
A would not pay for her stay because she had not been an
inpatient in an acute care hospital for 3 days. She asked how
that could possibly be true, after all she had been in the
hospital for 13 days. It turned out that the hospital had
called her an outpatient for all 13 days.
The Wisconsin woman had no way of knowing she was an
outpatient in observation status. She was in a bed in the
hospital for 13 nights, she had diagnostics tests, received
physician and nursing care, medications, treatment, food, a
wristband. Her care was indistinguishable from the medically
necessary care she would have received if she had been formally
admitted as an inpatient.
As in most hospitals, she was intermingled with inpatient,
so even the physicians and nurses providing care to her didn't
know whether she was an inpatient or an outpatient, and the
hospital was not required by CMS rules to inform her that she
was an outpatient or the consequences of that status. But
solely because she was called an outpatient in observation
status, Medicare Part A did not pay for her post-hospital care.
Medicare limits payments to SNFs who are hospital patients, who
are called inpatients for 3 consecutive days, not counting the
day of discharge, what we call the Three Midnight Rule.
In the past 6 years, the center has spoken with literally
hundreds of families from all over the country with similar
experiences. It is a very rare day that goes by that we don't
hear from at least one person and usually more. I would like to
describe the more recent case and the consequences. A 90-year
old man living at home with his wife had a fall. He went to the
urgent care center and the physician there advised him to
immediately go to the hospital because of a hematoma on his
leg, was growing rapidly. The daughter who called me told me
that as her father was being wheeled into the operating room,
the hematoma burst. He had emergency surgery to evacuate the
hematoma and remained in the hospital for four midnights, all
outpatient. From the hospital, he went to the skilled nursing
facility for rehabilitation, stayed for 18 days, and went home.
If the man had been formally admitted to the hospital as an
inpatient, Medicare Part A would have paid the entire bill for
his 18-day stay. Medicare Part A payment is comprehensive and
pays for room and board, nursing care therapy, drugs,
everything that the patient needs during that stay. Medicare
pays 100 percent of the cost for the first 20 days in the SNF,
and beginning on Day 21, the resident pays the copayment, up to
100-day maximum number of days in the benefit period, but
because her father that been called an outpatient during his
entire four day stay, Medicare did not pay, Medicare Part A did
not pay. The man had to pay out of pocket the SNF charges. For
room and board, the charges were 4,573 days, $73 for the 18-day
stay. In addition, he had to pay Medicare Part B copayments for
all of the therapy he received daily, and he had to pay for his
prescription drugs.
An administrative law judge found that the man's primary
care physician supported an inpatient admission, and she also
found that he had not been informed of his outpatient status;
nevertheless, she upheld denial of Part A payment for his SNF
stay solely because he was, as she described him, hospitalized
as an outpatient. Obviously, from the perspective of patients
and their families, what is happening makes no sense. When
patients need to be in the hospital for the diagnosis and
treatment of acute care conditions and when they are getting
medically necessary care they need in the hospital for multiple
days and nights, they do not understand why they are called
outpatients and why their care in the SNF will not be covered.
You have heard from physicians and hospitals this morning
about why calling hospitalized patients outpatients is causing
hardship for them, and some of the issues that we have been
discussing this morning are very complex, but the solution for
Medicare patients is simple and straightforward. H.R. 1179
counts all the time in the hospital for purposes of satisfying
the Three Midnight Rule. As of last week, there were 144
cosponsors. There is a companion bill in the Senate, and the
bills are bipartisan.
The legislation is supported by a broad ad hoc coalition of
30 organizations, and I have attached our comment fact sheet to
the end of my testimony with all of our logos on top.
We urge the committee to quickly move on this legislation
as you consider these other far more complicated issues.
Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thanks, Ms. Edelman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edelman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you all for your testimony.
Ms. Deutschendorf and Dr. Sheehy, do you think RACs
disproportionately target high value inpatient claims?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. Yes.
Dr. SHEEHY. Yes.
Chairman BRADY. In the appeals of those, could you give us
what you think is the true cost of appeal. My assumption is,
high value claims are more complex, there is more of the files
reviewed. You are obviously bringing in medical professionals
as well as appeals processing. In a case like that for a
hospital, what is the true cost of that appeal roughly? I am
sure it varies, but----
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. So we actually when RAC was proposed
several years ago as a permanent part of the program, we
actually went through a process to estimate the cost of an
individual appeal. You have to add into that, all of the costs
associated with the medical record requests, the issues in
terms of loading this into software because of the mountain,
and for a hospital like Hopkins it could be 600.
And then you have got 50 percent of those that may be
denied, so then the tracking and everything that goes along
with that. So there is all of that prior work, then there is
the estimation of time it is for our nurses to review the
cases, our physicians to review the cases.
Chairman BRADY. What do you think that cost is overall?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. So we estimated it was about $2,000 an
appeal at the first and second level, but then when you get up
to the ALJ level that requires another add on because you need
attorney support with that as well as physician advisor support
during that time.
Chairman BRADY. What do you think that cost is?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. I could probably get back to you, but I
would say it is a couple of thousand dollars per, at the ALJ
level.
Chairman BRADY. In addition?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. In addition.
Chairman BRADY. After the first two steps; and the third
step?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. We as a health system spent about $4
million just gearing up for the RAC process to add on the
additional personnel it would take to manage that process.
Chairman BRADY. Is that compliance and appeal?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. Compliance, appeals and medical records
and just managing and tracking the whole process as well as
software.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Dr. Sheehy, do you have an estimate on the cost of an
appeal on a high value claim.
Dr. SHEEHY. Yeah. I don't have an estimate on a single
appeal, but I can say the resources our hospital puts forth in
the whole auditing process, we have multiple nurse case
managers that their entire job is to determine status and
assist physicians in helping to determine the proper status.
Once an appeal is made, we have a team of lawyers, our CMO,
two utilization review physicians, and multiple other nurse
case managers staff, whose job is to fight the appeals process,
so anyone looking at those numbers of staff can calculate that
this is a costly endeavor to our hospital.
Chairman BRADY. Okay. Did both of you hear Mr. Cavanaugh
describe one solution as short stay outlier approach? Do you
have a view on whether that helps, hurts, doesn't solve the
problem?
Dr. SHEEHY. I think you know, we have been talking about
different solutions, and obviously I think CMS did intend the
Two Midnight Rule to fix a problem in observation status. They
recognized there were issues with the current observation
policy. I think now we have seen the Two Midnight Rule also has
issues, and we would hope that the there would be more
consideration of policies going forward, thinking about the
true definition of what observation truly means, a very short
stay, a patient, a very well-defined subset of clinical needs
prior to going forward and coming up with a new plan.
We would also strongly advocate for a pilot. I think with
the Two Midnight Rule is evidence of rolling out a policy
across the country with unintended consequences. I think a
pilot would be of great benefit.
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. I would agree with that, with everything
Dr. Sheehy said. One of the statements that was made earlier
was there was disparity between the cost of observation stays,
and I would submit that one of the reasons for that is the true
definition of what observation used to be, and that was a
period of time to help determine whether or not the patient
needed hospitalization as an inpatient or could be sent home.
Those short stays in observation would be very less costly.
By the time they need to be admitted, those are patients that
require extensive diagnostic studies and extensive treatment,
and sometimes those patients turn around in less than two days,
and so we should not be penalized for being efficient in our
ability to manage those patients as an inpatient.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Edelman, you made a point that drew my attention. You
were making the case that if outpatients return to the
hospitals within 30 days their return isn't a readmission
because they were originally labeled as outpatient, and some
portion of the report at the client hospital readmissions
reflects the fact that many patients are called outpatients.
Any idea how frequent that is, what percentage of the reported
decline that might represent?
Ms. EDELMAN. We don't have data that would indicate what
portion of the readmitted patients are not called readmitted
because of observation, but actually the only reason that we
have ever heard from families told by the hospitals that they
are using observation status is the Recovery Audit Program.
Nobody has ever actually brought up the hospital
readmissions issue, but we know that is now in effect, so it
obviously has some impact because if somebody returns to the
hospital as an outpatient, that does not count as an inpatient,
and a penalty would not be applied.
Chairman BRADY. Dr. Evans, when there are costs associated
with the hospital appealing, especially in high value inpatient
claims and they are overturned, the RAC returns the commission.
Is that correct?
Dr. EVANS. That is correct.
Chairman BRADY. Do they share in the cost of that appeal at
all?
Dr. EVANS. Well, the cost of our work doing that appeal and
the work doing the review initially.
Chairman BRADY. But having lost that claim, does the RAC
reimburse some portion of the cost?
Dr. EVANS. Well, we are paying back all of the funds that
were used on our part to do the work.
Chairman BRADY. Right. That was because it was an improper
determination up front, but do you share in the cost? So you
don't receive your commission.
Dr. EVANS. There is a financial penalty that occurs. There
is not a payment for any of the costs of the hospital, so I am
not aware of the----
Chairman BRADY. So, the impact is you return the
commission, but you don't share in the cost of the lost appeal?
Dr. EVANS. We pay our portion of attending the appeal, and
the provider pays their portion.
Chairman BRADY. Say that again.
Dr. EVANS. We pay our portion of attending the appeal, and
the provider pays their portion of attending the appeal.
Chairman BRADY. Okay. Win or lose, that is how it is
divided?
Dr. EVANS. That is correct. So when we win there is not any
difference either.
Chairman BRADY. Okay, I will finish with this. Listening to
testimony today, there are an isolated number of short stay
DRGs that may be problematic that was discussed earlier. In the
oversight of the RAC program, did CMS ever intervene to stop
audits so they could insert a targeted payment approach to
quickly and easily solve the problem of the short stay DRGs?
Dr. EVANS. And you said a targeted DRG approach?
Chairman BRADY. Yeah.
Dr. EVANS. They haven't intervened. The intervention has
been to stop the short-stay reviews with the Two Midnight Rule,
but there has not been an intervention and I think what we have
heard said today is there is a lot of variety, a lot of
difference across providers in the rate of improper payment,
for outpatient versus inpatient care, and I think we have also
seen discussion that we need to look at where we go forward.
So for instance, CMS is proposing in the new contract, that
we have a variation in the amount of medical records that are
reviewed based on the providers' outcomes. So if we have a
provider who has a very low rate of improper payment, we would
expect to decrease as we go forward their number of records
looked at. If we have a provider who has a higher rate, we
would expect to increase that going forward. So CMS is looking
at that, and so I think what I would say is we want to
collaborate with you, and I think this opportunity to share
information is very good; and I look forward to be involved in
continuing this sort of information exchange.
Chairman BRADY. Okay, thank you.
Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There was a Senator by the name of Daniel Patrick Moynihan
who said there are a lot of simple answers around but we need a
great complexifier and the fact is that we have a very complex
question here, and the next level is going to be, it seems to
me, even more complex because you have all agreed that the
patients get treated the same whether they are observation or
inpatient. The patient gets what they are supposed to get. So
what we are discussing here is who pays how much to whom, and
it is a question of whether the beneficiaries get charged more
or the hospitals get less money. That seems to be where we are.
And one of the issues that has come up here, Ms. Edelman,
is one that I would like to hear your thoughts about. There has
been a talk about the different cost sharing between Part A and
Part B, and people are suggesting that we roll Part A and Part
B together, and that, that somehow will eliminate or alleviate
or something in this whole process. I would like to hear from
you as a patient advocate what you think will happen to
beneficiaries if we roll the A and B together generally but
also specifically in this outpatient observation status,
because I think we don't want to make another step that makes
it even worse. I mean, we were trying to fix a problem with
what we did, so give me your ideas.
Ms. EDELMAN. Thank you for that question.
Simplifying the program, a complex Medicare program would
be helpful. The problem with the Medicare redesign proposals
that we have seen that combine Part A cost-sharing obligations,
is that they also prohibit other insurance like Medigap
policies that provide first dollar coverage and so the
consequence is that these combined Part A-Part B cost-sharing
obligations would shift costs to the patients. The idea of that
is, in fact, to make people pay more out of pocket on the
assumption that they will be more careful healthcare consumers,
but what we know will happen is that people will avoid
medically necessary care because they won't be able to afford
it.
Medicare beneficiaries already spend a much higher
proportion of their income on healthcare than younger people,
and half of the Medicare beneficiaries have incomes of $23,500
a year. They really cannot afford to pay more out of pocket,
which would happen as a result of a number of these redesign
proposals that we have seen.
Our program with a couple of other programs, Medicare
Rights Center and California Health Advocate submitted a
statement to this committee a year ago about concerns, about
the Medicare redesign proposals. I would be happy to submit
that for the record.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. How would the rolling of the two together
affect this whole question of observation versus--or would it
just be there would be no question anymore. It would just be a
patient in the system?
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, it would depend upon how the specifics
of the redesign worked and how people would have to pay. Right
now if people are in-patient, they pay the inpatient
deductible. If they are outpatients, they pay the full cost out
of pocket for the nursing home care and Part B copayments and
medications and it is not clear what would happen with a
combination of those two.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Does the three day stay that has to be there
to go into the nursing home, what happens to that?
Ms. EDELMAN. That is still in the statute unless that gets
repealed. That has been in the Medicare statute from the
beginning.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So if they are in the hospital and the
hospital calls it an observation, they do not get the credit
for going into the nursing home?
Ms. EDELMAN. They do not get, the three midnights do not
stay, so the woman in Wisconsin who was in the hospital for 13
days, consecutive days, as an outpatient did not have a three
day qualifying inpatient stay.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And rolling the Part A and Part B together
would not change that?
Ms. EDELMAN. Wouldn't change the three midnight rule. That
is still there.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You know what we are trying to do. How would
you design what we should do at this point?
Everybody's saying we should call a committee together or
something, but I would like somebody to put something on the
table and say, if anybody has an idea what we should do in this
situation, I would like to hear it.
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, for the simple issue of qualifying for
skilled nursing facility care, the H.R. 1179 does it by just
counting all the time. It doesn't deal with whether observation
makes sense or doesn't make sense. It doesn't deal with
recovery auditors. It doesn't deal with all of these much more
complicated issues. It just says if you have been in the
hospital for three nights, the time should count.
And I would just say when Medicare was enacted in 1965; the
average length of stay in an acute-care hospital for people age
65 and over was 12 plus days. The average length of stay now in
the acute care hospitals for people 65 and over is 5 plus days.
The three midnight rule is a problem considering how medicine
is practiced today.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Gerlach.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Deutschendorf, in your testimony you basically say that
the Two Midnight Policy now requires physicians to abandon the
medical assessment component of the medical necessity test when
determining the appropriate setting of care and instead imposes
a rigid time-based approach. Can you elaborate or expand on
that a bit?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. So for our providers what happens now is
the patient presents to the emergency department, and now they
are faced with this question, do you expect that the time this
patient will require hospital services will be greater than two
midnights, which to Dr. Sheehy's point, could be depending on
whether that patient arrives one minute before midnight on the
first midnight and then stays 24 hours and one minute in the
second midnight, or whether they would need to be hospitalized
for up to 48 hours.
A lot can happen in 48 hours, and what we have found since
October 1, is that we have tripled the amount of patients who
have started out as an outpatient and has been converted to an
inpatient after or just before the second midnight because, in
fact, we got it wrong. Because we really don't know. Patients
present to the emergency department with a myriad of problems,
some of which are going to respond rapidly, some of which will
not respond rapidly, and there is no way of knowing that, and
we are doing the right things.
We do have an army of case managers and utilization
management nurses who now have to run around the hospital
looking for patients who have crossed the first midnight to see
if these patients will require medically necessary services
beyond the second midnight so that we can get than converted.
We have been instructed by CMS that if the patient is going to
cross the second midnight, they want them to be converted, even
if they are going to go home in the next twelve hours. It is
logistically a very difficult policy to implement and has
required a lot of financial increases as a result of that.
Mr. GERLACH. H.R. 3698 would require the Secretary of HHS
to establish a new methodology for utilization in situations
involving the shorter stays in hospitals. We got some idea from
Ms. Edelman about what she'd like to see relative to that kind
of new methodology.
Could I have quickly the other three of you, please give us
your thoughts as a follow-up to Mr. McDermott's question, what
specifically change-wise and what kind of new methodology ought
to be employed so that there is a fairness, an equity in terms
of how hospitals are reimbursed for those that come in in a
very short-stay kind of situation. Dr. Sheehy, can we start
with you?
Dr. SHEEHY. Thank you for that question.
I think it is a very complicated topic, and I think a
simple answer is probably difficult to give. I think getting
back to the principles of observation being a triaging
definition, it was always meant to be a definition where
someone needed a few additional hours to determine whether they
should be fully admitted as an inpatient or discharged home.
I think we need to get back to the principles of that
definition and come up with a methodology that respects that
definition. I think we also need to think about the difficulty
as a provider I have telling a patient who is staying overnight
in a hospital, getting inpatient nursing care, getting
intravenous medications and tests in a hospital setting, how I
could explain that to that patient that they are an outpatient.
I think getting back to the heart of what observation really
means, I think is what we need to focus on coming up with a new
policy.
Mr. GERLACH. And then you added that you thought that
should be done on a pilot basis first to really test the idea
to see if it really in a practical way is working before you
expand it to the entire system?
Dr. SHEEHY. That is correct. I think we will see the
unintended consequences in any policy. I think we will
understand better how a policy should be audited and do it on a
smaller scale so hospitals across the country are not investing
a lot of money on a whole new plan that has a lot of issues. We
can figure out those issues and tweak the plan before it is
implemented nationwide.
Mr. GERLACH. Dr. Evans, do you have a quick answer to that
even though you look at it from the RAC perspective?
Dr. EVANS. Well, first from the RAC perspective, again, I
have said I think the collaboration and discussion is very
good, and I think that the idea that there is some changes that
can be made are good. If there were a pilot we would be willing
to be involved in that. I would say I am here for the recovery
audit work, but I am very interested in this personally. If
after the meeting or something you wanted to talk to me as a
taxpayer, I am a physician----
Mr. GERLACH. You are not having heart palpitations right
now or anything?
Dr. EVANS. No, I am not. I love this. I think it is really
excellent to have this discussion. It is what I am doing my
work for so that this would sort of happen. I am running over,
okay.
I just wanted to say I have been medical director of
skilled nursing facilities and worked at the MAC and now at the
HDI, and I have got a lot of ideas, but I think we would
support this type of reform, and we could offer discussion and
support afterwards.
Thank you.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank our panelists for an excellent
presentation today and Dr. Sheehy, a special welcome to you. I
have had the opportunity back home to visit UW Hospital System
and the clinics, and I have always been very impressed with the
quality of care, the outcome, the measurements that are being
established back home. But you are probably sensing a source of
frustration coming from this dais. This is some tough,
complicated stuff, and we are trying to wrap our head around it
and we are listening to you try to thread the needle on
different statuses on observation, inpatient, outpatient.
As policymakers, we are going to have a hard time being
able to provide direction at this level of expertise or
knowledge that is required of it. It is really kind of a source
of frustration that we have with the overall healthcare payment
system that we have in our country today. This is fee for
service. It is this coding. It is this payment based on how
much is done, not how well it is being done, and there are
tools in place right now; and many of us have been pushing hard
and been very inpatient to move to a more value, quality
outcome-based reimbursement system. If we can get those
financial systems I think aligned right, we are going to
unleash a heck of a lot of innovation in the health care
system. Knowing what those benchmarks need to be, where those
measurements are, and then figuring out how to meet them.
Because the truth is we don't have so much a budget deficit
problem here in Washington as we have a healthcare spending
problem, and that is what we are wrestling with. There are only
a few options that we can go down the road with. One is greater
cost shifting, you know, having patients bear more of the risk
of higher costs. We see that with voucher proposals or what
have you, or you are going to have some indiscriminate provider
cuts being made, and the provider community obviously isn't
going to be very happy with that. We see this with
sequestration and pushing those hospital cuts out for infinity
it seems at this point.
Or we need to be working with the provider community to
establish those quality measurements and then align the
financial incentives so it is value based and no longer
observational status or all these technical definitions that
just weigh us down, and it is just exhausting having these
conversations and getting the feedback from patients and
providers alike.
So, I guess it is just a general question. Dr. Sheehy, I
can start with you. If anyone else wants to chime in. Ideally
where do we need to be going with the healthcare payment system
of this country right now so that we are not having hearings
like this talking about inpatient or outpatient or
observational status and trying to figure out what the best
policy is in addressing it?
Dr. SHEEHY. Well, thank you for the question, and thank you
for all the work you do for the State of Wisconsin on
healthcare.
I would be more than happy to work with you in the future
on these issues going forward. I think it is very complicated,
I think there is certainly a role for quality measures in
physician payment, and I think as hospitalists we are trying to
figure out exactly how we fit into that payment model.
Going forward, though, I think, you know, I am from a small
town in Wisconsin as well, I grew up near Madison where I work,
and what I do on a daily basis is take care of patients in the
hospital. Some of these patients might have been my neighbors
or maybe a middle school teacher, and I think if we can get
back to thinking about these are Medicare patients, they have
worked their whole lives, and what is the right thing to do for
them, I think we are going to find those solutions.
Mr. KIND. Ms. Edelman, I am concerned about the impact on
the beneficiaries, the patients out there. It seems like they
are getting caught and often not to their knowledge and just
based on definitions that are applied to them and then the
increased out-of-pocket expenses which they experience which
creates a tremendous hardship and yet within the Medicare
system itself, we have seen beneficiary payments come down
dramatically in recent years, and hopefully that is
sustainable, and hopefully that is due to some of the reforms
that are taking place in the delivery system but also some of
the new payment models out there.
How much concern do you have right now in regards to the
cost shift that you are seeing with the beneficiary community?
Ms. EDELMAN. The cost shifting in the observation status is
considerable, and we know that some people really do not have
the money to pay for the nursing home care out of pocket when
they are told what the cost is, and they go home and then what
we hear is a couple of days later they have another fall, they
break a hip, they are back in the hospital. So the costs to the
system are very intense.
We know families are contributing huge amounts of money to
pay for out-of-pocket costs because Medicare is not paying for
the nursing home. So we have heard of a nephew being asked to
bring a check to the nursing home today for $7,000 for his aunt
to get care. People are doing that, families are kicking in
money that they may not really have. We have heard of families
cashing in life insurance policies that were intended for
burials because they need to get the nursing home care. So it
is having a tremendous impact on Medicare beneficiaries and
their families trying to pay these high costs.
The average private rates are like $250 a day, but I was in
the nursing home in Boston last month, and the private rates
were 450 to 480 a day. Most people can't pay that.
Mr. KIND. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Deutschendorf, in your written testimony you referenced
the Medicare Audit Improvement Act, H.R. 1250, obviously
supported by numerous members of the House. I am wondering if
you could reflect a bit on an alternative that I happened to
introduce, H.R. 2329, the Administrative Relief and Accurate
Medicare Payments Act. Have you reviewed that bill, and could
you reflect on that at all?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. I have not, but I would be happy to
respond in writing.
Mr. SMITH. All right. You bet. Thank you very much.
Mr. SMITH. Ms. Edelman, what do you believe is the cost--
well, first of all, do you believe that Medicare beneficiaries
are very familiar with the financing or the various--I mean, we
have heard a lot of technical things. I started to keep a list
here, and I lost it amidst the paperwork here of just
terminology and funding strategies and schedules of payments
and so forth. How familiar are seniors with that type of thing?
Ms. EDELMAN. I think most people have no idea of what the
terminology is or what it means.
Mr. SMITH. And do you believe that there is a cost to that,
given the existence of that disconnect with patients and, I
mean, I don't believe we could really expect them to be
familiar with all of these intricate details of a funding
system. Is there any possible way just to have a system to
where seniors are more familiar with what is going on with the
funding, so not that it has to be out of pocket, but so that
they can perhaps know more what their options are?
As you pointed out in your testimony, that they were
considered an outpatient, but yet they were in the hospital for
so long and certainly thought that they were an inpatient; what
do you think the alternatives should be?
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, there are some bills that would suggest
giving information to people to tell them, at least give them
information that they are outpatients and a couple of states
have passed laws, Maryland and New York, requiring that people
should be informed that they are outpatients and what the
consequence is.
But unlike other Medicare systems, they don't have an
opportunity to contest their outpatient status. Generally if
somebody goes into the hospital as an inpatient, the person
immediately gets a form Your Rights As a Medicare Patient and
if the hospital wants to discharge the person, and the person
thinks I am really not ready to go, there is an immediate
appeal to a representative of the Medicare program to make a
decision.
In observation status there is no due process right for the
Medicare patients. There is nothing they can do, so giving them
information is helpful, but we also need to give them an
opportunity to say I should be called an inpatient, not an
outpatient.
Mr. SMITH. Would you agree that the more the government has
gotten involved, that the more expensive healthcare has become?
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, I don't know if the cost of the
Government has been the cause of health care becoming
expensive. Certainly before the Government was involved a lot
of people didn't get health care, so it has been critically
important. Medicare is a very important program for older
people, and most older people love their Medicare program.
Without it they wouldn't get the health care they need.
Mr. SMITH. Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to make a
couple of points in response to my friend, Mr. Roskam's
comments in the last panel about state budget neutrality, which
is interesting to define, and how it affects what we are
talking about.
New Jersey is in a unique position because my state is an
all-urban state with no rural or critical access hospitals. I
would like to point out that the permanent adjustments have
always been based on the national budget neutrality, always. So
this includes adjustments for critical access hospitals and
there ironically are 53 critical access hospitals in Mr.
Roskam's state of Illinois. I think we need to make that clear.
Now, Ms. Edelman, your organization has done a significant
amount of work in the area of observation stays, and you worked
directly with a number of beneficiaries who have run into
problems with the way they were classified. I think you have
defined that. In your experience, do beneficiaries generally
know whether they are classified as inpatients or under
observation status, in your experience?
Ms. EDELMAN. Most patients do not know that they are in
observation, and the Medicare program does not require
hospitals to tell them. The only time----
Mr. PASCRELL. Do they have a right to know that?
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, they should have a right to know it.
Yes, they should. They should know and the consequence.
Mr. PASCRELL. When do patients generally find out what
their status is?
Ms. EDELMAN. Usually at the time of discharge.
Mr. PASCRELL. When they pay their bills?
Ms. EDELMAN. Bring the checkbook to the nursing home
because Medicare----
Mr. PASCRELL. That's what I figured.
Ms. EDELMAN [continuing]. Will not be paying.
Mr. PASCRELL. You mentioned earlier observation status is
particularly problematic when Medicare beneficiaries need care
in a skilled nursing facility after leaving the hospital.
Because Medicare won't cover these services unless, unless, a
patient has been classified as an inpatient for at least three
days. Am I right so far?
Ms. EDELMAN. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Ms. Edelman, in the cases your organization
has handled, what is happening to observation status patients
in need of care at a skilled nursing facility after leaving the
hospital?
Ms. EDELMAN. Some are not going because they can't afford
it. Some are going and paying out of pocket and trying to
appeal later through the Medicare summary notice form that they
get, trying to appeal through the administrative process. But
many of the people that I have spoken to do not pursue the
appeals. They give up. It is just too complicated and too time
consuming, and they give up.
Mr. PASCRELL. Are many of these seniors paying out of
pocket?
Ms. EDELMAN. Yes, they are paying out of pocket, and their
families are as well.
Mr. PASCRELL. So, Mr. Chairman, in conclusion if we don't
identify and respect the right to know, and we had a Patients
Bill of Rights, which is part of the reform process that we are
now going through, then we defeat the purpose of what we are
doing.
Seniors, anybody, has a right to know what status they are
in, what that implies, and how much it is going to cost them
eventually if they don't get out of that status or if they
don't cross over. I think that this is serious business, I ask
you to bring us to attend to it, and there is legislation here
which is bipartisan, and I hope that you will do that, and
thank you for the hearing.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the panel
for being here.
It is interesting because I think we are really talking
about the problem, and then there's the symptoms of the
problem. The problem is the hospital readmission reduction
program, and quite frankly the policy that was written was
probably, the thought was good, the outcomes are becoming bad
because when a patient enters the hospital, they are either
classified as observation. They are not admitted. There's all
kind of things. They are outpatients. We are putting them in
classifications. Why? Because we don't want to be penalized for
the reduction program if you are in the hospital.
And again, I am not blaming the hospitals in that sense.
They are trying to survive, too. But, quite frankly, who is
getting hurt here but the patient? So let's look at the
unintended consequences. We have patients that go into a
hospital. They are the sickest of sick, we know they are coming
back, and we have an issue there. It is one of the reasons why
I introduced H.R. 4188, a bill that requires the Secretary of
HHS to adjust the payment methodology to account for certain
disparities really in patient population. This adjustment will
really make a huge difference to hospitals across the country
and the 9 million duly eligible beneficiaries that rely on
these hospitals for critical care needs. We need to make sure.
There are patients that are going to come into a hospital that
are going to go back to the hospital, and those hospitals are
being penalized. This bill would at least help that issue.
Now, on the other side, I still have a problem when you
take a patient who quite frankly doesn't need to go to a
hospital, should be going directly to the nursing home, but we
have another policy that says you have to go to the hospital
first, and you have to spend three days in that hospital and
then that patient goes to that hospital and, of course, they
spend three days. They don't know whether they are observation,
they don't know whether they are inpatient.
Then they come out, they go to a nursing home, and then
they are penalized because in many cases they ended up as an
observation status. That is a problem, too. That is why we
talked earlier about the bill I introduced to eliminate the
three-day stay. Let's face it, there are some patients that
have to go in the hospital, but there are some that could go
directly to the nursing home, and I question why we would ever
be paying you know, up to $11,000 to have someone stay in a
hospital for three days versus going into a nursing home where
my statistics show the average stay is around 27 days. Quite
frankly it doesn't make sense. We are spending money that is
not necessary.
Ms. Edelman, I would ask you, you know, do you think the
elimination of the three-day hospital stay is good policy?
Ms. EDELMAN. Well, I think it ultimately is what makes
sense because as I said, the length of stay in hospitals has
gone down so much that the three days is a very large portion
of what time people actually do spend in the hospital.
The long-term care commission endorsed elimination of the
three-day stay and so this is where I think as Congress is
considering post-acute care reforms, which is a topic of
discussion now, this should certainly be part of the
discussion. We want to make sure that people are, that there is
not a lot of gaming in nursing homes, so we want to be careful
of that possibility; but this is where it needs to go to
eliminate it. It doesn't make sense with the way medicine is
practiced today.
Mr. RENACCI. And I don't know if there is anyone else on
the panel that when we talk about H.R. 4188, which is a bill
that really takes a look at these hospitals where there are
readmissions for the sickest of sick, the poorest of poor, if
we shouldn't have an adjustment for those. Is there anyone?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. So, as I stated in my opening comments,
and thank you for asking, I am responsible for the readmission
reduction program for the Johns Hopkins Health system and our
hospital. We have been at this for 4 years, and we are working
really, really hard to implement all of the strategies that
were suggested in the demonstration projects and at an academic
center such as ours where we take care of some of the sickest
patients in the country who are transplants, who are duly
eligible, et cetera, we have not been able to move that ball.
And, in fact, it is all about numerators and denominators,
but as you take out the short stays out of the denominator, and
your patients are sicker, your readmission rates go up. Despite
what we are doing, and we do have some successes, but we have
not been able to move that. So having that bill with taking out
transplants, end stage renal disease, substance abuse, and
psychoses and some of the other things, would certainly help
us. The other thing that we have really learned about this has
to do with patient's values, beliefs and preferences, so it is
very important that we share this responsibility not just with
the providers but also the patients.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am way over here, so I appreciate, I will give you a
different angle here to look at. I wanted to come today, and
thank you Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing, and thank you
to the panelists.
This is something I am very concerned about coming from a
rural section of the State of New York. My rural hospitals in
particular are struggling to deal with these issues as well as
many others, and I wanted to just read for the record a letter
I received from one of our hospital directors at Jones Memorial
Hospital in Wellsville, New York. She wrote, Dear Tom, Jones
Memorial is a sole community hospital in rural upstate Western
New York. Jones has an average daily census of 20 patients. As
many rural New York state hospitals, Jones has limited
resources and actively trying to keep costs down to the overall
healthcare system. Then she goes on. She writes in 2012 Jones
began receiving draft program audit notices. The cases dated
back to 2009, they received a total of 240 inpatient claim
denials. To date Jones have appealed and won approximately 197
of those claims. Of the 240 claims, 18 were not successful on
appeal.
The rest of the cases are still pending, so pretty good
outcome in regards to challenging these requests. But this is
what she said that really stuck out to me in the letter. Jones
Memorial with an average daily census of 20 has to employ three
full-time RN case managers to make sure that someone is here
the majority of the time to ensure compliance with the Two
Midnight Rule. These same case managers spend a lot of their
time working on appeals for the RAC audits. We also have three
billing and medical records staff that spend 30 percent of
their time on RAC audits and appeals. The dollars being
expended for a small hospital are unsustainable.
Now when I hear Eva write me that letter, and I know Eva
very well, Eva Benedict, does a great job there at Jones
Memorial, my concern is this. How are these rural hospitals
going to sustain themselves if they have to take on those
administrative cost burdens that we just articulated there and
keep the doors open and comply with this complexity coming out
of Washington, D.C.? Does anyone on the panel disagree with me
that in particular our rural hospitals are at a distinct threat
as a result of the burdens that are coming out of this
ambiguity? Dr. Sheehy.
Dr. SHEEHY. I can answer that question. My primary practice
location is a University of Wisconsin Hospital which is a
tertiary care referral hospital, but I also am privileged at
one of our community hospitals and practice there. It is a
small hospital and I agree with you. I think that the burden on
smaller hospitals is enormous. I also think a lot of these
smaller hospitals have contracted with, there are private
companies now who will actually do what your hospital has
described. Instead of hiring their own nurse case managers to
do this, they will hire a private company now and pay them a
lot of money to look at these claims for them and I think the
cost is enormous. The cost to fight this process and to kind of
learn how to do these audits and appeals, it is staggering.
Mr. REED. Anyone else share that sentiment or oppose that
sentiment? Because I agree with you, those are dollars that
otherwise could be going to the community in regards to
servicing their healthcare needs as opposed to complying with
the administrative burdens. Do you have any idea, here's a
hospital with 20 average daily census, and they have got
essentially five full-time workers focused on filling out
paperwork. How can we do better? Yeah, ma'am.
Ms. EDELMAN. I just want to say one thing about that. That
hospitals are spending an enormous amount of time and money
trying to make these inpatient-outpatient decisions.
The first thing they do is buy InterQual, which is a
proprietary computer program. Then they are hiring staff just
to make these decisions, and the American Case Management
Association, which is part of our ad hoc coalition supporting
H.R. 1179, did a survey of their members. These are the
hospital discharge planners. Three quarters of the hospitals
reported hiring staff just to be making inpatient-outpatient
medical necessity decisions. A third of them had spent more
than $150,000 and this is a couple of years ago, on that staff.
Then they are also using an outside secondary reviewer. The
company that we know of used to report on its Web site how many
medical necessity cases they had done. Since 1997, they had
done 4 million. If they are charging we think maybe $200, $250
a case, that is a lot of money to go out of the Medicare system
which should be designed for providing care to people, but it
is only to make the decision whether people should be admitted
as inpatients or called outpatients, and the care is identical.
It really makes no sense.
Mr. REED. Thank you.
My balance has expired, and I thank you for that input.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Ms. Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again thank you for allowing me to sit here with the
committee and ask questions.
I want to go back to the issue of the ALJs and the amount
of overturned cases and we just hear--I know this is a complex
situation, and we hear these numbers that keep floating around,
and there is a report that I want to submit for the record, and
it is from the Inspector General. The improvements are needed
at the Administrative Law Judge level of Medicare appeals.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
Mrs. BLACK. Because there are some good pieces in here as
well. But, Dr. Evans, I want to start with you on this question
because our members are hearing at least 70 percent number that
the providers win these appeals at the ALJ level. I understand
that there are two different ways that the ALJ adjudicates
cases, and can you please explain how the RAC's view of the
overturn rate and how these numbers can deceive when looked at
out of context?
Dr. EVANS. Yes. The report you refer to, the data that is
in there is from 2010, and that was early on in the Recovery
Audit Program. Now, I haven't done the analysis, and I would
say that I think it is good that this has been brought up here,
and I think there is some further investigation of the data
that can be done among the different experts like OIG, et
cetera.
But that data is from 2010, and at that time we were
getting no information about any kind of ALJ hearings. We have
attended a few in the demonstration, but we weren't hearing,
and we were asking about those. What we found out was that they
were 89, 90 percent. You know, the add quick has that
information, but they were huge numbers. They were on the
record. The on the record in general is a high overturn rate.
It is pretty much they are all overturned. All of the
contractors across CMS have data that shows that, and in fact
CMS had done a study with one of the contractors, where the
attendance of CMS at the hearing makes a difference in the
outcome of those hearings where the Medicare rules and
regulations and the medical record compared to the claim is
reviewed.
So I think it is an area that can be looked at, but I think
that is part of the difficulty. If you look at the last study,
the 7 percent overturn across the board is the most current
data that we have.
Mrs. BLACK. Could those who are providers weigh in on this
from your perspective as well, of your cases that get to the
ALJ level? Dr. Sheehy, let me go with you first.
Dr. SHEEHY. Thank you for that question. We have little
data on our ALJ Level 3 appeals at this time. The majority of
our appeals are turned over in Level 1 or Level 2. I will just
comment that I think the 2010 data, I think the RAC process and
observation care has evolved so enormously in the last four
years that I think it is worth looking at a new set of data and
a new set of numbers.
We know that the RAC recovery rate, the recovery rate for
back to the Government has increased. We know that the number
of RAC audits have increased. This is why the OMHA has now put
a hold on further audits and appeals. We know this is a lot due
to RAC denials and so I think we really do need to look at a
fresh set of numbers before we start thinking about a 7 percent
number.
I can speak on behalf of our hospital. We appeal almost
everything, and we win almost everything. The number that I
cited in my testimony we appealed in our last one year, we
appealed 92 percent of the audits that the RACs made, and we
have already won two-thirds of them. The rest are in Level 1 or
Level 2 of appeals, so our history is that we will win almost
100 percent of our appeals. I think there are a lot of
hospitals out there that are similar.
Mrs. BLACK. That is a good piece of information. Thank you
so much.
Others want to weigh in on that? Yes?
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. We just have 10 cases at the ALJ level
that have just made it there, and part of that has to do with
the delay in the actual recoupment, so we were able to take 239
cases of our 430-some denials directly for discussion, and we
spent a lot of time preparing with legal and also with our
physician advisors and went straight to the medical directors
of our RAC, and 135 of those cases were overturned just at the
discussion; and the remainder of those are in the appeal
process now. So that is a 50 percent, or a 55 percent overturn
rate just at the discussion level.
I just want to say one other thing. We had 108 cases denied
for intensity modified radiation therapy. All 108 of those
cases were overturned at the discussion level, again because
these were medically necessary services that the RAC really was
not able to really understand why these cases were brought
forward.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for this hearing. It
just seems to me that one of the things that I have learned
from this hearing is that this certainly needs to have more
oversight, more investigation to find out just how the program
is working, because I am so concerned as being a nurse for over
40 years, that the care that we are giving and, Dr. Sheehy,
please every time you give a testimony, use that example of a
diabetic ketoacidosis because it is so compelling to make the
case for how you just don't know what that patient is going to
need when you receive them into the hospital.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I will look forward to
more hearings.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Ms. Black.
I just have an inquiry, again, thank for all the witnesses,
in the first panel again from Dr. Evans we heard repeatedly
that RAC audits aren't a problem. 94 percent are not appealed.
Of those who are only about half are returned. Percentage-wise
this is a very small amount. Not a big problem. That is at odds
with what we hear from our local hospitals in a major way.
And what I think I just heard from Dr. Sheehy and Ms.
Deutschendorf is that is old data, that current appeals are
much greater than that, and the overturn rate is substantial as
well; and, while they may be a small percentage, these are more
of the high-value claims, so proportionately more important,
probably more expensive to appeal. Is that correct, in a
nutshell? Well, what other perspective should we bring to this?
Dr. SHEEHY. I think that is a correct assessment. Just
another data point, in the OMHA letter to hospitals, one of the
numbers they cited, which I think this is why I think this is
old data, they said in January of 2012, the OMHA was hearing
about 1,250 appeals a week and at the end of 2013, they were
getting 15,000, so I think the rate has just accelerated over
two years; and I think that number tells you how audits have
changed, how our practice has changed.
Chairman BRADY. Because the Inspector General's report was
from 2010 and 2011, you are saying. Ms. Deutschendorf.
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. So I would agree with that, that the
appeals have mounted as hospitals have been able to change
their processes and also that they have rigorous utilization
processes that they are also ensuring that they are meeting the
compliance and meeting the regulatory requirements for Medicare
review of inpatient stays.
We in our compliance program, we self deny almost $4
million a year in Medicare days that we feel we cannot justify
for medical necessity. So we feel that anything that we appeal
is justifiable. So anything that is denied by RAC, we will
appeal.
Chairman BRADY. Got it.
Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I am like you, a little by confused by what
I am hearing here, but it seems like what you are saying is
that the RACs operate like the fishermen in my district. They
go out and throw a great big net, and that is where the 12,000,
you jump from 1,500 at the end of one year to 12,000 in the
next. You will say, you have got a lot of stuff in there, most
of which turns out to be not justified because they are going
on volume. You are saying that the RACs are going on volume,
and they got a lot of by-catch, and they have to throw it back
because it doesn't work.
Ms. DEUTSCHENDORF. That is exactly right. They cast a very
broad net, and then what is really considered improper, we
would respectfully disagree that those are not improper
payments, and we are appealing all of them. So, we are
appealing 92 percent. It is almost exactly the same as what Dr.
Sheehy has said.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you.
Ms. EDELMAN. If I could just say one thing, if it is so
complicated for hospitals to do these appeals, you can imagine
what it is like for beneficiaries doing it on their own. There
is one gentleman from Chicago that I talk to every couple of
months, and he is in his 80s. He is homebound. The last
conversation we had he was describing his cancer and the
therapy he is having, and he is trying to do this appeal for
his wife. It is very difficult for beneficiaries if they even
get to that stage to appeal their outpatient status.
Chairman BRADY. Yeah. Thank you.
On behalf of Dr. McDermott, I would like to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today, and I appreciate the
continued assistance getting answers to the questions that were
asked by the committee. These are challenging issues,
interrelated, facing CMS, this committee, and our hospital
providers.
My view is we have to address them head on in order to
ensure seniors are treated fairly and do not face unnecessary
charges, and it is equally important for providers and
taxpayers to get these issues straightened out, so I look
forward to working with all the witnesses and Members of the
Committee to do just this.
As a reminder, any member wishing to submit a question to
the record will have 14 days to do so; and if any questions are
submitted to the witnesses, I ask that the witnesses respond in
a timely manner. With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:32 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the record follow:]
Wisconsin Hospital Association, Statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Watertown Regional Medical, Letter

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Walter F. O'Keefe, Letter

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
