- MEDPAC'S ANNUAL MARCH REPORT TO CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDPAC'S ANNUAL
MARCH REPORT TO CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 15, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-HL02

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

89-473                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of March 15, 2013 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESS

Glen M. Hackbarth, Chairman, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission     6

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..............................    50
George Mason University, statement...............................    57

MEDPAC'S ANNUAL
MARCH REPORT TO CONGRESS

----------

FRIDAY, MARCH 15, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:32 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Kevin Brady
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Friday, March 15, 2013
HL-02

Chairman Brady Announces Hearing on

MedPAC's Annual March Report to Congress

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Kevin Brady (R-
TX) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
on the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission's (MedPAC) annual March
Report to the Congress which details the Commission's recommendations
for updating Medicare payment policies. The Subcommittee will hear from
MedPAC's Chairman, Glenn Hackbarth. The hearing will take place on
Friday, March 15, 2013, in 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 9:30 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear the witness, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witness only.
However, any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral
appearance may submit a written statement for consideration by the
Committee and for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

MedPAC advises Congress on Medicare payment policy. The Commission
is required by law to submit its annual recommendations on Medicare
payment policy by March 15. In its March Report to Congress, MedPAC is
required to review and make recommendations on payment policies for
specific provider groups, including hospitals, skilled nursing
facilities, physicians, and Medicare Advantage plans.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Brady stated, ``MedPAC provides
critical information to policymakers about the adequacy of provider
payments in the Medicare program. With its Hospital Insurance Trust
Fund set to go bankrupt as early as 2023, it is clear that Medicare is
facing significant financial challenges. This hearing will afford
Members the opportunity to understand where Medicare payments can be
adjusted in a way that is fair to providers and taxpayers, while
protecting seniors' access to care.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on MedPAC's March 2013 Report to the
Congress on Medicare payment policies.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Friday, March 29, 2013. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BRADY. Good morning everyone. I want to welcome
everyone to the second hearing of the Subcommittee on Health
for the 113th Congress.
Today we will be hearing from the Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission, MedPAC, on the recommendations in their March 2013
report on Medicare payment policies. We heard from MedPAC
during our Medicare structural reform hearing 2 weeks ago. It
was insightful to hear the Commission's recommendations for
improving the design of Medicare in a way that is less
confusing for seniors, limits their out-of-pocket costs, and
provides financial incentives to seek the most appropriate care
in the most appropriate setting. It is my hope that the
Committee can work together in a bipartisan way to advance
these much-needed structural reforms to save Medicare for the
long haul.
Today, however, we are hearing from MedPAC on the topic of
Medicare payments to providers. We are pleased to have the
Commission here to discuss the recommendations in its report,
which was released this morning, for updating payments in a way
that ensures Medicare families have access to high-quality care
while also being fair to local healthcare providers and the
American taxpayers. The insight and guidance we receive from
MedPAC is very important as we seek ways to reform the Medicare
program--for instance, improving the accuracy of provider
payments.
The MedPAC recommendations also focus on payment system
changes that encourage accountability by local healthcare
providers to deliver high-quality care at the most affordable
cost. These are important discussions as we move toward
payments that reward providers for the quality they provide
rather than the quantity of what they have done. I really
appreciate the point that Ranking Member Jim McDermott made in
our first hearing. To paraphrase, he said we need to bring
value over volume to the Medicare program. The challenge, of
course, is to find common ground as we seek these solutions.
One payment system I want to mention specifically is the
physician payment system that is governed by the sustainable
growth rate formula, or SGR. Democrat or Republican, the truth
is; enough is enough. This year, right now, we have a golden
opportunity to eliminate the long, problematic SGR once and for
all and reform how Medicare pays physicians. I know that MedPAC
has put significant thought into this topic. I look forward to
hearing more about those ideas today.
Structural changes to the program and payment systems that
are accurate and provide the right incentives are complementary
pieces. I applaud the MedPAC Commissioners and staff for the
work they have done in this area, but, as I mentioned last
hearing, I respectfully ask you to do more.
It is abundantly clear Medicare is on an unsustainable
path. In fact, two independent agencies, the Congressional
Budget Office and the actuaries at the Department of Health and
Human Services, estimate that Medicare's Part A trust fund will
be bankrupt by 2023. Additionally, CBO projects that by 2222
Medicare spending will top $1 trillion. That is 90 percent more
than we currently spend. If these trends continue, we can't
save Medicare for every generation or guarantee a sustainable
future. Finding solutions to these problems now is our
challenge.
The President's healthcare law didn't actually lower
healthcare spending. Congressional Budget Office Director
Elmendorf recently testified that it could not attribute any
particular factor to explain the recent lower healthcare
spending other than, of course, the economy. Additionally, CBO
estimates that ObamaCare delivery changes will yield a
miniscule $14.7 billion in savings. That barely registers.
But regardless of how we feel about the new healthcare law,
the glaring fact remains: Medicare's hospital insurance trust
fund will go bankrupt in 10 years. We have to act now; the
clock is ticking. And today's hearing will help us address our
challenges. MedPAC's analysis is invaluable in helping us
better understand when growth in Medicare spending is
appropriate and when Medicare payments need to be adjusted.
We also look forward to receiving MedPAC's next report to
Congress in June, which will highlight additional opportunities
for reform beyond just changes in the payment system. We rely
on MedPAC's recommendations because they are based on strong
data analysis. That is a key element in designing policies that
improve the Medicare program and save it over the long term.
So I welcome our invited witness, MedPAC Chairman Glenn
Hackbarth. Thank you for joining us today, and I look forward
to hearing your testimony.
So before I recognize Ranking Member McDermott for the
purposes of an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that
all Members' written statements be included in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman BRADY. I now recognize Ranking Member McDermott
for his opening statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Where is your St. Paddy's Day tie?
Chairman BRADY. I am in trouble.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You know it is coming.
Chairman BRADY. In a serious way, I am in trouble.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for your calling
this hearing today. It is one of our regular reports from CMS.
And it is important that we actually have people come in and
make these reports and give us a chance to ask questions.
And I appreciate Mr. Hackbarth coming back. You were here
the other week. We won't always agree on the recommendations
that MedPAC makes, but it does good work and it takes seriously
its charge to ensure appropriate payment and access.
Government oversight keeps people accountable to the
interests of the people and to the experts of our field. It is
sometimes easy for us, sitting up here, to stand on our
respective sides screaming at each other across the aisle, but
your agency can help us to find common ground and to cut
through the self-serving claims of the special interests. Our
offices are filled with them.
Today's discussion will also be useful as we look at the
Affordable Care Act's opportunities to explore innovative
payment and delivery systems, some of which are based on
MedPAC's work. With the freedom to think in new ways about how
to pay for services, aligning the needs of providers and
patients, and deliver care, I believe we can continue to
improve cost and quality for everyone while still protecting
benefits.
I appreciate MedPAC's commitments to evidence-based data. I
am one of those that believes that you can have whatever
opinion you want, but you can't have your own facts. And I like
the fact that you are a fact agency. This agency has proved
itself to be credible, nonpartisan, and committed to
transparent and well-founded methodologies and results.
MedPAC's efforts to take a comprehensive look each year at the
underlying economics of each sector drive thoughtful
recommendations rooted in reality. We share your goals in
ensuring that payments are both appropriate and adequate.
Medicare is an entitlement to a defined set of benefits. It
is not an entitlement to specific reimbursement for providers
or plans. While we need to ensure that hospitals and doctors
and others earn enough off of Medicare to preserve access,
sometimes people lose sight of the program's purpose, which is
to serve the people. We, likewise, have an obligation to
taxpayers to ensure that the payments are appropriate and not
too high.
That said, given Medicare's size and the health needs of
the Medicare population and our reimbursement rates, many in
the healthcare sector have made and will continue to make a
very pretty penny off the program. I remember when doctors
didn't have a certain way to get paid when they saw old people.
They had to rely on the children of or the collection agencies
or bags of potatoes or whatever.
So when people come in to cry poverty over a proposed
regulation or piece of legislation, we would all be well-
advised to take such claims with a grain of salt. And then we
should pick up the phone to call MedPAC to find out just how
pressed the group in question is.
Even so, while data are important, we mustn't let ourselves
lose sight of the people behind the numbers. As health
economist Uwe Reinhardt noted, you can put a person on a hot
stove and another one on a block of ice. On average, sure, they
are a comfortable temperature. Individually, they might
disagree.
With that in mind, I hope that we will receive the
recommendations in the context of our current environment and
consider the challenges of the year ahead. In the time since
these recommendations were voted on, the sequester has been
implemented, with no end in sight. Republicans failed to
address this in the budget. Instead of replacing blunt, across-
the-board cuts with more justifiable, targeted proposals, they
kept the sequester and they added to it.
These recommendations are a healthy and timely reminder
that there are still plenty of well-justified potential
provider savings that should be pursued before asking patients
to pay more.
And I thank you again for joining us, and we look forward
to your testimony.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. McDermott.
And today Glenn Hackbarth, the Chairman of MedPAC, joins
us. Mr. Hackbarth is no stranger to the Subcommittee, having
served as MedPAC's Chairman for more than 11 years and having
appeared before the Subcommittee numerous times.
We are pleased to have you with us, Mr. Chairman. As you
know, we have reserved 5 minutes for your opening statements.
Your entire written statement will be made a part of the
record. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GLENN M. HACKBARTH, CHAIRMAN, MEDICARE PAYMENT
ADVISORY COMMISSION

Mr. HACKBARTH. Thank you, Chairman Brady and Ranking Member
McDermott. I appreciate your kind words about MedPAC.
Since there are some new Members of this Subcommittee, I
thought I would take just a second to introduce MedPAC a little
bit further.
We are a nonpartisan advisory body to the Congress. We have
17 Commissioners appointed by the GAO. Six of our current
Commissioners have clinical training either as physicians or as
nurses; five have experience as hospital executives; five as
leaders of integrated delivery systems; four in health plan
management; two former presidents of the National Rural Health
Association; three with high-level government experience; as
well as several eminent academics. And, of course, some of us
have more than one of these credentials in our background.
By law, our March report presents to the Congress our
update recommendations for the various Medicare payment
systems. Our statutory assignment from you is to recommend
rates that are consistent with the efficient delivery of
services to Medicare beneficiaries.
Our analysis of payment rates considers the supply of
providers, their access to capital, their financial
performance, and the quality of care they provide. In
considering an update recommendation, we start with zero--in
other words, keeping the rates at the current prevailing level.
And then any increase in the rates or decrease needs to be
justified with evidence in one of the categories I just
mentioned.
Our March report this year includes a total 19
recommendations, including 4 related to special needs plans
under Medicare Advantage. Across those 19 recommendations,
there were a total of 302 ``yes'' votes from MedPAC
Commissioners, 5 ``no'' votes, and 3 abstentions. So there is a
substantial consensus in the Commission in favor of the
recommendations in our report.
If I could highlight just one thing in my opening
statement, it would be our recommendation to repeal the SGR
system, the sustainable growth rate system, in the Medicare
physician payment program. As you well know, CBO recently re-
estimated the cost of repeal, and it is dramatically lower than
it has been in recent years. From our perspective, SGR repeal
is now on sale, and the sale price may not last. And so we urge
you to take advantage of this opportunity.
We also urge you to include in the repeal legislation two
other things: One is provisions aimed at rebalancing payments
between cognitive and procedural services, with particular
emphasis on primary care; and, second, provisions designed to
encourage movement toward new payment systems.
As we see it, payment reform--that is, moving away from
fee-for-service to new payment models like accountable care
organizations, bundling around episodes of care, or medical
home--movement to payment reform is the single most important
step to improve quality for Medicare beneficiaries while
minimizing taxpayer burden.
Payment reform is essential because it encourages and
supports delivery system reform, whereby clinicians and other
providers accept joint responsibility for both the quality of
care and the total cost of care. Medicare's current payment
systems, which are siloed payment systems based on provider
type, in fact facilitate, if not encourage, fragmented care
delivery and inhibit collaboration across providers and inhibit
the smooth flow of resources to where clinicians think they can
do the most good for Medicare payments.
So those are my opening comments, Mr. Chairman, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hackbarth follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let's start at the beginning. The report acknowledges what
we all know, which is Medicare will be broke in 10 short years.
How urgent is it for us to act now to make that program solvent
over the long term?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah, so, as I indicated in my comment, the
most important thing for us to accomplish is to support reform
and care delivery. That is where the action is.
And the sort of changes that we are talking about--for
example, moving to accountable care organizations or bundling
around episodes--require providers to develop new relationships
with one another. And we believe those relationships are
important to quality of care, let alone cost.
But they will take time to develop. And so moving in that
direction now allows us to have the necessary delivery system
reform in time to help us, you know, 5 or 10 or 15 years down
the road.
Chairman BRADY. In your view, is it possible to make Social
Security solvent for the long haul without reforming fee-for-
service?
Mr. HACKBARTH. No. We think reforming fee-for-service is an
essential part of the effort.
Chairman BRADY. In the report, you make two recommendations
generally: one on the principles of SGR reform, breaking the
link between expenditures and updates, and you outline some
principles. Then you talk about offsets. Once we get the
replacement right, which tells us the price, we have to do the
hard work on the offsets.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right.
Chairman BRADY. So can you talk for the Committee about
some key principles on SGR reform in your mix of offsets for
once we get that replacement right?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So the major principles I touched on
in my opening statement: repeal, rebalance payments within the
physician fee schedule, and encourage movement to new payment
systems.
In terms of offsets, in October 2011 we sent this Committee
and the other committees of jurisdiction a letter with almost
$300 billion in offsets. Actually, let me just clarify that. We
had about $200 billion in offsets and $100 billion in suggested
changes in the physician fee conversion factor. So, at the
time, the total cost to repeal was about $300 billion, and we
had a package that would roughly achieve that goal.
Since that time, as I indicated, the cost of repeal has
fallen dramatically, so not all of the things on that list
would be required. We do have roughly $100 billion worth of
current unenacted MedPAC recommendations before this Committee
and the Congress.
We would also think that it would be appropriate to have
some balance between physicians and other participants in the
Medicare system. In our October 2011 letter, we had the balance
one-third physicians, two-thirds from all of the other
participants in the Medicare system. There is no magic to that
split, but it might be still a reasonable approach.
Chairman BRADY. Final question is really advice for the
Committee. As we look at this, it sort of reminds me of Parade
magazine every year does an edition on what do people earn, you
know. And you sort of thumb through it to find out what average
people make.
You are tempted, in looking at this report, to look at the
margins to sort of--in the past, it has been who is ripe for
picking in provider cuts going forward. But that has been part
of the problem. We are really not focused on quality, reforming
this process so it is not so reimbursement-driven.
How should we as a subcommittee use this as a tool in
designing a permanent, reliable, quality-driven SGR or
replacement for the SGR?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, as you say, we don't think that
you only look at the margins. In fact, we think sometimes
looking at average margins is deceptive. What you have asked us
via our statute is to recommend rates consistent with the
efficient delivery of service. And sometimes the average
margins don't help you understand what the efficient level of
payment is.
So we tend not to base our recommendations solely on
average margins. That is just one input. In addition, we look
at quality of care, the entrance and exit of providers in a
particular area.
Within our recommendations, there are, however, certain
provider groups, namely skilled nursing facilities and home
health agencies, where we have seen persistently very high
margins for a long period of time, double-digit margins. And,
in those cases, we have recommended an actual rebasing of the
rates. In other words, don't just update from the current rate;
lower the current rate so that it is more appropriate given the
cost of delivery.
So those are two areas where we think in particular there
is an opportunity--skilled nursing facilities and home health
agencies.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the issues that we hear about, all of us go to
various events, people come up and say, I can't find a doctor
and I am on Medicare.
I know you do an annual survey. I would like you to talk
about what you have found in that survey.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes. So each August, September we do a
survey of 8,000 people--4,000 Medicare beneficiaries and 4,000
people who are just prior to Medicare eligibility by age and
are privately insured. And we ask a series of questions about
their access to care and then also ask them about their ability
to find a new physician if, in fact, they are seeking a new
physician.
On the issues about their satisfaction with access to
quality of care, Medicare beneficiaries have consistently
reported higher satisfaction with their access to care than the
privately insured patients just under age 65. The differences
aren't huge, but the pattern has been pretty consistent over
time.
On the questions related to finding a new physician if you
are seeking one, Medicare beneficiaries report about the same
level of difficulty as the privately insured patients. Those
numbers have bounced around a little bit in recent years, but
they are basically the same.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Is that basically the question of finding a
primary care physician?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes. Actually, we ask questions on both. We
ask if you are looking for a new primary care physician and
then a separate question, if you are looking for a new
specialist. The challenges, both in Medicare and in private
insurance, tend to be in terms of finding a new primary care
physician.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So as we take on 30 million new people under
the Affordable Care Act, we are going to be in some difficulty
with primary care physicians?
Mr. HACKBARTH. We have not looked specifically at the
implications of the Affordable Care Act, but we do see
indications, particularly in some portions of the country,
finding a new primary care physician is difficult, again, for
both Medicare and privately insured patients.
This is the reason why, in talking about SGR repeal, I
emphasized the importance of increased payment for primary
care. That is where we see the potential access problems for
Medicare beneficiaries.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Could I ask a question about Medicare
Advantage programs? They cover everything that traditionally
Medicare covers. Are they allowed to play with co-pays and
other things to make a difference in how they are used or to
limit the risk or make people say, well, I think I am going to
get out of here because I have something that isn't covered, or
it costs too much, or----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So they do have some flexibility
around the benefit design. And for the reasons that we
discussed in the hearing a couple weeks ago on benefit design,
we think some flexibility is appropriate. In fact, we would
like to see them have a bit more flexibility than they have
currently in some areas--for example, having tailored co-pays
for particular patients with particular illnesses. That is the
idea behind value-based insurance design.
Having said that, though, you need to take care that
benefit design is not used to enroll a favorable selection of
risk and discourage the higher-risk patients. So that
flexibility needs to be within a regulatory framework that
protects against risk selection activity. So we are trying to
strike a balance: flexibility for a more value-based insurance
design without skimming behavior----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Tell me about the spread. If I am in one
plan and my diabetes is taken care of and it costs me $100 and
in the other one it costs $40, is that spread possible between
two Medicare Advantage programs and co-pays? Or is it a $5
difference? Or what are we talking about here?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, I can't answer that question off the
top of my head, Dr. McDermott. I would be happy to respond to
that in writing afterward.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. As a final thing, I notice in today's paper
the FTC is suing a hospital in Idaho for buying a doctor's
practice under the noncompetitive questions.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Some of the things in the ACA, the
Affordable Care Act, these accountable care organizations, it
seems to me that there are a lot of problems out there about
how you control costs and how medical systems can move to do
that that are inherent in the law. I would like to hear you say
a little something about that.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, this is another challenging
area.
In general, we believe that developing formal relationships
among different types of providers is a good thing and a
necessary part of trying to improve the value of care. When
providers of various types work independently without
coordination, we know what the results are. That is the
experiment we have run for the last 40 or 50 years. We get a
high cost and uneven quality. So we favor some integration
combinations. That doesn't always have to be in terms of a
formal merger or ownership. There are a lot of different ways
that configuration can happen.
Having said that, there is a fear that as these
combinations develop, that they will have undue market power
and be able to, using that market power, get very high rates of
payment from private payers, if not from Medicare. And so there
is a balance to be struck. And, you know, we don't want
complete consolidation, but we do need some reorganization of
care.
You know, this is one of the reasons why I personally favor
physician-led ACOs. If all of the ACO development is hospital-
focused, you tend to get more consolidation, more market power
that can lead to higher prices for private payers. Having
physician-led ACOs I think can be consistent with a more
competitive system.
And so I am encouraged to see that, in fact, roughly half
of the ACOs that have now been approved by CMS are, in fact,
physician-led ACOs. I think that is a good sign.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hackbarth, how many on your board are actually in
private practice?
Mr. HACKBARTH. In private practice. It is going to be hard
for me to do a quick count off----
Mr. JOHNSON. But you do have some?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes, we do.
Mr. JOHNSON. And not a preponderance, though, I would
guess.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, as I said, in our current membership,
we have six clinicians. For example, one, Tom Dean, Dr. Tom
Dean, practices in a small town in South Dakota and brings to
us the experience of a family practice physician in that
environment.
Mr. JOHNSON. Good.
As you know, ambulatory surgery centers' payment updates
are based on Consumer Price Index-Urban, which reflects
inflation in the entire economy. MedPAC previously said CPI-U
is a poor proxy for input price increases.
Since there is no empirical evidence to suggest that ASC
inflationary challenges differ from hospitals--they both have
to hire and retain nurses and purchase similar medical
supplies--shouldn't their payment updates reflect the
outpatient hospital market basket?
Otherwise, payments between the two sectors will continue
to diverge over time, as CPI tends to lag market basket by
about a percentage point.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, as you indicated, Mr. Johnson,
we don't think that the CPI-U is an appropriate adjustment
factor for ASCs.
We have recommended that cost data be collected from ASCs,
one of the purposes of which would be to develop a more
appropriate index for ASCs. Although there are some
similarities in the services and inputs used by ASCs and
hospitals, the mix is significantly different. So even the
hospital inflator wouldn't be tailored to ASC patterns.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, how do you all adjust for those
differences?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, as I said, right now, without cost
data, it is very difficult to do that. And that is one of the
reasons why we think ASCs should be required to submit some
cost data to Medicare.
Mr. HACKBARTH. And they don't do that now?
Mr. HACKBARTH. They do not.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay.
In the report, the Commission found the current system
undervalues primary care and overvalues specialty care. I agree
primary care physicians are different. I am also aware of
potential primary care shortages. Over half the doctors in
Texas aren't taking new Medicare patients.
However, is MedPAC concerned about the access to cognitive
specialists, who bill a lot of office visits but would face
cuts under your recommendation?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, so we have made over the years a
series of recommendations about how the relative values are
calculated in the physician fee schedule. In general, those
recommendations would increase the value for what we refer to
as cognitive services, nonprocedural services.
So specialists who provide a lot of those services actually
could benefit from our recommendations, whereas those that are
doing procedures or imaging would tend to be paid less.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hackbarth, thank you again for your testimony today and
the work that MedPAC does.
You are probably familiar with CBO's recalculation of
Medicare spending between now and 2020. It just came out in
February. They updated their baseline from just last August.
This is what they found: They found a reduction in Medicare
spending during that time period of 3\1/2\ percent, or $382
billion, which is significant, which tells me something is
happening out there, something is churning. And it may be a
little bit too early to tell what exactly, but it does, I
think, give many of us hope that have been working with MedPAC
throughout the years, as far as the recommendations you have
been making to this Committee and to this Congress in regards
to delivery system and payment reform, which was included in
the healthcare bill.
And I don't know if you were familiar with the article that
came out in USA Today last week on March 4 entitled,
``Healthcare Spending is Transferred Out of ICU.''
And, Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to have
this article inserted in the record at this time.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. KIND. The article states, and I quote, ``Cost-saving
measures under the healthcare law appear to be helping keep
medical prices flat, according to healthcare providers and
analysts. Also, weak demand may linger from the recession,
which ended in June 2009, especially for optional care, such as
cosmetic surgery.''
And then later in the article, Dan Mendelson, who is the
CEO of Avalere Health, which advises healthcare companies and
investors, was quoted as saying, ``We are beginning a long
period of adjustment in health care. Institutions are taking
both cost control and quality improvement more seriously.''
And a little bit later in the article, it states, ``In the
4 years leading to the expanded health insurance, the
government has used authority in the Patient Protection
Affordable Care Act,'' the ACA, ``to try to reshape the
economics of health care through regulation and financial
incentives. That appears to be keeping a lid on medical
costs.''
And then later in the article, Peter Person, the chief
executive of Essentia Health, a 13,000-employee hospital system
up in Duluth, Minnesota, was quoted as saying, ``It all goes
back to the Affordable Care Act and how it is changing so many
components of the way we do business. The language I use now in
the healthcare business is completely different from the
language I used even 5 years ago.''
And, again, there is more to the article in that.
So there is something happening that is starting to gain
traction right now. And, obviously, we listened closely to what
MedPAC was recommending throughout the years and included
virtually all of the delivery system reforms that MedPAC was
making and the payment reforms in order to help drive the
system to better quality, better access, at a better price. And
now CBO is saying almost a $400 billion savings in Medicare
over the next 8 years. And the verdict is still somewhat out as
far as what is driving that.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. KIND. But these are all, I think, signs of hopefulness
with where the healthcare system is going. And, in fact, the
ACOs that you were talking about a little bit earlier, medical
homes is moving forward, trying to reduce preventable hospital
readmissions as part of ACA, wider testing, the bundle of
payments and that.
What hope do you see as far as the implementation of these
delivery system and payment reforms in regards to finally
starting to bend the cost curve within the healthcare system
and whether or not that might be sustainable in the long term?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, I am hopeful. I think there is
change afoot. It is hard to go around the country and talk to
physicians and hospital executives and other providers without
being convinced that there are changes, meaningful changes,
happening.
As to what share of the change in the trend is attributable
to those real changes in care delivery versus temporary factors
like the economy, I don't know the answer to that. As you know,
there is a robust debate about that issue.
I would say, though, that even if you believe, as I do,
that there are real changes happening, that is not quite the
same thing as saying that they will be sustained in the long
run.
Mr. KIND. Right.
Mr. HACKBARTH. In the 1990s, I was a private health plan
executive and then the CEO of a large multispecialty medical
group. That was, as you will recall, the period of managed
care. Real changes were happening in healthcare delivery in the
1990s, too. And, in fact, we saw a significant slowing of the
rate of increase in healthcare costs.
That did not last, that was not sustained, in part because
those changes in delivery, that change in healthcare spending
provoked a reaction.
Mr. KIND. Uh-huh.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Whenever we try to bend the cost curve,
there will inevitably be some winners and some losers. And we
know that the losers will push back at some point.
Mr. KIND. Mr. Chairman, I would hope that in the future
MedPAC might offer some recommendations on how we can
accelerate some of the financial incentives or payment reforms,
given the track record that is being established. That might be
helpful for the Committee to consider, as well.
Chairman BRADY. Yes. And I think SGR reform is the perfect
opportunity for us to start making those changes together.
Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hackbarth, thanks for your time today.
Back in your 2007 report, and now it is reiterated in this
current report, you raise concerns about the ease with which
critical access hospitals could manipulate the Medicare
hospital wage index system by converting to a prospective
payment system hospital and pull national Medicare dollars into
one State entirely.
Since enactment of the Affordable Care Act, this very
scenario has occurred and is referred to as the ``Bay State
boondoggle.'' Can you give us a sense of this, how real is it,
why it is that you are concerned about it?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So in our hospital payment system, we
adjust the payments for local wages across the country since
there is so much variation. And that is an appropriate thing to
do.
The problem that we have had, Mr. Roskam, is that over the
years there have been a lot of ad hoc changes in that system
for adjusting wages--special rules, special categories created.
And what we saw in Massachusetts, the case that you refer to,
is one of those special rules being manipulated for the purpose
of increasing Medicare payment.
We recommended in 2007, as you know, a complete overhaul of
the wage index system, including wiping out all of these
special rules that are subject to manipulation. Recently, the
Institute of Medicine was asked by the Congress to look at the
same issue and came up with recommendations quite similar to
the ones that we made in 2007.
So we need to get away from these special provisions that
are sort of rifle-shot additions to the law, because they are
subject to manipulation.
Mr. ROSKAM. Because this is a zero-sum game, right?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right.
Mr. ROSKAM. So when these things are manipulated--and I
know that is a characterization, but I will characterize it as
a manipulation--when they are manipulated, they are manipulated
for benefit of one at the demise of another hospital or the
demise of another State. Is that right?
Mr. HACKBARTH. That is correct. The wage index system is a
zero-sum game. It is an index, and it redistributes a fixed
amount of dollars.
Mr. ROSKAM. Let me just shift gears to the rehab side. As
we all know, our former colleague and my Senator, Senator Kirk,
had an incredibly difficult health experience in that he
suffered a stroke. But we have all been heartened by the story
of his recovery and now his return to the Senate. He gives an
incredible amount of credit to an institution in Chicago, the
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
I have a sister institution out in the suburbs called
Marianjoy. And I want to get to this question of the 60 percent
rule and how this is--or the 75 percent rule and the 60 percent
drama.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right.
Mr. ROSKAM. Congressman Hyde, my predecessor, served in his
last days at Marianjoy. And so it is an institution that has a
great reputation, but they are under incredible downward
pressure.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. ROSKAM. And when I spoke to the president of Marianjoy,
she said that they evaluated in the previous year more than
7,400 patients, only admitting 2,400 patients, which means that
2 out of 3 were turned away.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. ROSKAM. It is a selective admission process. And their
argument is, look, this shows that the system isn't being
abused and so forth.
Can you speak to this 60 percent rule----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Sure.
Mr. ROSKAM [continuing]. And what happens if it moves to 75
percent? Because there is a number of us that have real
concerns if we move in that direction.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So in the post-acute portion of
Medicare, we have several different types of providers. We have
the in-patient rehab facilities, we have long-term care
hospitals, we have skilled nursing facilities, and home health
agencies. And patients requiring services after a hospital
admission can end up in any one of those four places. And what
we see in the data is that patients with the same diagnosis,
the same clinical problem can often wind up in any one of the
four.
The challenge is that the payment rates for those four
different settings are dramatically different.
Mr. ROSKAM. Right.
Mr. HACKBARTH. And so, in the case of in-patient rehab
facilities in particular, they are very important institutions
for patients with a particular set of needs, that really need
intensive rehabilitative therapy, but it is an expensive place
to send patients who could be cared for just as well in a
skilled nursing facility or home health. The cost is much
higher in the in-patient rehab facility.
And so the 60 percent rule or the 75 percent rule is a
crude attempt to assure that the in-patient rehab service, an
intensive high-cost service, is focused on the patients who
really need it and not on patients who could be cared for just
as well in a skilled nursing facility.
It is an arbitrary rule, it is a crude rule, and it is the
sort of rule that you need to impose when you don't have an
accountable party, a clinician, making that choice on where to
send a patient, coupled with responsibility for cost and
quality.
So the direction that we want to move is away from these
arbitrary rules like the 60 percent or 75 percent to systems
where a clinical organization would say, this patient with a
hip replacement can go to a skilled nursing facility, this
patient with a more complicated problem really needs to go to
an in-patient rehab facility. And that person is accountable
for the cost and quality of care. In a siloed payment system,
there is no accountability.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you for raising that issue. The whole
challenge on post-acute care and the reimbursements in those
settings is clearly going to be a focus of the Subcommittee
going forward. So thank you.
Mr. Blumenauer.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hackbarth, I must say that you may be 17 unelected
bureaucrats, but I think MedPAC has over the years served us
very well. It is too bad there isn't a mechanism for Congress
to be required to respond to your recommendations. The
healthcare system would have been better off, and we would have
saved a lot of money.
Mr. THOMPSON. Is that a motion?
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Just an observation, and not a political
comment.
There are three areas that I would appreciate your helping
me with. One, you highlight in your report that we are
overpaying some of the very low-performing Medicare Advantage
programs; that, on balance, there was a concept of reward good
ones, penalize poor ones. We have seen some improvement, but
could you comment briefly about that problem that you see with
the overpayment of the underachievers?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So, in general, as I have said before
this Committee many times, I believe, we believe that having
private plans as an alternative, a choice for Medicare
beneficiaries is an important thing, because often they can do
things that traditional Medicare finds difficult to do in the
current siloed payment systems, like coordinate and integrate
care for chronically ill patients. So that is a good thing.
But that doesn't mean that all private plans are equally
good and perform equally well at those activities. Some are
truly exemplary and among, you know, the people that everybody
points to as the very best in the country. But, in fact, there
is a huge range of performance among Medicare Advantage plans.
One context in which this came up recently was the CMS demo
for quality bonuses. And what they did in this demonstration
project was extend the bonuses for quality basically to, like,
90 percent of all the plans participating in Medicare.
We had two objections to that. One is, 90 percent probably
don't deserve quality bonuses. But even more important than
that, this demo, in effect, overrode the decisions made by the
Congress in PPACA on how to structure a Medicare quality bonus
for MA. So we thought the money was being spent
indiscriminately.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. And I am hopeful that we will be able to
return to that because we really do want to coax more capacity
and quality. All Medicare Advantage programs aren't the same.
You also referenced hospice care----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes.
Mr. BLUMENAUER [continuing]. And some difficulties you see
there. This is an area that I would deeply appreciate some
brief comments here, but perhaps being able to follow up with
you, because----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Sure.
Mr. BLUMENAUER [continuing]. We are seeing such dramatic
advances in palliative care, that we are watching that people
who choose this option in some instances actually have not just
a higher quality of life but they actually live longer----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right.
Mr. BLUMENAUER [continuing]. In that setting. And,
coincidentally, it costs less than keeping people in intensive
care or extreme procedures.
Do we need to be reevaluating our principles of hospice, do
some fine-tuning so we are not having areas of abuse but we
capture the potential of higher-quality and lower-cost care for
others?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. It is, I think, safe to say that the
current MedPAC Commissioners and all the Commissioners that I
have served with in my tenure at MedPAC believe that the
hospice benefit is extremely important for Medicare
beneficiaries. And we are heartened by the fact that if you
look back over the last 10, 15 years, in fact, utilization of
the hospice benefit has increased over time. And we think that
is a good thing, so long as that is what the beneficiaries
want.
We do have some concerns about the hospice payment system,
however. And we believe that the current payment system is
subject to manipulation. And the form that manipulation takes
is very, very long hospice stays, in fact, often multiple
recertifications of eligibility for hospice. And our concern is
that is what the payment system currently rewards. And so we
have made some recommendations about how to address that
problem.
So let me stop there. And I would welcome the chance to
talk in more detail about that.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Mr. Chairman, I think this is an area that
is worthy of some consideration of the Committee. There may be
adjustments that need to be made clearly in the payment system,
but, by the same token, the definition that we started with was
in a different era in terms of palliative care and what we
know.
And I am hopeful that there is a way that we can get a
little deeper into this, maybe with the help of MedPAC or
others, that both assures the integrity of the program but
targets it in a way to maximize the benefit and minimize some
gaming of the system.
Chairman BRADY. Right.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you very much.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Blumenauer. My pleasure.
Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Hackbarth, back. We appreciate your testimony,
and appreciate your report.
I want to touch very briefly on the comment you made on
fee-for-service, that we ought to be moving away to a different
model. It is not in your testimony, however, is it, that fee-
for-service ought to be outlawed?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Not outlawed, but we do think that we ought
to be encouraging movement to new payment systems. And, you
know, there is so much talk about how they can reduce cost.
Mr. PRICE. Yeah.
Mr. HACKBARTH. I really want to emphasize that we think
that the new payment systems increase quality for Medicare
beneficiaries.
Mr. PRICE. But you wouldn't outlaw fee-for-service. You
wouldn't recommend that.
MedPAC looks at utilization, correct?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Correct.
Mr. PRICE. You look at overutilization, whether or not
things are being--tests are being ordered too much, procedures
are being done----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. PRICE [continuing]. Too often. And you do that because
increased utilization increases costs, right?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. PRICE. Do you look at the practice of defensive
medicine?
Mr. HACKBARTH. We have in the past.
Mr. PRICE. What kind of estimates do you have about how
much that adds to costs?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, we don't have an independent estimate
of that. We have looked at the literature on that.
My own view on that is that there may be too much emphasis
on trying to calculate precisely what increment it adds to
cost. Having worked with physicians as CEO of a very large
group, I think that those estimates sort of understate the
impact it has on medical practice.
Mr. PRICE. There are some estimates that it may be as much
as 1 out of every 3 or 4 healthcare dollars. Is that--which
is----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, again, we----
Mr. PRICE [continuing]. Hundreds of billions of dollars.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. We have not tried to calculate----
Mr. PRICE. Wouldn't that be wise, to look at that?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, it is a very difficult estimate to
make, and I am not sure that we would be able to do it better
than the various people that have tried to do that.
Mr. PRICE. I think it would be wise for MedPAC to begin
considering that. I think it is hundreds of billions of dollars
of waste in our system. And when you talk about the kind of
need for providing coverage for folks and the need for more
resources, this is an area where I think we could make great
progress.
I want to shift to the treatment of patients, the incentive
for treatment of patients in certain settings. And I am
confused by why the same service for a patient in an outpatient
setting, nonhospital outpatient setting, and that same service,
that same exact procedure, that same exact service being
provided in a hospital outpatient setting, why those payments
are different.
Your report last year, I believe, looked at the potential--
--
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes.
Mr. PRICE [continuing]. For equalizing those payments.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. And what was your conclusion or what were your
thoughts about moving in that direction?
Mr. HACKBARTH. So we have already made recommendations to
move toward equalizing the payment for evaluation of management
services. And we are in the process of looking at other
services beyond that initial group where we ought to move
toward equalizing the payments.
It does not make sense to us to pay dramatically different
rates, as you know, for the same service simply based on what
name is over the door. And right now, given the transitions
that are under way in medical care organization, the program is
at risk and Medicare beneficiaries are at risk for much higher
costs even when they go to the same physician----
Mr. PRICE. Exactly.
Mr. HACKBARTH [continuing]. Just because of changes in
ownership.
Mr. PRICE. Have you looked at combining the fee schedules?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Pardon me?
Mr. PRICE. Have you looked at combining the fee schedules?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, what we have done, consistent with our
assignment from the Congress is we want to set the payment
levels at the level of the efficient provider. So if the
physician office is the efficient provider of a service, we
think we ought to be paying at the physician office level.
Now, there are some services where we think that the right
level might be between the physician office level and the
hospital outpatient department level. We are looking at some of
those services right now.
Mr. PRICE. What are your metrics for efficiency?
Mr. HACKBARTH. So right now, in this particular example, if
we can get an adequate supply of a particular service and
physician office under the physician fee schedule, that is the
efficient provider. Adequate supply at this rate. Why should we
be paying more in a hospital outpatient department for the
exact same service?
Mr. PRICE. And how much do you think you could save by
equalizing payment?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, again, we looked initially at our
recommendations on evaluation and management services. And
maybe Mark can--yeah, so $900 million. About $200 million of
that would accrue to the Medicare beneficiary from our past
recommendation.
Mr. PRICE. That is just for E&M.
Mr. HACKBARTH. That is E&M alone. Now we are looking at
additional groups of services beyond E&M that potentially would
add to that number.
Mr. PRICE. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Did I hear that right? Site-neutral
reimbursement on office visit evaluation would be about $900
million, and of course then obviously to the senior themselves?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah, $200 million to the beneficiaries,
$900 million total.
Chairman BRADY. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding the hearing.
Mr. Hackbarth, thank you for being here.
I want to talk about access to primary care. And you cover
this in your testimony. Is it as difficult for Medicare folks
as it is for private insurers? Is it difficult for both? Or is
it just a Medicare thing?
Mr. HACKBARTH. No, this is a general problem beyond
Medicare. It is Medicare and private.
Mr. THOMPSON. Yesterday, I had a visit from a constituent
who is a med student. And his concern was that when today's med
students get out of school, they are carrying considerable
debt. And I think this is a problem for all students, but for
medical students it tends to be a little bit more. He told me
that he didn't think there was anyone in his class, unless they
were going through school as part of the military that would
leave without at least $200,000 in debt.
And his feeling was that high debt would, in turn, help
those students determine what field of medicine they want to
pursue and, because primary care is historically low
reimbursement, it stands to reason that there is going to be a
shortage of docs.
Is it your belief and MedPAC's belief that the cost of
medical school is a factor in this?
Mr. HACKBARTH. It is a factor. It is not the only reason
that people elect to go into specialty care, but it is a
factor.
Mr. THOMPSON. And, no, it is probably not; you are probably
right. But I would assume that there are folks who want to go
into primary care but, once they get over the sticker shock,
that it pushes them over the edge into going into----
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right.
Mr. THOMPSON [continuing]. A type of medicine that maybe
they didn't set out to go into. Maybe they wanted to be primary
care docs, but once they come to the realization they are going
to have a pretty hefty bill to pay, then that causes them to go
into specialty?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Are there other professions, medical
professions, nurse practitioners and things of that nature that
because of the cost of care, they tend to go into areas with a
higher reimbursement than in primary care?
Mr. HACKBARTH. So you are asking whether we have evidence
that nurse practitioners, for example, elect to engage in
specialty care versus----
Mr. THOMPSON. Correct.
Mr. HACKBARTH [continuing]. Primary care? I don't know the
answer to that.
Mr. THOMPSON. Is that something that you look at or should
look at?
Mr. HACKBARTH. We have not looked at that in the past. You
know, we can try to do that. I don't know what issues might be
raised in doing that analysis.
Mr. THOMPSON. It might be worth looking at, because
especially now with the distribution of labor and what nurse
practitioners and physician's assistants and the likes are
doing, I am assuming it would have some impact on primary care.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. And I would say that I believe that
nurse practitioners and physician assistants are a necessary
part of dealing with our primary care issues. I think we have
not taken full advantage of the capabilities of non-physician
practitioners, and, frankly, I think we are going to have to.
Mr. THOMPSON. I agree with you.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Even if we decided today to increase the
number of primary care physicians trained, it takes a long time
for that pipeline to produce physicians.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, given the fact that these reimbursement
rates are affecting the delivery of health care, particularly
as it applies to primary care, the Commission's proposal on the
SGR freezes the existing reimbursement rates.
How do you square that with what you just told me?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So the proposal that you are referring
to is our October 2011 letter to this Committee and others. The
context for that letter was, at that point, SGR repeal cost
$300 billion over 10 years. And since we knew that the cost of
repeal was the single biggest reason why SGR had not been
repealed, we felt obliged to come up with a package to cover
that $300 billion cost.
The only way that we felt we could get there was to take
$200 billion from hospitals and other participants in the
system and about $100 billion worth of the cost out of the
physician fee schedule. That necessitated cuts in the
conversion factor for specialty physicians and a freeze on
primary care.
Now that the cost of repeal is much larger, you know, you
would have a different set of options for how to structure
that, thankfully. And, potentially, you could elect to have
some increases for primary care if you so desired.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, I think it is important that we get
something back, Mr. Chairman, on that. Because if, in fact,
part of any proposal would be to freeze primary care, when we
all acknowledge that the lack of primary care is one of the
reasons that the healthcare costs, you know, are where they are
and that this is one way to lower or bend that cost curve and
provide a more sensible delivery of medicine, I would think
that we wouldn't want to miss that point.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Right. So, you know, there are two ways to
look at this. One is, you know, how much it costs to go to
medical school and the like. And, in that context, a freeze
obviously is not helpful to future primary care physicians.
The other way to look at it is the relative fees paid to
primary care versus specialty care. And our proposal in October
2011 said, if you are constrained on the number of dollars you
have, maximize that gap by cutting specialty fees while holding
primary care constant. If you have more money available,
though, it would obviously be desirable to increase primary
care.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thanks, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Hackbarth, for sharing your perspective
and insight on some very important issues today.
It is my understanding, and I think this topic was touched
on briefly, but there are various factors that are perhaps
leading to more and more provider consolidation. Could you
elaborate more on that and perhaps share what you see as the
impact to insurance premiums as a result?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, I would say there are basically
two. One, there is consolidation that is aimed at developing
new organizations that are better able to effectively care for
Medicare patients and other patients. So they are integrating
in a way that they collaborate to better coordinate and
integrate care. That is the good type.
Then there is the other type that is basically aimed at
maximizing market power. And so there have been a lot of what
antitrust lawyers would refer to as horizontal mergers where,
you know, hospitals are joining together. They are not
integrating with physicians, they are just building hospital
systems that have more leverage vis-a-vis insurance companies.
That is more problematic.
Now, the tricky part is that some of the good type of
integration also leads to market power that can lead to higher
prices for private parties.
Mr. SMITH. And I can appreciate a lot of things about how
differently health care is delivered across the country,
certainly, representing a very rural area. And I think there is
still some consolidation out there, too, for various reasons.
So I appreciate that.
Now, shifting gears a bit, in terms of reimbursement, I
notice that the Commission has recommended steps that Medicare
can take to make sure that it is paying accurately for each
individual physician service. And without getting into the
details too much here, why would you say it is important that
the determinations are accurate? And what are the implications,
perhaps, for getting them wrong?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, there are two types. One we just
discussed a minute ago. If the prices are wrong, it can
influence the physician pipeline for the future. So if we
consistently underpay for primary care, in the long run we will
have too few primary care physicians. And we fear that is
happening.
The other type of problem is that if you overpay for
certain services, you are likely to get more of them. And an
example of that, we believe, would be around imaging services,
where we think Medicare has paid too much. We have encouraged a
lot of investment in imaging equipment to take advantage of
that mispricing. And once the equipment is in place, the
profitability goes up dramatically. And you want to use that
equipment more, more, more because the marginal cost of using
it is low.
So you can have two types of ill effects. One is on supply
of physicians, and one is on the type of services rendered.
Mr. SMITH. And so could you elaborate on how we shift to a
system that more accurately reflects the actual costs and how
we may not have a Federal policy that tends to put things out
of balance?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So the physician fee schedule, as it
is constructed, is focused on what are the costs involved in
providing a particular service. There are 7,000 different
services under the fee schedule, and relative values are
established for each of these services. And the goal is to
accurately measure the inputs and costs that go into producing
those services.
We think there are errors in those measurements, and not
small occasional errors but pretty broad errors in those
measurements. So we have made a series of recommendations both
to the Congress and to the Secretary about correcting those
errors.
The other less discussed challenge in the physician
schedule is that it focuses only on measuring the input costs.
In the market for all other goods and services in the country,
prices not only reflect the input costs, they reflect the value
of the product, and they also move to reflect imbalances in
supply and demand. The construct of the Medicare physician fee
schedule pays no attention to the value of the service to the
patients nor to imbalance in supply and demand.
The latter is why we have recommended and Congress has
enacted a primary care bonus. It is a way of dealing with that
value and supply part of the equation that the fee schedule
ignores.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Thank you.
And thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Gerlach.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hackbarth, thank you very much for testifying today.
I want to focus on the home health agency issue, if I can.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Mr. GERLACH. First, I want to offer you a constituent case
that we experienced a few years ago and get your reaction to
that. And then, also, I want to focus on a couple of your
recommendations from a few years ago in this area.
On the constituent matter, we had a constituent that came
to us after having 3 days of home health care, and the home
health agency billed $1,500 for that care. It was submitted to
the Medicare program, and the reimbursement back to the
provider was actually double that, $3,000. So the reimbursement
was actually double what was billed by the home health agency,
and the explanation from CMS was that, well, we base our
reimbursements on a 30-day episode of care; based on the nature
of the care over 3 days and a 30-day episode, that was what the
reimbursement amount is.
Is that a particular issue you are aware of, that we would
pay, reimburse a provider double what was actually billed? And,
if so, what would be your recommendation on how best to deal
with that situation?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Actually, Mr. Gerlach, we exchanged
some correspondence on this, I think, when it first came up a
couple years ago.
So in the home health area and many of the other Medicare
payment systems, we pay on a per-episode basis, and do so
recognizing that some episodes will cost less, some will cost
more, but those differences will tend to average out.
The reason for paying on an episode basis is that it
creates an incentive for effective management of the services.
You eliminate the incentive to do more home health visits by
paying on an episode basis. So that is----
Mr. GERLACH. So, in this instance, paying double what was
billed incentivizes who to do what? Wouldn't it incentivize
providing more care because you are going to get reimbursed
more than what your actual, in essence, retail billing would be
for that service?
Mr. HACKBARTH. So in some cases the episode payment will be
higher than the costs incurred, but in other cases it will be
less than the costs incurred. And, as I say, the idea is----
Mr. GERLACH. Over a spectrum of service, you are saying?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah, over all of the patients that a home
health agency cares for. Some they will make money, some they
will lose some money, and it will tend to average out. And the
reason for using that approach is to create incentives to not
provide more visits than are necessary.
Now, a problem that we have in the home health----
Mr. GERLACH. Wouldn't it make more sense, though, if a home
health agency bills for, say, the $1,500, that the formula for
reimbursement ought to be the lesser of what that episode of
care was under the current formula or what is billed, whichever
is less? Wouldn't that make more sense?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, I suspect that over time what you
would have is that all of the people who have fewer visits in
the episode would start to gravitate up, saying, well, we want
to maximize the payment, and so we will just increase the
number of visits until we get to the limit.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay.
Mr. HACKBARTH. And so that is why Medicare avoids that.
But there is a very important issue in home health, and
that is that the payments are way too high, on average.
Mr. GERLACH. Yeah, and that is where I was going. Back in
March 2011, it was recommended that the Secretary should
implement new authorities to suspend payment in the enrollment
of new providers if they indicate significant fraud. What has
been the progress from your recommendation 2 years ago that you
can see from your position at MedPAC? What progress has been
made at CMS to address that particular problem?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Well, I can't provide a quantitative answer
to that, but there has been a fairly intense focus on fraud in
home health in particular areas of the country, like south
Florida.
Mr. GERLACH. Yeah. Yeah.
Mr. HACKBARTH. And I think there is probably more that
needs to be done there, but it is increasingly the focus of
attention at HHS.
Mr. GERLACH. Uh-huh. Okay.
And then real quickly, you also recommended 2 years ago a
per-episode co-pay for home health episodes that aren't
preceded by hospitalization or post-acute-care use. What is
that rationale for that recommendation?
And, in particular, for low-income beneficiaries--and I
visited a number of those types of homes in the last few
years--I can't foresee some of these individuals being able to
provide any co-pay for the services they are getting in their
home. What is the rationale for your recommendation? And what
do you think the impact would be if a co-pay was established,
particularly for low-income individuals?
Mr. HACKBARTH. So, under our proposal, the duly eligible
Medicare beneficiaries would not be subject to the co-pay. So
if we used that as the definition of low-income, they would be
protected.
We think having a co-pay for all services is important in a
fee-for-service insurance program like Medicare. That is one of
the only tools that is available to manage costs.
With regard to home health in particular, as you noted, our
recommendation focuses on what we refer to as admissions from
the community. So these are not patients coming out of a
hospital or a skilled nursing facility; these are patients who
are just admitted from the community. There are not clear
clinical guidelines about when that community-initiated home
health service is necessary and appropriate. It is a gray area,
kind of like some medical services.
And, in fact, in the last hearing, Mr. McDermott and I had
an exchange about this. You know, you don't worry about the
patient initiating demand when the service is something that is
painful or risky. Nobody wants to undergo that. But home health
is different. There is no risk involved. There is no
inconvenience involved. In fact, it often lightens the burden
on family members and friends, so it is very attractive in that
regard. And if it is a free service, you know, why not use it?
Mr. GERLACH. Uh-huh.
Mr. HACKBARTH. And so what we have recommended is quite a
modest co-pay, like $150 per admission. For the average home
health episode, that works out to about $8 a visit, which we
think is an appropriate sort of check for people to say, is
this really something that I need?
Mr. GERLACH. Uh-huh. Okay. Very good. Thank you, Mr.
Hackbarth.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Gerlach.
We are not going to do a second round, but I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member for a comment and question and
then Dr. Price for the final question.
Mr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to take a second to enter into the record, or
ask unanimous consent to enter into the record, an article from
The Washington Post by Sarah Kliff dated today. And it is
called, ``Want to debate Medicare costs? You need to see this
chart first.''
It shows that hospital readmissions in Medicare are
dropping, and it shows that the percent of GDP in the future,
if you use what has gone on in the last few years, is going to
stay level rather than continue to rise to 0.7.
I think you are familiar with these numbers.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And I think Members of the Committee ought
to be aware of this particular article that shows that the ACA
is already having an effect before these things go into impact,
or before they went into impact last year.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Uh-huh.
Chairman BRADY. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
indulgence, and just a few quick questions.
This whole issue of post-acute care and the venue for care
and the differential treatment, I think you mentioned that it
ought to be a clinical organization that ought to be making the
decision about the venue of treatment for a patient. You
wouldn't consider MedPAC a clinical organization?
Mr. HACKBARTH. No, no. I am referring to a provider.
Mr. PRICE. Great. I just wanted to make that clear.
And I want to visit home health for just a second, because
a lot of issues are about overpayment in home health and the
like. Isn't it true, though, that if you look at the number of
counties in this country and where the real challenges are, it
is like 25 counties out of 3,000 or something like that?
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. So the patterns of home health use
vary dramatically. In fact, the variation in home health is
much greater than the variation----
Mr. PRICE. Yes.
Mr. HACKBARTH [continuing]. In almost any other service.
Mr. PRICE. Shouldn't we be looking at those targeted
counties?
Mr. HACKBARTH. We should look at those areas in particular.
But across the whole country, we are still overpaying for home
health services.
Mr. PRICE. And let me just touch on that, if I may, very
briefly. The margins that you have talked about--and I think
that your margin analysis comes from methodology of the HCFA
era, really, right?
Mr. HACKBARTH. No. This is our own methodology.
Mr. PRICE. But what margins--refresh my memory on the
margins that you believe--the proper margins that they are
making?
Mr. HACKBARTH. For home health, we are projecting for 2013
around 11, 12, 13 percent.
Mr. PRICE. Are you familiar with an Avalere study,
analysis, 2013 study, that uses financial reports that are
filed with the SEC that put the margin--and take into account
significantly greater information than I think your
methodology--that puts the margin at around 2.5 to 3.5 percent?
Mr. HACKBARTH. I am not familiar with that report. Keep in
mind, the information that we are using is the information
supplied on cost reports by home health agencies.
Mr. PRICE. Great.
Well, maybe we can follow up on that, Mr. Chairman, and see
if we can't get more accurate data. Because this is a real
concern. Because if we lower, if we allow the lowering of
reimbursement for home health, then we may significantly
adversely incentivize movement of those individuals into
actually higher-cost venues. And I think that is probably the
last place we want to go.
Mr. HACKBARTH. Yeah. Well, I would agree that we don't want
to do that. And I would be happy to follow up in detail with
you on this. We don't think that there is a risk of that by
lowering the home health base rate.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Dr. Price.
Thank you for this hearing. There is a lot in this report
to digest. I know there will be followup questions from the
Members. We have 14 days to submit questions, and I am sure
there will be a number of them, including related to what are
driving some of the lower costs, including the economy, the
shift into Medicaid by a number of patients, issues like that.
And I would ask if questions are submitted by the Members that
you respond promptly, as you have in the past.
With that, this Subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
