- SOCIAL IMPACT BONDS: CAN THEY HELP GOVERNMENT ACHIEVE BETTER RESULTS FOR FAMILIES IN NEED?

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SOCIAL IMPACT BONDS: CAN THEY HELP
GOVERNMENT ACHIEVE BETTER RESULTS FOR.
FAMILIES IN NEED?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 9, 2014

__________

Serial 113-HR14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-109                        WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania             JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
JIM RENACCI, Ohio                    DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of September 9, 2014 announcing the hearing.............     2

WITNESSES

Lloyd Doggett, Representative from the State of Texas............     6
Linda Gibbs, Principal, Bloomberg Associates.....................    24
David Juppe, Senior Operating Budget Manager, Maryland Department
of Legislative Services (DLS)..................................    32
George Overholser, CEO and Co-Founder, Third Sector Capital
Partners.......................................................    39
Robert Romo, former client, Center for Employment Opportunities..    20
Sam Schaeffer, CEO and Executive Director, Center for Employment
Opportunities (CEO)............................................     7

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
(AFSCME), statement............................................    60
American Public Human Services Association (APHSA), statement....    62
CSH, statement...................................................    65
Douglas P. Koch, MAI, AICP, statement............................    70
Enterprise Community Partners, statement.........................    77
Green & Healthy Homes Initiative, statement......................    81
Institute for Child Success, statement...........................    88
ReadyNation, statement...........................................    95
Results for America, statement...................................   104

SOCIAL IMPACT BONDS: CAN THEY HELP GOVERNMENT ACHIEVE BETTER RESULTS
FOR FAMILIES IN NEED?

----------

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave
Reichert [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman REICHERT. Thank you for being here today. We will
call the committee to order.
Of course, today's hearing is on social impact bonds, and
our goal today is to review these innovative financing ideas
and determine whether they can help government achieve better
results for families in need.
And to discuss this approach in greater detail as well as
legislation that he has introduced to promote development of
social impact bonds, I want to yield the balance of my time to
the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Young.
Mr. YOUNG. Well, I want to thank Chairman Reichert for
holding this hearing today to discuss how social impact bonds
can be an innovative tool to improve social and public health
outcomes, save taxpayer resources, and unleash non-governmental
investment capital to help at-risk Americans.
I also want to thank our panelists for being here today to
share testimony with the committee.
I want to give special recognition to Congressman Delaney,
a Maryland Democrat and a very conscientious colleague, for his
leadership and partnership with me on this initiative. This is
the sort of big-idea, bipartisan initiative that we need more
of in Washington, and he has helped make that happen here.
Now, I studied a bit of economics at the University of
Chicago, and I want to start today with a quote from Milton
Friedman, who once said, ``One of the great mistakes is to
judge policies and programs by their intentions rather than
their results.''
I have spent the last 2 years on this subcommittee learning
about many of our Nation's social services programs, and I
found that to ring exceedingly true. For all our best
intentions, each of us knows that too often we see government
programs fail the constituencies they are intended to help and
the taxpayers who fund them.
Unfortunately, instead of trying to determine how to get
better results, serious discussions about social service
provisions tend to devolve quickly into superficial arguments
over funding levels. Instead of outcomes, we spend too much
time talking about inputs. Now, to some, it is tempting to
measure compassion with dollar signs, but this was not and is
not what our social safety net is all about.
Social impact bonds can help change our focus from inputs
to outcomes, where it belongs. They do this by requiring every
approved project to answer three basic questions at the outset:
One, what does a successful outcome look like?
Two, whom are we trying to serve?
And, three, what is the value of a successful outcome in
terms of current government spending?
When those questions are answered, we can develop programs
with measurable policy goals and measurable savings. Measurable
policy goals and savings are pre-conditions to using social
impact bonds as a funding mechanism to raise private investment
capital, administer the evidence-based social intervention. And
then, if and only if those policy goals are met, the Federal
Government can pay back those initial investors.
If the goals aren't met, the Federal Government doesn't owe
a dime. In essence, SIBs bring pay-for-performance to the
social and public health sectors, allowing the Federal
Government to improve both the impact and cost-effectiveness of
vital government services.
In short, the Social Impact Bond Act, which I sponsored
with Congressman Delaney as well as Mr. Griffin and Mr. Reed on
this subcommittee and several Democrats, including Mr. Larson,
who is joining us here today, empower states, local
governments, non-profits and the private sector to scale up
evidence-based social and public health interventions to
address some of our Nation's most pressing social challenges.
The results of these projects will help empower well-
intentioned policymakers across all levels of government to
improve lives through evidence-based policymaking as well as
aid non-profits in expanding their models with fidelity across
different geographies and populations.
In turn, this expands our menu of policy options and offers
meaningful alternatives to simply increasing funding for
existing government programs that we know are less than
successful at meeting their stated policy objectives.
With that, I will once again thank our panelists for being
here today, thank the chairman for this opportunity.
And I yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. I thank you, Mr. Young.
Mr. Doggett, would you like to give an opening statement?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE LLOYD DOGGETT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I welcome the discussion about how we invest in our future.
In a time when there are so many valuable initiatives that are
limited by budget squeezes and even by sequestration, it is
important to be as creative as possible.
I salute Mr. Young, Mr. Larson and their co-sponsors for
recognizing the need to invest more in programs that will help
low- and middle-income Americans get an education, attain long-
time employment, and be successful in other areas.
We know that social impact bonds are a relatively new
phenomenon, having, I believe, begun in the United Kingdom in
about 2010. I am familiar with the effort in New York City and
Rikers Island, the work being done in Utah.
The question we have today is the impact of social impact
bonds as a new phenomenon and whether this is the best way to
encourage stronger and more responsive communities.
Since the States are laboratories of democracy, one
question presented by today's hearing is whether Federal
intervention is necessary or desirable at this early stage.
Most of us are familiar with the old saw that a
conservative is someone who says, ``You go first.'' Well, we
have a method in the States and the localities already to
determine how effective these programs are and to evaluate
whether they are accomplishing their objectives. I look forward
to hearing from each of our witnesses on this question.
I know that many of our programs, including those in which
this committee has been involved in the past, face significant
questions as to whether they can continue even next year.
Home visiting for at-risk mothers and their children is set
to expire next March, and I do have some doubts as to whether
now is the time to implement a funding structure that will help
put taxpayer dollars with some third-party investors instead of
directly into the future of these children.
I welcome the good counsel of all of those present, and I
think we must be open to new ideas. We just need to be sure
that those new ideas are the best way to make effective use of
what are fairly precious taxpayer dollars.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Doggett.
And I show there is some agreement on the panel here. I
want to thank all of you for being here, and we do look forward
to the information that you will provide us today.
We are looking for new and innovative ways where we can
help people in this country, and I think we need to keep an
open mind as to how we do that. And your information today will
help us determine if we should do anything in the Federal
Government or not.
So, again, appreciate your testimony you are about to give,
and thank you for being here again today, as I said.
Without objection, each member will have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and have it included in the record.
I want to remind our witnesses to limit their oral
statements, please, to 5 minutes. However, without objection,
all of the written testimony that you have submitted will be a
part of the permanent record.
On our panel this afternoon, we will be hearing from Sam
Schaeffer, CEO, Center for Employment Opportunities; Robert
Romo, former client, Center for Employment Opportunities; Linda
Gibbs, principal, Bloomberg Associates; David Juppe, senior
budget operating manager, Maryland Department of Legislative
Services; and George Overholser, CEO and co-founder, Third
Sector Capital Partners.
Mr. Schaeffer, thanks for being here today, and proceed
with your testimony, please.

STATEMENT OF SAM SCHAEFFER, CEO AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER
FOR EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES

Mr. SCHAEFFER. Thank you, Chairman Reichert, Ranking Member
Doggett, and all the Members of the Committee for highlighting
social impact bonds at today's hearing.
SIBs have the potential to scale some of this country's
most effective social interventions, helping communities expand
programs that have proven results and save taxpayer dollars.
My name is Sam Schaeffer, and I am the executive director
and chief executive officer of the Center for Employment
Opportunities, or CEO.
CEO is an organization devoted to exclusively meeting the
employment needs of men and women with histories of
incarceration. Since founded in New York City in 1996, CEO's
transitional jobs program has helped more than 16,000 people
coming home from prison secure full-time employment.
CEO has been proven, through random assignment evaluation,
to reduce recidivism and provide up to $3.30 in taxpayer
savings for every dollar invested in the program. Over the last
5 years, CEO has leveraged its expertise to expand into ten
cities across California, Oklahoma, and New York State.
In a few moments, you will hear from Robert Romo, one of
the thousands of individuals we have worked with every year, on
how CEO turned his life around. Robert's story illustrates the
challenges so many face when coming home from prison.
Every year more than 60,000 people are released, but more
than 40 percent will return. This failure is costly. The United
States spends $64.3 billion annually on incarceration.
It also has a profound effect on public safety, as well as
families and communities impacted by the criminal justice
system. Attracting new capital for prisoner re-entry programs
like CEO is critical.
In December 2013, CEO, New York State and the intermediary,
Social Finance, began a 4-year SIB project that will help us
serve an additional 2,000 high-risk recently released men in
New York City and Rochester. 44 private investors provided
$13.5 million in capital to support this expansion of services.
This is a performance-based contract, but instead of
focusing on outputs like job placements, it hinges on our
organization making an impact on recidivism and long-term
employment.
If a random assignment evaluation shows that individuals in
the treatment groups spend at least 8 percent fewer days in
jail or prison than the control group and shows a 5 percent
increase in their immediate and long-term employment, USDOL and
the State of New York will return investors their upfront
capital. If we exceed these measures, returns can reach as high
as 12.5 percent. But if the targets are not met, investors
stand to lose their capital.
CEO is excited to take part in this historic project. It
represents a watershed moment in which both the State of New
York and the Federal Government are supporting the full funding
of our core model delivered to our primary service population.
What is more, the contract aligns our partners in New York
and Social Finance to drive effective performance management,
fidelity, and collaboration. Congressman Young and Delaney's
Social Impact Bond Act provides robust tools to create more
deals like CEO's SIB.
Drawing on our organization's experience, I would humbly
offer the following suggestions to help guide this nascent
field, several of which are also contained in Young-Delaney.
Select experienced, proven providers. At this early stage,
it is important to select service providers whose programs have
been proven through experimental or quasi-experimental studies.
For the field to gain steam, we need to construct projects
around interventions most likely to demonstrate impact.
Choose performance and repayment metrics carefully.
Performance thresholds must be achievable based on a provider's
track record. Projects should only aim to achieve results that
are consistent with provider's historical performance.
Attract new capital. Don't cannibalize. One of CEO's
interests in participating in the SIB was accessing new forms
of financial support. If CEO's existing government or
philanthropic funding were diverted to support this SIB, the
project's appeal would have diminished considerably.
Government champions are critical. For a deal to close and
be successfully operationalized, strong government leadership
is essential. Government must be committed as a payor, but also
as a performance and operations partner.
Help providers manage risk. Government should provide tools
for providers negotiating transaction. The risk of any large,
high-profile project is significant, and they will benefit from
the help assessing evaluation design, investment terms, among
other areas.
Finally, cost-benefit is key, but it is not the only thing.
We should find a way to support projects with clear societal,
if not exclusively monetary, benefits. Interventions focusing
on violence reduction or literacy, for example, may show
impacts, but fewer cost savings. These projects should receive
support, if they produce results, government values.
Not all social problems can or should be solved by SIBs,
but in a resource-scarce environment, SIBs allow government to
support proven interventions that show impacts on a specific
social problem.
Perhaps most importantly, SIBs and the Young-Delaney
legislation have the opportunity to help change how cities,
States and the Federal Government support the social sector by
persuading them to fund what works.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schaeffer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Schaeffer.
Mr. Romo, please.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT ROMO, FORMER CLIENT, CENTER FOR EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES

Mr. ROMO. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
House Ways and Means Committee.
My name is Robert Romo, and I am very excited, very proud,
and a little bit nervous to be here. Thank you so much for
inviting me and letting me share my story.
I was released from prison after doing 13.5 years, and 3
days out my parole officer gave me two options for employment
programs to attend. The first program required me to wear a
uniform that made me feel uncomfortable and reminded me of
prison. I wanted to take my shot with CEO.
As soon as I started CEO, I felt positive about gaining
employment sooner than I thought. Everything felt professional
from the first day. It felt good to come to class every morning
at 7:00 a.m., to have a place to go that made me feel positive
about myself.
My life skill instructor consistently treated us like
equals every day. It never felt phony, and I got my attention
right away. She truly believed in me and pushed me to
accomplish things that I was not sure I could. She instilled in
me to do my best every day and to believe that my conviction
did not define me.
I was taught that presentation helps define who we are. I
learned how to interact appropriately and professionally on the
job. I learned self-confidence, and the CEO staff helped build
my self-esteem. My job coach worked with me doing mock
interviews. She never said my ways were wrong, but encouraged
me to look at a different way of expressing my way, myself.
I worked for 6 weeks on a part-time transitional job site
doing maintenance on college campuses. I got a paycheck at the
end of the shift, which was great. It helped me buy extra
groceries to support my family.
At the same time, I was attending the carpentry program at
the CEO training center two nights a week. CEO kept me busy.
There was not a lot of leisure time, which was very good,
because staying busy meant I was not tempted by bad habits and
old acquaintances. I was totally focused on my future.
None of this was easy, but my instructors motivated me,
pushed me and believed in me 100 percent. I had to get good
grades on multiple tests and have good attendance to have CEO
pay my tuition at a local community college for the next part
of the carpentry program. I did it. And before the training was
over, my job developer set up an interview for me at a hotel,
and I was hired on the spot, doing maintenance and carpentry.
I kept in touch with CEO because they told me I could and
should do something I love, not get stuck in just any job. I
love construction. And they sent me on another interview. And
again, I was hired on the spot.
On that job, I met someone I knew while incarcerated. He
told me about an opportunity with his window company and set up
a meeting with his owner. I was planning to go in a suit, but
my CEO job developer suggested I should dress like I was ready
to start work that day. And I did. I was hired on the spot. I
have been there since last October and have already
participated in building two sites.
Honestly, I could not have achieved all of this without the
support of CEO. They helped me see beyond my conviction to a
future that was really positive. I am grateful for the second
chance.
I always had a passion to help others who are in a similar
situation, and CEO is helping me fill that dream. This
opportunity to speak today is just a first step towards
fulfilling that goal.
Thank you again for having me here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Romo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman REICHERT. Well, if I can call you Robert.
Mr. ROMO. Yes, sir.
Chairman REICHERT. Robert, you did an awesome job. So we
couldn't even tell you were nervous.
Mr. ROMO. Thank you, sir.
Chairman REICHERT. You did very well. And we are so happy
to have you here. And I imagine that there were times in your
life where you probably didn't have much hope at all in getting
a job, and here you are. You were hired on the spot at least
three times.
I have never been hired on the spot my first applications
in my previous career. And so congratulations on your success
there. And I bet a few years ago you would never have thought
you would have been--would have had the opportunity to testify
in Congress. Right?
Mr. ROMO. Absolutely, sir.
Chairman REICHERT. Yeah. Well, you--as I said, you did an
excellent job. You should be very proud. And we are happy to
have you here today.
Mr. ROMO. Thank you so much, sir. It means a lot.
Chairman REICHERT. You are welcome.
Ms. Gibbs, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. GIBBS. That is a hard act to follow.
Chairman REICHERT. Yes, it is.

STATEMENT OF LINDA GIBBS, PRINCIPAL, BLOOMBERG ASSOCIATES

Ms. GIBBS. Good afternoon, Chairman Reichert and Ranking
Member Doggett and members of the Ways and Means Subcommittee
on Human Resources.
I am Linda Gibbs, principal at Bloomberg Associates, which
is a non-profit consultant group that was established by
Michael Bloomberg to support mayors in achieving their visions
for the citizens of the cities they serve. Before joining
Bloomberg Associates, I served as the New York City Deputy
Mayor for Health and Human Services.
Working in City Hall with Michael Bloomberg, we focused
closely on poverty in New York City. The Young Men's Initiative
was a key part of that work and--which was focused on reducing
the disparities for young men of color across all social
domains. The Nation's first social impact bond was born out of
that initiative as we searched for funding sources to help
commissioners to launch innovative strategies to meet the
mayor's challenge.
The goal of our SIB is to reduce future jail time among
adolescent inmates who are held on Rikers Island. We know from
historic data that this population has a shocking 1-year
recidivism rate of 50 percent. Half of them will be back on
Rikers within 1 year.
We were determined to change this outcome, but that left us
with a question of what was going to prove the most promising
model. While we had many post-discharge programs in place, we
wanted to explore a jail-based strategy to counteract the
negative effects of incarceration itself on later criminal
behavior.
We settled on an evidence-based cognitive behavioral
therapy program called Moral ReconationTherapy, which
emphasizes changing negative patterns of thinking as a way to
reduce harmful, self-destructive antisocial behaviors, and has
evidence that demonstrates reduction in recidivism in the range
of 15 to 30 percent where it has been evaluated across the
country.
We adopted this. We called it ABLE. And we worked with two
proven non-profit providers to deliver the service, MDRC, a
national research and evaluation shop, and Osborne Associates,
who had a long history of work on Rikers Island. The
independent Vera Institute of Justice will serve as our
evaluator and will be monitoring the success of the program.
Goldman Sachs fully funds the project's intervention by
advancing a $9.6-million loan to MDRC. If recidivism, meaning
return to Rikers, drops by 10 percent, the investor will be
repaid the $9.6-million investment.
At the 10 percent break-even point, the City will have an
amount necessary to both repay that investment and to pay for
the continuation of the program. Drops in excess of 10 percent
produce increasing returns to the investor up to a total payout
potential of $11.7 million, which--at a recidivism reduction of
20 percent. Everything beyond that would accrue savings
exclusively to the City. The investor's benefit is capped at
that level.
If the performance of recidivism does not drop by 10
percent, a portion of the investor's investment will be
protected by a guarantee fund provided by Bloomberg
Philanthropies, which will protect part, but not all, of the
investment.
We have completed the first full year of service, and
results on the reductions to recidivism will be calculated
after a full year expires from the treatment cohort's exit from
prison. We need to watch a full year after they leave to know
what the recidivism rate is for those that received the
service. The program is funded to continue for 4 years, and the
evaluation will continue for a full 7 years. So that is our
program.
Reflecting now more broadly on the issue of social impact
bonds, I believe the model has great potential for a number of
reasons. You have heard many of them already.
SIB funding frees up the creative thinking process and can
really stimulate innovation, the potential that the resource
brings to the table. And it not only brings private capital
forward to fund social programs, it directs a flow of capital
to areas that current private markets typically do not serve:
high-need communities without liquid access to private markets.
SIBs also advance promising strategies. SIBs can help
evidence-based projects being tested in one place to more
easily jump government boundaries for replication elsewhere,
and SIB investors can facilitate the scaling up of what works
locally.
Less attention has been given to what I believe is a
different and very significant benefit, that is, that SIBs
elevate the tenor of outcome-based management in city halls and
State houses, advancing skills and defining clear outcomes,
measuring for results, and assessing governmental cost and
benefits.
In many ways, I believe the SIB's greatest potential for
government is that it is bringing this expertise to the table.
Particularly for small jurisdictions without the ability to
invest in large research capacities, the field of SIB practice
is making straightforward tools more broadly accessible.
But SIBs are not a panacea. They are not appropriate, for
instance, when the intervention will not produce government
savings. There are many social programs that should and need to
be done, but just require an outlay of government expenditure
or philanthropic investment. So SIBs will not serve every
purpose.
Other programs produce savings, but they take too long for
them to be realized to be relevant in an investor's timeframe
or they are too dispersed to be easily recouped, although I
would note that the Young-Delaney bill, 4885, would solve part
of that problem by making it easier to recoup those Federal
savings that do accrue.
Two other cautions I would note. Without good data
management systems, evidence cannot be produced to satisfy the
rigor of the model. Over time, I would expect this will improve
as government agencies become more adept and systems are more
widely available at reasonable costs.
Great expertise is developing in structuring programs to be
administratively simple and increasingly well structured to
avoid practitioner bias, but this is also an emerging expertise
and design considerations are significant.
And this effort is in its infancy. Transaction costs can
still be high and prohibitively high for many. Again, as skills
develop and tools proliferate, these barriers should drop,
making the practice more widely available.
In sum, I am optimistic that SIBs offer great potential to
move the field of sound social service practice forward,
providing well beyond the short-term benefits of new investment
dollars to providing sound outcome-based management expertise.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gibbs follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman REICHERT. Thank you.
Mr. Juppe. Is that pronounced correctly?
Mr. JUPPE. ``Juppe.'' Yes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DAVID JUPPE, SENIOR OPERATING BUDGET MANAGER,
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES (DLS)

Mr. JUPPE. Good afternoon, Chairman Reichert, Ranking
Member Doggett, and Members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Dr. David Juppe, and I am the senior operating
budget manager with the non-partisan Department of Legislative
Services in Maryland. I have spent the last 25 years analyzing
operating and capital budgets and making recommendations on
fiscal policy.
I got involved with social impact bonds in 2012 when a
former colleague, Kyle McKay, who is now with the Texas
Legislative Budget Board, began examining a proposal by
Maryland's Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services to utilize a social impact bond for reentry program
funding for the purpose of reducing recidivism by at least 10
percent.
So I will talk a little bit about the findings of our paper
briefly. As mentioned, there are a number of potential benefits
for social impact bonds, but since it is a fairly new financing
mechanism, you should also be aware of some of the concerns and
issues that counteract some of the proposed benefits.
I am not terribly surprised that social impact bonds would
be considered at this point. Since the great recession of 2008,
governments at all levels have been cutting back spending, and
certainly it could be expected that providers would be seeking
a long-term source of revenue. So you have--various mechanisms
like social impact bonds, public-private partnerships and the
like are gaining in popularity.
Some of the risks that we would raise for your attention,
at least consideration--first off is, you know, there is the
higher cost to government for social impact bonds.
Governments can and do procure contracts and services from
private non-profit vendors through competitive procurements and
single-source procurements every year and pretty much pay
simply a direct cost, whereas, under a social impact bond, you
have not only the direct costs, you have the potential for
return on investment costs, costs for independent evaluations,
as well as additional costs, such as management fees for
intermediaries that link the financing with the providers and
with governments.
Related to this is the question of whether or not
governments can really avoid having funding upfront provided in
their budgets annually in terms of appropriations. One issue
related to this is the fact that, when you look at State and
local government budgets, typically they are--they build a
request based off of their base and they often get a request
ceiling or a target for the next year.
So it would be very difficult--or more difficult certainly
in this constrained fiscal environment for a level of
government to provide 10, 20, $30 million above its base
funding to pay a multi-year social impact bond payment.
Certainly you would also expect that investors would like
to see some sort of security. I mean, certainly, when
purchasers of government-issued debt, either GO bonds or
revenue bonds, see some sort of security in the forms of debt
service reserve accounts, the bonds are insured or you may see
debt service coverage ratios, but right now the only security
you have is the expectation that, potentially, governments will
appropriate the funds.
A second issue that I would raise has to do with overstated
cost savings and the likelihood of success. I have seen a
number of proposals over the years, boot camps, community
courts, drug courts and the like, social impact bonds.
In many instances, there is a--it seems like there is a
proclivity to taking the total cost of a facility, dividing it
by the total number of cases, and deriving a cost per case and
claiming that is a savings.
So, for example, you may have a prison where it costs
roughly $30,000 per offender. That includes all fixed and
variable costs. So the savings from 100 inmates would not be $3
million, as you might expect with the simple math. Typically,
unless you shut down an entire wing or entire facility, you
really only save the variable cost of food, supplies and
medical costs. And in 2012, when we did our study, the variable
cost was about $4,600 for offender in the Maryland prison
system.
So just--in short, just to say about our summary of our
findings, we looked at a program that would involve 250
offenders and we estimated costs of $4.1 million over 5 years
against savings of about $250,000. So that pilot project would
end up costing the State about $3.9 million.
Also, with social impact bonds, we have a concern that
short-term incentives could skew results to try to ensure
success so that the investors get their return. And this could
include selecting the most treatable offenders--or cases, a
short-term focus on getting results as opposed to maybe longer-
term programs, and, again, I think a flight to safety, so the
potential for focusing on programs that you know are successful
so there is a greater likelihood of investors getting their
money back.
One other issue I would simply raise is just the risk
versus the rate of return. We are seeing in social impact bonds
a number of different negotiated on case-by-case rates of
return. 13 percent in Peterborough. I think I saw 22 percent on
one of other social impact bonds.
And, you know, in the bond market, risk of non-payment is
measured by bond rating agencies, and you also have, you know,
a number of other factors, such as the length of the maturity
and so forth.
With social impact bonds, you know, for a short-term
program, it seems like the rate of return can be fairly
inordinate and--especially if there is a flight to safety and
there is not as much risk or, in instances where--in New York
City, where a portion of social impact bond was guarantied by
the Bloomberg Foundation, then risk is very slight indeed.
In closing, I have included in my written testimony some
considerations for the legislation that you have before you.
And I will just close by saying that social impact bonds do
carry some risks, and in addition to the benefits, I think
that, you know, you need to weigh carefully both the good and
the bad here.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Juppe follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman REICHERT. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Overholser.

STATEMENT OF GEORGE OVERHOLSER, CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, THIRD
SECTOR CAPITAL PARTNERS

Mr. OVERHOLSER. Thank you, Chairman Reichert, Ranking
Member Doggett, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am very
pleased to be here.
Just by way of introduction, I had a business career. I was
on the founding management team of Capital One and then had a
venture capital business that I built called North Hill
Ventures, but for the past 10 years, I have spent more or less
full-time on the social sector.
The one thing that connects all the work I have done is
riding on the megatrend that I think is behind the social
impact bond discussion and pay-for-success discussion that we
are having today, which is the inexorable and very powerful
drop in the cost of computation and in the cost of capturing
data.
And what we are really seeing here is that, for the first
time in history, just as it was true for the credit card
industry 15 years ago, the cost of measuring outcomes has
gotten to the point where we can actually do performance-based
contracting based on outcomes, something which I think we would
have done 20, 30 years ago if it were economically feasible.
This cost is only going to continue to go down further,
especially as we learn the art of performance-based contracting
in this subsector.
2 or 3 years ago I co-founded a non-profit called Third
Sector Capital Partners. We currently have 25 people, and we
spend 100 percent of our time working with partners around the
country, putting together pay-for-success contracting that has
SIBs as a source of loans for the financing associated with
those contracts.
Currently we have about 15 projects underway. And our first
project was a $27-million transaction that we helped to set up
in Massachusetts, which was based on variable costs.
I think many of the points that Mr. Juppe brought up are
highly valid. And we see it as our job to bring scrutiny to
these arrangements so that they are of the highest fidelity.
In Massachusetts, it was another recidivism project. In
this case, it was helping an intervention that was--it is
called Roca, which is a tremendous intervention that could not
find its way to scalable funding.
And the pay-for-success approach found a way to get scaling
of this program so that 900 gang-involved youth could avoid the
terrible obstacle, terrible statistic, of a 60 percent expected
prison recidivism rate with an average of more than 2 years in
prison.
Each of our 15 projects has an enthusiastic government
sponsor behind it. And these people, I have learned, around the
country are extraordinarily busy. So why would they take on
something so difficult as to basically undergo procurement
reform, which is what I believe pay-for-success is about?
And as I speak to them, here are the answers that I hear.
First and foremost, these are public servants and they realize
the current strategies just simply aren't working for the
families in need in this country.
At the same time, they know that there are untapped
innovations that are waiting in the wings, and what they are
looking for is a mechanism that makes it possible, easier, to
surface the best interventions for the families in need and get
them implemented at greater scale with greater fidelity and
with strong focus on outcomes.
They also realize that they don't have the working capital
to get this done. And so they like the idea of lenders coming
in. And I should mention that, in our 15 projects around the
country, more than half of the money is coming from
philanthropists. It is not coming from banks. It is coming from
philanthropists who are looking for no return or for an
exceedingly modest return.
But what they are able to do is to absorb the risk of
failure on these experimental pilots, and that allows public
servants, people in government, to go after innovations that
they otherwise might not be able to go after and often would
never go after.
The other thing that happens is that, bringing in private
partners, we tap into human capital. If you work in government,
which you do, and I am learning, as someone who is now
traveling around the country, there is no one available on that
staff to do the hard work of learning how to grapple with data,
how to conduct deep due diligence, which is inherent to an
outcomes approach. And so the private partners bring human
beings who bring this type of expertise that otherwise would
not be present, and I think this is very important.
Then the last, probably most important, is having a
mechanism in place that recognizes not that something is great
now, but it recognizes when a program is no longer working. I
would say government is very good at funding stuff that used to
work, but it is not very good at recognizing when stuff isn't
working anymore.
At Capital One, we did 3,000 tests a year, and what we
discovered is that our best innovations rarely lasted. And this
was such a profound part of our business that we put posters
all over the company of melting ice cream cones. And the poster
said, ``It melts like ice cream.'' And what we were saying was,
``Whatever you do, don't stop innovating.''
What happens, I believe, with the way we do social policy
is we have a fund-what-once-worked system. And the joke I like
to make is, if we did music the same way we do social policy
funding, we would all be listening to Meatloaf on an 8-track
recording machine. And that is because 30 years ago Meatloaf
was great music.
Not to diss Meatloaf, but 30 years ago, Meatloaf was all
the rage and the 8-track machine was cutting-edge technology,
and you could imagine someone would say, ``This is great. There
ought to be a law. Everyone should have access to this. Let's
write it up like a recipe card into law and say, `Anyone who
offers this standard of music and this standard of technology
will be reimbursed, but if you don't--if you don't follow the
recipe, you won't be reimbursed.' ''
And that, to me, is a formula for freezing the system, and
that is why we are stuck with programs that no longer work.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Overholser follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------

Chairman REICHERT. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Overholser.
Those last few words really resonated with me. I don't know
if you know my background, Robert, but I was a police officer
for 33 years before I came here. So I just look like I have
been here 40 years. But I want to visit with you afterwards. I
am very proud of you.
And I really agree with the comments that you made, again,
at the end. Funding those programs that used to work I think
has been a mistake that we have made across the board in a lot
of social services and aid and help to families.
So this is why this hearing is so important, to get the
good news out about some of the new programs and new efforts
that are being made across the country.
And, Mr. Overholser, in--your testimony and your work at
Third Sector Capital suggests that this social impact bond
financing model has been catching on rapidly at the State and
local level.
Is this the case? And why do we need Federal legislation to
implement it on a nationwide basis?
Mr. OVERHOLSER. Thank you for the question, Chairman
Reichert.
Indeed, I do think there is a great deal of interest around
the country. As I mentioned, we have about 15 projects
underway, and each one of them does have a government sponsor.
I would hasten to add, though, that many of these projects face
considerable obstacles that could be addressed through Federal
legislation that I will explain in a moment.
The Massachusetts project, I would also mention, had as a
major impetus a DOL match that was a Federal match. And,
interestingly, that DOL program that challenged States and
counties to come up with rigorous pay-for-success constructs
caused many, many more applications to be developed, many, many
more initiatives and investigations to take place around the
country than actually were awarded in the end. In the end, only
two of them were awarded. One of them was our project in
Massachusetts.
I would also say that the deadline that was imposed as part
of that DOL Federal grant created great impetus. I am not sure
we would have gotten the project done if we did not have the
benefit of that match because it is--there is an impetus that
comes if you have a match available from the Federal level.
It allows a local politician to look at folks in the eye
who may say, ``No. Wait a minute. Why are you spending time on
this?'' And it allows them to say, you know, ``We are able to
tap into some funding that we could not otherwise tap into.''
And even if that funding might be quite small, it changes the
discourse.
I would also say that Federal--that this Federal
involvement sets much needed standards. Mr. Juppe brought up
many pitfalls. If we, for example, in Massachusetts did not
look at the variable cost behavior of prisons, that would have
been a bad thing. And so I love the idea of having a Federal
match that says, ``Hey, this match is contingent on quality
standards as spelled out in the law.''
There is also money there for feasibility studies. It is a
modest amount of money. But when you look at local government,
that money does not exist. So a very small amount of money for
feasibility can unlock major initiatives.
And then, finally, as Linda Gibbs pointed out, many of
these social programs around the country, of course, have
Federal savings that are generated. So work at the local level
can generate savings at the Federal level.
But if you aren't able to tap into those savings and have
that feedback loop of the savings, then the cost-benefits don't
work, as a matter of economics.
And so the presence of a--and this is sometimes called the
wrong-pocket problem--but the presence of a feedback loop that
goes up to the Federal spending streams will make it so that
more of these initiatives find the cost-benefit that they need
in order to be successful propositions.
Chairman REICHERT. You have answered question 2 and 3 as a
follow-up question to your first question. So thank you for
your answer.
And, Mr. Schaeffer, you talk about the rigorous evaluation
of the CEO model and the results of your model. I am going to
shorten this up just a little bit because of time.
Given that CEO has been shown to be effective, why should
government fund it through a social impact bond and not just
contract with you directly, or why not just turn it into a
government-run program? Is this just a more expensive way of
contracting out, as Mr. Juppe contends?
Mr. SCHAEFFER. Thank you for the question, Chairman
Reichert.
You know, I would say, on the one hand, CEO is extremely
proud of the evidence base we have developed over the last
several years--right?--proving that you can reduce people going
back to prison is hard work.
But, on the other hand, I am not sure government at any
level--city, county, Federal--has quite caught up in really
adopting that ethos of funding what works.
And so this project offers us a tremendous opportunity to
build additional evidence, but also build a proof point around
really getting government to take hold of this different ethos
of funding what works.
And, for us, that is really exciting. And my hope would be,
at the end of this project, we would reach really what we could
term a performance-based contracting 2.0-type approach where
the State of New York, now seeing that we did a really great
job, we reduced people going back to jail or prison, would want
to contract with us directly. But I would also--it would be,
you know, quite understandable at this point that we are not
just at that level yet.
I would also say, though, in the SIBs, there is--a
tremendous thing that a few of the other witnesses hit on is
just the deepness of collaboration that this brings a part
between government and a contracting partner.
So frequently we enter into a contract, at the end of a
year, end of 2 years, we produce results and--or we don't
produce results, and we report back to government.
Given the reputational risks that I think all parties here
are taking on, it has been a tremendous experience for us to
really work hand in glove with the State of New York to solve
operational problems when they arise, to go through everything
from how somebody even comes to our program, to how they get
placed in a job, really, with a partnership in government, not
just as a contractor-contractee relationship.
Chairman REICHERT. All right. Just jotting down some notes
there while you were talking. Thank you so much for your
answer.
Mr. Doggett, you are recognized for your questioning.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I indicated in my opening statement, I believe we need
to look for innovative ways like this. I wish we had more
Bloomberg Foundations across the country to participate in the
significant way that your foundation has and the mayor has in
New York City.
I am a little concerned, though, about the practicalities
and reflect on the experience that my State and some others
have had where we were told, if we would just privatize State
services and turn it over to some multi-national consultant, we
would save a tremendous amount of money, and what has, in fact,
happened is that we have had one lawsuit after another as
taxpayer resources have been wasted with some of those
privatization efforts.
Here the idea of bringing in bond lawyers, consultants,
lawyers into the process at a time when we have so many
immediate needs concerns me some. In this very committee, we
face a situation where we will see major cuts, barring some new
budget agreement, in education and social services next year in
Federal funding through the sequestration agreement.
The Nurse Family Partnership, funded through the Visiting
Nurses, we could extend for about another year at the same
price as is reserved in this bill, and, at the moment, we have
no funding source for it whatsoever. I think it is a cost-
effective program that we need to extend.
In fact, I think every program that we invest in needs to
be evidence-based. We should be applying these standards on all
government expenditures except for those that we set aside for
what are truly innovative programs that we want--where we want
to try out a new concept.
Mr. Juppe, my understanding is that your colleague, Kyle
McKay, at the Texas Legislative Budget Board, who testified on
social impact bonds in front of the Senate Budget Committee
earlier this year, reached similar conclusions to yours, that,
in many cases, the cost of using the social impact bond
outweighed any benefits the State got in modest impact on its
cost. Is that right?
Mr. JUPPE. Yes. That is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. And can you tell us some of the costs
associated with establishing and implementing social impact
bonds that need to be considered along with the benefits of
those bonds?
Mr. JUPPE. Well, yes. In addition to the direct service
costs, you have the return on investment at whatever rate that
is negotiated. You also have a cost for an independent third-
party evaluation to ensure the outcomes were met.
And then, finally, you can also have additional costs for
the intermediary in terms of a management fee or a contract for
arranging for the financing, the contractor and the government
to get together in that social impact bond.
Mr. DOGGETT. It has been suggested that the benefit of
social impact bonds--that they will help us grow the pie
overall in terms of State or Federal funding for these
programs, and certainly we need to do that. But you pointed out
that the States may need to put aside funding to reimburse
private investors for these projects.
In terms of State budgets, will social impact bonds
actually free up additional funds to invest in social
initiatives?
Mr. JUPPE. I think it is actually more likely that
government at the State level would have to put aside the funds
for the service, plus the additional costs associated with the
social impact bond, and then have those funds appropriated each
year and then, at the end of each year, encumber those funds
for when the actual social impact bond program was completed.
So I think there would be additional costs each year.
Mr. DOGGETT. Ms. Gibbs has appropriately noted that these
aren't a panacea even where they do work.
Does turning over a decision to private investors about
where those dollars will be invested in order to secure a
return bias the process of determining what needs will be met
and what needs will not be met?
Ms. GIBBS. I don't--I don't see this as a privatization.
The thing that is really important to remember is that the
relationship of the government and the service is by a
negotiated contract between government and a service provider.
90 percent of the social services in New York City are provided
in that manner now with non-profit organizations.
So, fundamentally, government is making a decision of what
it wants to purchase and under what conditions and the investor
is--for social impact bonds is making a determination whether
or not that is a risk--a relationship that the investor is
willing to take.
But, ultimately, the evidence around what the program's
outcomes are, first of all, have to align to the governmental
purpose and then, second, for the purpose of whether or not it
is a SIB-able event, would have to show the government savings.
And the contract itself is up to the government partner to
enter into.
So it is not privatization in a private investor who is
implementing a program for profit. It is a fundamental non-
profit relationship with--the service provider remains in
place.
And in the case of the--New York City, we are a GAAP
financing jurisdiction. We have to have a balanced budget every
year with revenues in, paying for costs incurred. And under
those rules, the lawyers determined that the contract payments
would not have to be accrued--or recognized in our budget until
they actually became due. So there was no obligation to put
money up front.
And, in fact, that is one of the beauties of the SIBs, is
that the taxpayers do not have to put the money up front. The
investors bring in the upfront money and, ultimately, the
taxpayers only have to pay if it actually works.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much.
Thanks to all our witnesses.
Mr. CHAIRMAN.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you.
Mr. Young, you are recognized.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate Mr. Juppe's critical feedback and thoughts on
the SIB model, Ms. Gibbs' responses to some of those thoughts,
and would entertain any other thoughts Mr. Overholser or Mr.
Schaeffer might have about Mr. Juppe's concerns.
Mr. OVERHOLSER. Yes. Thank you.
I would agree very much with what Ms. Gibbs said about
privatization. The 15 projects that we are working on--every
one of them begins with a pay-for-success contract between
government and a non-profit provider.
And, in most cases, these are non-profit providers who
already contract regularly with government and government is
sitting at the table and has the decision rights about who the
provider is and what the program design looks like. So this is
certainly not an outsourcing to private decision-makers of how
taxpayer dollars are being spent.
There is a very useful distinction between pay-for-success
contracting, which is what we just were describing, and then
the SIB. The SIB is just a loan. What it says is that, instead
of the provider taking on the risk of maybe never being paid, a
group of philanthropists and perhaps some banks as well will
provide them a special type of a loan.
And the loan is not to government. The loan is actually to
the project itself. The loan will never be repaid if the
project fails to produce outcomes because there won't be money
to repay the loan. And, so, therefore, these lenders are not
like normal bond lenders. They are taking on tremendously more
risk.
It is not just the risk of the government failing to honor
its obligation, which is called counter-party risk, but there
is a much larger risk, which is, in a world where less--
considerably less than 50 percent of those social strategies
that are put to the test under randomized control trial--
considerably less than 50 percent--some people would say 90
percent of those programs bring about no discernible level of
impact, meaning you cannot tell the difference between those
who are in the program versus those who are not in the program
very, very often. This is an extremely high risk of non-
performance that the government no longer needs to take and
that providers no longer need to take.
So when we talk about the economics, imagine you spend 10
percent more to put one of these projects together because they
are new and it is quite difficult now--I think they are going
to become lower than that in the future--but imagine you spent
10 percent more and, instead of 50 percent of them not working,
20 percent of them didn't work. Well, in that case, government
would end up spending 20 percent less money because, when it
didn't work, government wouldn't need to spend.
Mr. YOUNG. If I could very quickly interject.
Has it been your experience, Mr. Overholser, as--working
with the various counter-parties when putting together these
series of contracts that constitute a SIB, that government has
learned to calculate savings on a net basis, that is, net of
management and transaction fees, number one? And have they also
understood the difference between variable costs and fixed
costs and, thus, factored that into future savings?
Mr. OVERHOLSER. The answer is yes.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay.
Mr. OVERHOLSER. In every case, it is very important to have
the economists come in and work through what are the true cost
economics.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you.
Mr. Schaeffer.
Mr. SCHAEFFER. Yeah. I would--I would echo that, sir. You
know, we have a current active SIB in New York State in which
the State was very focused on ensuring the variable cost rate
was considered, and as we consider a SIB in San Diego as well,
they are laser-focused on that issue.
Mr. YOUNG. You know, I would further add the issue of
giving security to investors in an incipient, inchoate market
is certainly very important, and I am glad that Mr. Juppe
brought that up.
Based on my field research in the United Kingdom and their
work on SIBs, their development of SIBs, they emphasize the
importance of allocating money--a pot of money that would offer
that additional security--though not essentially necessary,
additional security that a contract would not be broken in the
future by a future Congress or government. So that has been
incorporated into Young-Delaney.
Is there anything additional, Mr. Overholser, that you
would add, based on your experiences, to prevent investors
from, you might say, gaming the system, that is, trying to
reach proven--reach outcomes, that they get their outcome
payments, but not, in fact, improving the lives of services?
What has been done in the past to prevent this?
Mr. OVERHOLSER. I would begin by saying that the current
system is also--you could call it gamed in the sense that the
name of the game is to follow the rules that were written in a
recipe that probably is very obsolete and that the new game is
to try to get the needle to move on a set of metrics that we
hope are well chosen.
Very importantly, we must continuously measure outcomes.
Very importantly, we must use randomization as opposed to other
methods because other methods will invite what some people
would call creaming.
And, very importantly, it is helpful to have a market
basket of metrics rather than a single metric. As my old
friend, the cofounder of Capital One, used to call it, ``Beware
of mono-variabilitis.'' We don't want to just have one--one
variable.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Renacci, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying today.
Mr. Overholser, just this year Cuyahoga County proposed a
way to help homeless children stay with their own families and
avoid the foster care system through the use of social impact
bonds. The county spends about 35 million annually on foster
care.
I understand the administration has been working with your
company. Are you able to share any details on the progress of
that program?
Mr. OVERHOLSER. You are speaking of Cuyahoga County?
Mr. RENACCI. Yes. Cuyahoga County.
Mr. OVERHOLSER. Yes. We are very excited about that
project. We are making great progress there. And we have, we
think, something that is going to be a winner, but we are not--
we have not yet come in for a landing. So I am not able to
share all the details.
The basic idea there is that homeless mothers tend to have
children who are highly involved in the foster care system. And
if you think about it--we thought this was a homelessness
project until we discovered that investments on the
homelessness side actually can affect what is happening over on
the foster care side.
So this is a mechanism that makes it possible to do work in
one area of government that brings about savings in another
area of government and to build a feedback loop. That is that
wrong-pocket problem.
The government is very, very poor--does a very poor job, I
believe, at being able to take advantage of these interagency
relationships, and that is what we are most excited about in
Cuyahoga.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you.
And this is a question for anybody on the panel because I
am trying to get a feeling. I mean, what we have here is an
intermediary. There is a bond that is the source of funds to do
this program and then, if the program is successful, the bonds
are paid back with a premium of whatever, 10, 11, 12 percent.
How about the thought--and I just--what is the downside of
just contracting for success? What is the downside of
eliminating the bond procedure and just contracting for
success, eliminating all the fees and coming up with an
outright contract that says, ``If you do this, you get paid.
And if you don't do this''--or, ``If you do this, you get paid
with a fee. And if you don't do this, you don't get paid,''
just without--so I would love to hear from any one of you as to
what your thoughts are.
Ms. GIBBS. Okay. I am sorry, Sam.
I would say, from--from a government manager's perspective,
I, in fact, see social impact bonds as part of a broader family
of performance-based contracting. And the world of performance-
based contracting, where people are paid in some fashion, their
payment is contingent on outcomes, can be everything from 100
percent at risk, only paid if you hit a milestone, or can be a
bonus on your payment.
So the difference in those scenarios where it is a 100
percent milestone, it tends to be very input-oriented. You get
a payment if you complete an interview with a client. You get a
payment if a client enrolls in a training class. You get a
payment if a client completes a training class.
The nature of social impact bonds is that they are very
much more focused on those longer-term social outcomes, the
real good that you are trying to get after. So I would
distinguish it that way. Because nonprofit providers simply
can't take the gamble around those longer-term outcomes. They
don't have the cash flow to wait for those. They need the--they
need the revenues now.
Mr. RENACCI. But--not to interrupt, but aren't they taking
a gamble on the bonds? I mean, that is where----
Ms. GIBBS. Not the nonprofit providers. The only one who is
taking the gamble financially is the investor.
Mr. RENACCI. Well, it is the same. That is what I am
getting at. It is intermediary. It is somebody outside of the
government that is taking the risk.
Ms. GIBBS. The service--the government and the service
provider are not. The investor is.
And the other big difference, of course, is that the social
impact bonds bring in new--new cash now versus, if it is a
performance-based contract, you have to appropriate the dollar
value of that contract in the year that you contract it and
with a pretty--pretty much knowledge that 80 or 90 percent
minimally will be paid and potentially 105 to 110 percent will
be paid, depending on the incentive structure that you have
built into your contract.
Mr. RENACCI. Anybody else want to take a run at it?
Mr. SCHAEFFER. Ms. Gibbs gave most of my answer, but I
would echo sort of from the vantage point of our project, you
know, we are looking at jail and prison bed days, which is a
metric that we have no other contract that measures, but it is
ultimately the real social good--or one of the two real social
good that CEO is achieving.
So as opposed to, say, looking at something like job
placements, which was really important--it is what helped Mr.
Romo turn his life around--we are taking a longitudinal look at
what CEO's impact is 3, 4, 5 years into the future. And SIBs
are a great mechanism for looking at those longer-term
impactful measures rather than the shorter-term government
contract.
And I would add, too, as a provider, we would be very happy
to take government contracts that paid us for the full cost of
our services. It has nothing----
Mr. RENACCI. If you were successful.
Mr. SCHAEFFER. If we are successful.
Mr. RENACCI. And if you aren't successful, you didn't get
paid.
Mr. SCHAEFFER. We get paid up front in this deal. It would
be too much a risk for us to take to not enter into something
that--where it had such variability.
Mr. RENACCI. Yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am pleased that we are holding this hearing. At the
beginning of social impact bonds, I am of a firm belief that
the government shoulders the--I am interested in social impact
bonds to see if they can leverage public dollars with private
investment to expand high-quality prevention programs to
improve key social problems.
The topics of the initial social investment bonds are of
particular interest to me. The State of Illinois has advanced a
pay-for-success program to increase support for youth involved
in both the child welfare and juvenile justice systems to
improve their outcomes.
Further, part of the President's pay-for-success budget
proposal was up to $10 million via the Department of Justice's
Second Chance Act, a program that I worked bipartisanly to
enact into law to implement the permanent supportive housing
laws.
However, I also want to ensure that social investment bonds
do not take away funding from existing programs and services
that provide critical support to our citizens. I also want to
make sure that the return on investment is reasonable and not a
windfall to the investment community.
Mr. Juppe, social impact bonds have been touted as a way to
fund innovative programs, but you have suggested that the
opposite might be true. In other words, pressure from private
investors who want limited risk might steer funding to more
proven methods.
If this is true, do you think it is more appropriate to
provide direct funding for these proven programs?
Mr. JUPPE. Yes. Absolutely. I would agree that it would be
more cost effective to provide direct contracts. There is
plenty of examples where governments can, you know, undertake
requests for proposals, requests for information with vendors
to develop innovative strategies.
Maryland is currently undergoing negotiations with private
vendors for the construction and operation of a Purple Line
extension between New Carrollton and Bethesda and, as such, is
structuring those contracts in negotiations with various
interested parties to determine the most cost-innovative
strategies for constructing that line and operating it. So
certainly you don't have all the additional expense of a social
impact bond, which, as we have heard, is really relating to the
financing of the services.
Mr. DAVIS. Are you concerned that the returns provided to
investors from social impact bonds may not be commensurate with
the risks they are bearing?
If mostly proven programs are funded, does this
significantly reduce the risk of a project failing to meet
performance measures?
Additionally, do you worry that the complexity of the
contracts that involve the SIBs might make the balance between
risk and reward unclear as well as uncertain?
Mr. JUPPE. Yes. Absolutely. I would agree with that.
Certainly as--there is no standard nationally or within States
for how you calibrate the risk and the return on investment.
And, as we have seen, for example, in Peterborough, it has
been cited as a very complex arrangement and it is unclear
entirely how the outcomes will relate to the--you know, the
payments to the investors.
For example, in the first year, the recidivism rate has
been reduced by 8.4 percent. I believe the first-year cohort
required a reduction in recidivism of 10 percent to provide a
payment.
So there is no payment for this first cohort, but it sounds
like in 2016 there could be a payment if the first- and second-
year cohort realizes a reduction of 7\1/2\ percent.
So it certainly skews the outcomes, definitely, and--as
well as the--there is the concern between how you calibrate the
risk and the return.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Romo, let me congratulate you on finding a job and
for all of your efforts to create a new life for yourself.
What was the biggest barrier you felt that you needed to
overcome in order to secure a job?
Mr. ROMO. Thank you for the question.
I really believe that the tools that CEO provided me with
and the mentality that I allowed myself to believe, that, you
know, I wasn't going to be successful anymore due to the time
that I did behind prison--I feel that it was--it was--it was
helpful and very important because we come out with a low self-
esteem and no--no guidance. Don't know how to really find
certain--certain responses to be successful and make the
transition back into society positive.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Mr. Overholser, you suggested that social impact bonds
could reduce the waste of $720 billion per year. That budget
figure includes tax relief for working families through the
earned income tax credit and child tax credit, Pell Grants for
college students, healthcare for veterans, school lunch
programs, and long-term care for seniors through Medicaid.
Do you consider any of those programs wasteful?
Mr. OVERHOLSER. I consider them--I consider them programs
that could have higher and better use of the same amount of
funding. And so my interest is in creating a mechanism that
reallocates money towards their highest and best use.
And so many of these programs, yes, could--could have
different strategies used that, when put to--to the test, can
be shown to be a more efficacious use of that funding.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Griffin.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am proud to be an original cosponsor of Mr. Young's
bill, and I just want to applaud all the work that Mr. Young,
in particular, has done on this issue.
I want to ask you, Mr. Overholser, a little bit--if you
would comment a little bit about the value that investors add
to a particular enterprise. We heard some talk about directly
funding.
It seems to me that the value here of the overall program
lies in the value that the investors add to the intervention or
the enterprise because, when the government just cuts a check
to a nonprofit, there is a different sort of pressure, if any,
put on that nonprofit to perform than if you get an energetic
investor who uses their own money and shows up at the door
every day to check on the progress.
So it seems to me that the investors want to get their
money back and redeploy it elsewhere and they bring energy and
oversight in a detailed way, what the government almost never
provides.
If you could comment on that, if you would. And it seems to
me that is a huge--that is a big--there is a big difference
there between the government just cutting a check to somebody,
and that--therein lies the value--the reason we are having the
whole hearing, it seems to me. Can you comment on that.
Mr. OVERHOLSER. I would agree with most of what you are
saying. And I guess my view is I would prefer an end game where
it is direct contracting.
I would prefer to have a world where government procurement
is changed in that the actual human beings working in
government acquire the skills that currently we are needing to
bring in from the outside.
And I would--I would love to get to the point where
providers themselves are on a solid enough financial footing
that they don't need to seek private financing because of their
concerns about maybe this thing won't work.
So I see a world, frankly, that doesn't have social impact
bonds. It just has pay-for-success contracting. That is where I
would like us to get. I believe that, in order to get there,
there is a period of time where it is very helpful to tap into
what the private side can bring.
That is not present currently in government. And absolutely
we are finding that bringing in experts in how to use data
better, bringing in experts in how to assess risk better into
these--into these project teams is very valuable.
I would also say that the time span of these projects is
longer than the--than most political cycles. And so something
quite unique about the public-private partnership setup is
that, if you have private partners who are working on a 7-year
timeframe, they are going to bring a continuity of focus to a
project that is absolutely required if you have work that needs
7 years to conduct.
And so the--the cadence of government decision-making, the
political cycles are shorter than the absolute truth of what is
required to bring about the long-term changes we are looking
for in our communities.
Mr. GRIFFIN. I agree with some of what you said, though I
am not sure we ever get to this ideal. I mean, you were talking
about all the things that you----
Mr. OVERHOLSER. We may never get there. So it is more the
ideal----
Mr. GRIFFIN. Yeah. My kids want to live in a world of
unicorns and glitter, but that is just not happening.
And we have had decades of either underperformance or
failure or--I mean, it seems to me this is--this is reaching
outside of the system to bring in proven innovators--even
though a particular idea may not be innovation, we are bringing
in people who have been successful and who have a stake in the
success of this enterprise.
Mr. Schaeffer or Ms. Gibbs, or if anybody else wants to
comment, it would be great in my limited time
Mr. SCHAEFFER. Yeah. Absolutely, sir.
CEO would like to believe--and I think we do do a great job
on all our contracts. And you are right. To the most extent, it
is government cutting us a check and, on a quarterly basis or
yearly basis, I will report back the outcomes.
There is something to what you are saying, I believe, in
the high-profile nature of this project, in which we are
putting our neck out there a little bit, the government is
taking a risk, the investors are taking a risk, and that shared
interest, I do believe, is driving performance from the
leadership of our organization to the case management level.
In Mr. Overholser's world, I would absolutely agree. That
is a place that we want to aspire to, and how quickly we can
get there, I think, is on all of us to try to figure out.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Skin in the game is what you are talking
about.
Mr. SCHAEFFER. That is the right metaphor.
Mr. GRIFFIN. I am out of time. In an ideal world, we
wouldn't run out of time.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Griffin.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing today.
I appreciate the comments from both sides here this
afternoon. And it is great to see some friends from New York
here as well. I am proud that New York, both the city level and
on the state level, have been so involved in the undertaking
of--in some of these projects.
There is a lot we are still learning about the effect of
social impact bonds and these types of projects, but I
appreciate the fact, as I said before, that New York City, New
York State, our leaders are trying new approaches to solving
complex problems.
New York State started with a project to reduce recidivism
and increase employment among high-risk formerly incarcerated
individuals.
And, Mr. Schaeffer and Mr. Romo, thank you for sharing your
experiences with these projects.
In New York City, we have also had an undertaking in an
effort to reduce recidivism, particularly teen recidivism at
Rikers Island, which is in my district. I have seen firsthand
the challenges with respect to recidivism at Rikers and the
need to find solutions that focus on prevention and long-term
strategy.
So I am very glad that we have former Deputy Major for
Health and Human Services, Linda Gibbs with us here as well
discussing New York City's efforts in these areas.
So thank you all for being here.
These are problems for which there is no easy answer, and I
welcome efforts to try and address these challenging social
issues. Often we get in the business of reacting to problems
rather than trying to prevent them in the first place.
In many cases, it is hard enough ensuring funding for the
services that are needed just to respond, such as in the case
of assisting individuals leaving incarceration. We appreciate
funds for just the immediate need, but don't take the time to
stop to consider new and different ways of looking at the
overall big picture.
So I am heartened to see that our witnesses today, whether
using social impact bonds or not, are trying to encourage new
thinking and new approaches to societal problems. And there are
a lot more ideas out there and more not-for-profits, State
agencies, think tanks, and other groups trying to put ideas
into action, which I applaud.
I am glad that this hearing is giving us a chance to think
about how best to support these efforts and encourage further
innovation. Innovation doesn't mean diverting efforts away from
what governments and not-for-profits are already trying to do
and the funding that they need to do it, but I am sure there
are lessons we could learn from what is being tried and use
that information to improve our social programs. And if these
initiatives are focusing attention on problems that need more
solutions, that is helpful as well.
I know, in addition to the work being done now in helping
formerly incarcerated individuals find employment, New York
State is moving forward with projects to address other
challenges that could have greater effect down the road.
They are trying to address early childhood health and
wellness, diabetes prevention, school-based health centers, and
providing alternatives to placement and attention for high-at-
risk youth.
And none of these problems are going to be solved
overnight, and there probably isn't going to be one right
answer for every State or city or for every particular--for
every problem that is out there. The good news is that we have
a lot of people both in this room and outside of it who are
interested in working on a solution.
Mr. Schaeffer, in your written testimony, you phrase the
effort behind social impact bonds as catalyzing all levels of
government to address some of these challenging issues, and I
think that goes to the heart of what we are considering here
today.
I look forward to continuing to work with all of you and
with all of my colleagues on the committee on both sides of the
aisle here in Congress to keep exploring ways to promote
innovative policy ideas and to keep supporting the
organizations that are doing this work all throughout our
social policy programs beyond the incarcerated as well. But
thank you for your work.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman REICHERT. Well, that ends--concludes our
questioning and our hearing.
I want to thank you all for being here today and sharing
your testimony with us. And, as you have heard, there is a lot
of interest here. And, therefore, we held the hearing today to
help us learn a little bit more.
And there is a number of things that--I kind of like to sum
up things from my previous experience. You know, prevention is,
of course, one of the things that, in my past life as a law
enforcement officer for 33 years, is key, I think, to the
success of our society.
And I know that you are all looking for answers to prevent,
well, young people, for example, from being homeless and find
them loving homes. And we are working on that together here on
this committee--subcommittee and as a full committee, you know,
and keeping them off the streets and out of drugs, off of
alcohol and out of the drug scene, gangs, et cetera.
That is all preventing people from ending up in, you know,
a place where Robert was and--but, you know, Robert, those
experiences build a man. And you have become quite a man. And
so we are very proud to have you. It takes courage to be here
today to tell your story. We are happy you had the courage to
come and do that because it will help people.
And I know that is where you are today, not only, you know,
striving to be a good American with a job and support a family,
but you also want to help those who need help, help them from
where you came. Right?
So I think we do need to take a look at these things. I--in
my previous career, I had the responsibility of being a part of
a team who investigated a series of murders in the Seattle area
called the Green River serial murders.
Back in those days in the 1980s, those young women on the
streets were called prostitutes. Today we know that that is not
a correct word. They were criminalized. They were victimized at
home. They ran away. And they were victimized again on the
street and then they were victimized again by the system.
We have grown as a society and we recognize that these
young ladies and sometimes young boys, young girls, are not
criminals. They are victims.
And so our system needs to change in that regard as we look
at those young girls and young boys on the street who are being
victimized as victims and provide those services to them and--
just in the same way that we provide services that we talked
about today.
So when we talk about innovative, it is almost sometimes
just a realization and a growth and a maturity of our community
in recognizing that some criminals are not criminals. They are
victims, and they need our assistance, they need our help, and
they become productive citizens.
Sometimes the Federal Government--I always like to joke
when I go back to my district. I know I am going long, but I am
on my soapbox.
I go back to my friends at home and I say, ``I am from the
Federal Government and I am here to help,'' and they laugh.
We are from the Federal Government, and this committee--
this subcommittee is committed to helping in any way that we
can. And your testimony today is going to help us decide how we
can do that.
So I am required to say, if Members have additional
questions for the witnesses, they will submit them to you in
writing, and we would appreciate receiving your responses for
the record within 2 weeks.
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:28 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the record follow:]

American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME),
Statement

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
