- HEARING ON THE INTEGRITY OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT'S PREMIUM TAX CREDIT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE INTEGRITY OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT'S PREMIUM TAX CREDIT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

__________

SECOND SESSION

__________

July 23, 2014

__________

SERIAL 113-OS10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-428                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan,Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of July 23, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Seto Bagdoyan Acting Director, Audit Services, Forensic Audits
and Investigative Service, Government Accountability Office,
Testimony......................................................    11

HEARING ON THE INTEGRITY OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT'S PREMIUM TAX CREDIT

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles Boustany [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Boustany Announces Hearing on the Integrity of the Affordable Care
Act's Premium Tax Credit

1100 Longworth House Office Building at 10:30 AM
Washington, Jul 16, 2014
Congressman Charles Boustany, Jr. MD (R-LA), Chairman of the
Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Oversight, today announced
that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the integrity of the
administration of the Affordable Care Act's Premium Tax Credit. The
hearing will take place on Wednesday, July 23, 2014, in Room 1100 of
the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:30 A.M.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) will be the only witness
at the hearing. In view of the limited time available to hear
witnesses, oral testimony at this hearing will be from invited
witnesses only. However, any individual or organization not scheduled
for an oral appearance may submit a written statement for consideration
by the Subcommittee and for inclusion in the printed record of the
hearing.

BACKGROUND:

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) created tax credits and cost sharing
subsidies for certain individuals purchasing health insurance through
insurance exchanges. To ensure that payments only benefit those
eligible and are made in the correct amount, the Federal Government
must verify a number of pieces of information, including, identity of
the applicant, date of birth, Social Security Number, income, lawful
presence in the country, and other data. As the Congressional Budget
Office projects that the Federal Government will distribute over $1
trillion in subsidies over the next decade, it is critical that
adequate measures are in place to protect taxpayers. The hearing will
explore the integrity of the premium tax credit verification system,
and whether it is vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse.
In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``In recent
years this Subcommittee has examined fraud, waste, and abuse in the
execution of existing programs, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit.
We know that the Federal Government wastes tens of billions of dollars
each year in improper payments--what we don't know is how much more
will be wasted under ObamaCare's new federal subsidies. We look forward
to hearing from GAO and examining what is happening now that the
subsidies are going out the door.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the Federal Government's ability protect
premium tax credits from fraud, waste, and abuse.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on August 6, 2014.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. This hearing will come to order. Good
morning and welcome to this morning's hearing on the integrity
of insurance premium subsidies under the healthcare law.
Last month, this subcommittee and the Subcommittee on
Health held a hearing that showed the administration's failure
to implement effective eligibility verification systems would
result in billions of the dollars in improper payments going
out the door and unexpected tax debts for families across
America.
This morning, we turn to the question of whether the
Federal exchange has sufficient controls in place to verify
income and identity verification, including Social Security
numbers, names and other information. On September 12th of last
year, Chairman Camp, Senators Tom Coburn, Orrin Hatch and I
wrote to Comptroller General Gene Dodaro asking that the
Government Accountability Office conduct testing to determine
whether the administration had in place appropriate internal
controls to prevent fraud and abuse in health insurance
exchanges. We asked that they do this through the GAO's
forensic audits and investigative service, a team of forensic
audit and investigative professionals who conduct special
investigations and fraud assessments.
To test these internal controls, GAO went undercover,
created 18 fictitious identities to apply for insurance
subsidies online, over the phone and in person. When GAO
applied for premium subsidies online or over the phone with
fictitious names, Social Security numbers and documents, it
succeeded over 91 percent of the time. When GAO went to seek
help from taxpayer-funded assisters, five teams out of six,
they were turned away or unable to find help. When GAO sent in
fake documents to support their applications, Federal
contractors accepted those documents. Sadly, this is not
terribly surprising, but it is really disturbing.
Time and again the administration has chosen to either
ignore the law, or when it does implement the law, it does so
with a level of incompetence. The administration decided the
employer mandate would harm its political and electoral
interests, so it delayed the mandate. The administration found
that the words of the law would prevent it from implementing
Federal subsidies in a way it preferred, it ignored the law,
and as the D.C. Circuit ruled yesterday, when the
administration sought to implement Federal exchange--implement
the Federal exchange and created healthcare.gov, the Web site
crashed spectacularly. So when the administration began issuing
billions of dollars in subsidies, we found that it did so
without regard to protecting those taxpayer dollars from
improper payments.
This is not simply a question of whether one likes the
President's health law or the way this administration has gone
about implementing it. The question really is whether the
administration is being a good steward of taxpayer dollars and
putting in place adequate controls to protect those dollars
from fraud, waste and abuse. This is about whether these
subsidies are actually going to those who really need them and
who have--who qualify them--qualify for them appropriately. The
history of the healthcare law's implementation suggests that
the answer has been no.
Today we hear from Seto Bagdoyan, the acting director of
the Forensic Audits and Investigative Service on GAO's
preliminary findings in this matter. I want to thank him and
GAO for this work.
And look forward to your testimony, Mr. Bagdoyan, and also
look forward to continuing to work with you on this issue.
Now I would--I am very pleased to yield to the
distinguished ranking member from Georgia, Mr. Lewis, for the
purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you for holding today's hearing, Mr.
Chairman. I would like also to thank our witness for being here
today. Thank you for being here, sir.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. My pleasure.
Mr. LEWIS. Let me begin by highlighting a simple and an
important fact. The Affordable Care Act works. Last week,
multiple reports from Gallup, the Commonwealth Fund and the
Urban Institute provided Congress with a truth that cannot be
denied, explained away or disputed. Today more Americans have
health insurance than they did 1 year ago.
Many of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle said
that no one would sign up for the Affordable Care Act; instead,
8 million people enrolled. There were claims that part of the
law were too expensive, but last month HHS reported the average
cost was only $82 per month for those receiving tax credits.
Let me highlight some more indisputable ACA successes.
Today, more than 17 million children with pre-existing
conditions can no longer be denied coverage, 3.1 million adults
can be covered on their parents' plan until age 26, and 105
million Americans will no longer face bankruptcy because
insurance companies will stop paying their medical bills. That
is what the ACA did and we should be proud of this work.
Despite constant attack, the prediction of disaster has
simply failed to come true. Instead, the door to healthcare has
opened for millions of Americans.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
insert two articles into the record. One is from Politico,
entitled, ``The Verdict is in: Obamacare Lowers Uninsured.''
The second is from the New York Times, entitled, ``Obamacare
Fails to Fail.''
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection, they will be entered
into the record.
[The information follows: Rep. John Lewis 1, Rep. John
Lewis 2]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LEWIS. It is clear that it makes no sense to continue
attacks to the fund and destroy the healthcare law. There
should be no fear in a good faith, bipartisan effort to make
the ACA stronger and better for future generations. This is why
I look forward to the testimony of the GAO about ways to make
commonsense improvements to the ACA. In fact, there are actions
we can take right now to find and fight waste, fraud and abuse.
For example, Congress can provide adequate funding for the IRS
and HHS enforcement systems so that all taxpayers will be
protected. We have an opportunity to be proactive and not
reactive.
One thing is crystal clear, one thing is crystal clear: It
is time for political stunts and baseless fear tactics to end.
Success cannot and must not be dismantled. We will not go back
to a time when Americans did not have access to affordable
healthcare insurance. We will not destroy the ACA. I hope that
all of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle will come
together to strengthen and improve the historic benefits and
protection of the ACA. It is time to move forward and do what
is right, what is just, what is fair and what is responsible.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Now it is my pleasure to welcome our
witness, Mr. Seto Bagdoyan, acting director of Forensic Audits
and Investigative Services at the Government Accountability
Office.
Thank you, sir. We really appreciate your time today. We
appreciate the effort that you have put into this, along with
your staff. The subcommittee has received your written
statement. It will be made part of our formal hearing record.
As is customary, you will have 5 minutes to give your oral
remarks, and then we will open up for questions.
Sir, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF SETO BAGDOYAN, ACTING DIRECTOR, AUDIT SERVICES,
FORENSIC AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIVE SERVICE, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. BAGDOYAN. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss at a high level preliminary observations from the
undercover component of GAO's ongoing review of the Federal
healthcare Marketplace to test its enrollment controls. This
review is at the request of this subcommittee, as the chairman
mentioned, and others in Congress.
In terms of preliminary results, Mr. Chairman, we used
fictitious identities, false information and forged documents,
as well as instructions from the Marketplace itself, to
circumvent its front and back end controls.
Accordingly, we obtained actual coverage for which we are
paying premiums, the government is paying premium tax credits
on our behalf directly to insurers totaling about $2,500 a
month, or about $30,000 a year.
At the outset, I would note that, one, observations are
subject to change as we obtain and analyze additional
information; two, enrollment test results can't be projected to
the entire universe of applicants; and three, since our work is
ongoing and involves the use of certain investigative
techniques, I am precluded from discussing many details about
this and future work in this setting.
That said, the results in the two main components of our
undercover work are as follows: First, in 12 fictitious
applications, which were made by phone and online, we tested
the Marketplace's front-end controls for verifying an
applicant's identity or citizenship or immigration status.
Marketplace applications require attestations that information
provided is neither false nor untrue. The applications also
stated income at a level to qualify for income-based subsidies
to offset premium costs for tax credits and reduce expenses,
such as co-pays.
For 11 of the 12 applications, we obtained subsidized
coverage. For the 12th application, the Marketplace did not
allow us to proceed, because the applicant declined to provide
a Social Security number as part of our test.
In terms of back-end controls, the healthcare law requires
the Marketplace to provide eligibility while any identified
inconsistencies between information submitted by the applicant
and what resides in government databases is being resolved
through submission and verification of supplementary
documentation. For each of the 11 approved applications, we
were directed to submit supporting documents, such as proof of
income or citizenship, but we found the document submission and
review process to be inconsistent regarding similar
applications. As of July of this year, we had received
notification that some of the forged documentations submitted
for two applicants had been verified, thus clearing the back-
end controls for these three documents.
According to CMS and its document processing contractor,
this contractor is not required to look for or detect fraud and
accepts documents as authentic unless they are obvious
alterations. We continue to receive subsidized coverage for all
11 successful applications, including those where we did not
provide any of the requested supporting documents.
Second, in six other fictitious applications, we attempted
to test the extent to which, if any, in-person assisters would
encourage our applicants to misstate income in order to qualify
for income-based subsidies. However, we were unable to obtain
in-person assistance in five of six attempts. For example, one
in-person assister said that he does not provide assistance--he
provides assistance only after people already have an
application in progress. The assister was not able to help us,
because the healthcare.gov Web site was down at the time, and
he did not respond to several follow-up phone calls. One in-
person assister correctly advised the applicant that he--that
the stated income would not qualify for subsidy.
Collectively, our undercover and audit work to date has
highlighted key areas of inquiry about the Marketplace's
controls, which we plan to pursue in depth during our remaining
work.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks. I look forward to
the subcommittee's questions.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Bagdoyan.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bagdoyan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. I want to thank you and your team for
this first look at what appears to be a pretty significant
problem with process and implementation with regard to these
subsidies.
And these findings, although preliminary, are quite
troubling. Eleven out of 12 applications with false identities
were approved and are receiving subsidies. Applications that
falsified citizenship information were also approved. And then,
on the back end, five out of six navigators and assisters are
failing to help taxpayers. Federal contractors seem unable to
uncover fraudulent documents. CMS is either unaware or unable
to screen out fraudulent applications nationwide with regard to
premiums and subsidies.
This is all very troubling, and I am glad you are going to
continue taking a more in depth look at this, because we look
forward to revisiting the issue, but from your work so far, you
know, in your official capacity, but also as an American
citizen, are you really worried, are you really concerned about
the total lack of effective controls that might result in
significant fraud and more improper payments in this system as
it stands?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Thank you for your question, Mr. Chairman.
I would speak only on my--in my official capacity, of
course, in this setting, but as I mentioned earlier, our
investigative work and our audit work thus far has identified
certain areas of concern that we plan to pursue as our work
unfolds, as well as areas, such as the database of applicants
itself, which will be at the core of our work.
So I would say in summary that what we have so far is a
number of questions that are fundamental regarding the
effectiveness of controls, especially at the front end, where
the preventative controls are paramount, as well as the back
end, where traditionally they are relatively less effective,
where you have a situation of a pay and chase, as we discussed
earlier. So we are absolutely committed to focusing on controls
in this regard.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And we know that if we have--if we fall
back into a pay-and-chase situation, it is very difficult to
recover those dollars. Is that correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, according to GAO's fraud prevention
framework, back-end controls are relatively less effective than
strong preventative controls, so I would just respond in that
context.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. And your work also included
interesting findings regarding two contractors and numerous
grant recipients. One concerned a contractor hired to resolve
identity verification and a second concerned a contractor hired
to process paperwork that is unable to verify whether the
document is actually authentic. Another finding concerned
navigators and other assisters who were unable or unwilling to
help your undercover applicants despite the fact that they had
received tens of millions of dollars in Federal grants.
Again, I know this is still a preliminary finding, but can
you describe in greater detail GAO's experience with these
groups? What--you know, what are we--what is your
recommendation at this point, or do you have one, to correct
these problems? This is troubling, because a lot of money has
gone out the door in the form of grants to these--you know,
these navigators. I have deep concerns about this.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Certainly. In all three instances, we have
had an initial touch with these entities, so it would be
premature to reach a judgment about effectiveness or not or
certainly what needs to be done about them, but in terms of the
contractor who was--who has been tasked with verifying
identity, they did attempt to assist us during the call process
after we were directed by the online system to do so. And when
they were unable to verify our identity, they suggested that we
call the call center, and as my statement alludes to, we were
able to get coverage that way.
Regarding the contractor who is tasked with verifying
documentation at the back end, there is no provision to look
for fraud in the contract itself. And we confirmed this with
CMS officials as well as the contractor officials at our site
visit in their facility in Kentucky, so----
And then in terms of the navigators, again, it is a--it is
an initial contact, and one person made the correct call on our
application scenario, but the other five, for various reasons,
were unable or unwilling to assist us.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. Do you have any more--can you shed
any more light on why they were unable or----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. In one instance, one assister said they
didn't have sufficient training to do so. Another one said we
needed to make an appointment, because we essentially were a
walk-in at that--in that case and--but would not pick up the
phone to make an appointment. And another two instances, I
believe, there might have been a willingness to do so, but the
Web site itself was unavailable at the time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. Well, I appreciate that. This
subcommittee and the Ways and Means Committee as a whole is
taking our oversight function very, very seriously. We know
this is a first look. We appreciate the work you have done, and
we know this work is ongoing, and so we will look forward to
revisiting these issues as you get more data and hopefully get
to a point where you can make some specific recommendations to
us.
I have to say, the initial findings are deeply troubling to
me. We know we are dealing with fraud and abuse in a number of
other areas where tax credits and especially refundable tax
credits are being utilized, which undermines the integrity of
these programs and the intent of the programs to help those who
really need help. And I think we are at a point now, clearly,
we are at a point where this--these kinds of situations are
intolerable. Whether you are a Republican or a Democrat, we
cannot tolerate this level of fraud, abuse, taxpayer waste, and
we need to root these things out, so we will look forward to
continuing to work with you on these issues. Thank you.
I will now yield to my friend, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman, my friend, I want to thank you for
yielding.
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask you a question. Can you share
with the Democratic Members of the Committee a copy of the
letter that you sent to GAO? It is my understanding that GAO
does not make public ongoing investigation.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yeah. We will be happy to share that
letter with you. I was under the assumption that you had seen
it.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
That will be most helpful.
Mr. Director, let's get right to the heart of the matter.
Have you drawn any conclusion at this point in your
investigation?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. No, sir, we have not. Our work is ongoing. As
I mentioned earlier, this is our first touch-through looking at
the controls, and we have identified certain areas for further
audit and investigation as appropriate, but we can't draw any
conclusions based on our current status.
Mr. LEWIS. What is your time frame for concluding this
investigation?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. It is difficult to say at this point. It
could be several months, but our work is very active, and we
are receiving new information as we speak from CMS, and we will
have a chance to analyze and follow up that, but we are looking
at at least several more months, sir.
Mr. LEWIS. What areas are subject to further review?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Sure. In general terms, I think there are
various types of controls where they are at along the process,
how they interact with each other, who is responsible for them,
how they might benchmark against best practice, that sort of
thing.
Mr. LEWIS. And the false income information that the GAO
gave, would that not be caught up during a true process? Can
you explain this process?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I am sorry. Could you restate the question?
Mr. LEWIS. Yeah. The false information that the GAO gave,
would that be caught up during the true-up process?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I think what we used was part of the overall
investigative plan, but the identities we employed, the
information and the documents were all fictitious.
Mr. LEWIS. The income process, how do you go about getting
this information? Are you free, at liberty?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, in a general sense, we set our income
levels within the range of eligibility to obtain subsidies, and
that is pretty much all I can discuss at this time.
Mr. LEWIS. Okay. Over the past year, a lot has been made of
the problem with the Web site. Tell me how many fraudulent
applications were you able to get past the Web site.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Our online applications, as I state in my
formal statement, our applications were flagged for identity
verification. We were referred to the contractor, who is tasked
with resolving those identity questions. They were unable to do
so. They referred us to the Marketplace's call center, and
through the call center, we were able to bypass the initial
flag and obtain coverage.
Mr. LEWIS. Could you tell Members of the Committee, what
are the benefits of cheating the ACA system? The money goes to
the insurance company, not the individuals.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. I mean, we are not receiving the
subsidies directly to our accounts. They are paid by the
government to the insurers directly upon presentation of what I
would imagine would be some sort of an invoice on a monthly
basis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Director.
I yield back my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Reed, you are recognized for questioning.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the testimony today, sir. One of the pieces
of information I found intriguing in your preliminary work is
as you went through this work, my understanding is you talked
with the officials of CMS that handle this situation, and they
indicated to you that--the CMS officials told you that their
experience has not shown the need for any changes in the
eligibility determination process. So CMS is working with you
throughout this investigation, correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. We have been in touch with CMS officials
and obtained documents and other information.
Mr. REED. Very, very frustrating to me as a member of this
oversight committee that the officials that are responsible for
trying to implement this program are sending you and sending
this body a message that they are not interested in making any
changes to improve the situation, even though you have given
them examples of clear, egregious violations of the procedures.
Am I misunderstanding the response of CMS?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, I think that has been their position at
the time. I believe in press reports regarding this hearing,
the public statement that CMS made was their willingness to
continue to work with GAO and identify areas where improvements
were made. So I would have to reconcile those two statements
during the course of our work.
Mr. REED. Well, I would hope this oversight process and
this public spotlight does do its job and gets CMS on the ball
to not send a message that they don't want to work with you and
others to clear up this clearly egregious behavior that you
have discovered and that you continue to discover as you go
forward with this investigation.
There is another interesting thing in your written
testimony that I read, and it is that you indicated that CMS is
currently unable to identify who has made a premium payment and
who has not. Is that accurate? I mean, did I read your
testimony correctly?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. That is our understanding, that that
part of the back-end system, that is part of the broader data
hub, I believe, has not been constructed, but there is a plan
to do so, we just don't have a timeline for that to happen.
Mr. REED. Okay. So there is a plan that CMS has advised to
you that they have in order to verify that information?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That is our understanding at this time, yes.
Mr. REED. But they can't give you a timeline as to when
they are going to get that done or implemented or----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That's correct as of this date.
Mr. REED. What are the details of that plan?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I can't comment on them. We can check back
and see with my staff to determine. If we have appropriate
documentation, we can get back to you on that.
Mr. REED. So just say you don't know, and there is probably
information out there that you could check?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. There might be in our work papers set, but I
am just not familiar with that plan specifically. So I don't
want to give you a wrong answer. We will get back to you.
Mr. REED. And am I correct in your testimony, though, too,
that the insurers have given the information to CMS on the
payment?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Again, that is our understanding, that the
insurers provide a list and an amount of subsidy owed, and the
government takes that self-attestation and reimburses the
insurers for the subsidies directly without touching the
enrollee, which is an important point to make.
Mr. REED. So just so the American people understand that
may be enrolled in these situations, what happens if the
government doesn't catch the fact that they are not paying
their premiums anymore with the individual's responsibility to
repay back these premiums that may be erroneously or
fraudulently issued to them?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, I think the requirement is that the
applicant or the enrollee continue to make payments to be
eligible for the subsidy, but that is a determination that I
wouldn't be able to make in terms of what exactly the process
would be for the government to follow up with that particular
enrollee and determine why the payments are not being made,
whether there would be a grace period to restart the payments.
Mr. REED. Okay. But maybe I am not being clear. So if an
enrollee doesn't make the premium payment and the subsidy
continues to be provided to the insurer, correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I--that is a possibility, yes.
Mr. REED. And then, subsequently, it is discovered that the
premiums weren't made, isn't there an obligation on CMS' part
or the government's part to go after the enrollee to say, hey,
we gave you a premium subsidy that you are not entitled to,
because the premiums weren't made? Is that--that is my
understanding of it.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Thank you for your clarification. We are
aware of situations like that, but so far, the audit part of
our work has not focused on it, and we will be focusing on that
area going forward.
Mr. REED. Well, I appreciate that, because I am very
concerned about the fraud and everything that you have
uncovered in this preliminary report, but I am also very
concerned that enrollees don't understand what is coming down
the pipeline, because if CMS doesn't do its job, if the
government doesn't do its job, if they continue to engage in
this fraudulent behavior, then premiums are going out. That is
one thing. That is wrong. That is illegal. That is a clear
violation. But also if the premiums go out and the enrollees
have to pay back those premiums because of some type of mistake
that the government made, I hope the American people understand
they are the ones who are going to be on the hook to have to
pay this back, and not the insurer.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. CROWLEY. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am interested in hearing about the concern for the
enrollees. That is very interesting. My friend from New York
spoke so eloquently about concern for the enrollees. I would
just add for the record that 52 times my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle have voted to repeal the Affordable
Care Act, 52 times. I am not asking you to comment on that, but
just to state for the record that 52 attempts by my colleagues
on the Republican side of the aisle have been to repeal the
entire act itself, so it is interesting to hear about the
concerns for the enrollees.
Quite frankly, Mr. Bagdoyan, I think that this hearing is
premature. You have stated yourself that you have not finished
your investigation. Is that correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. The work is ongoing on the investigative
and the audit front, yes.
Mr. CROWLEY. And I would suggest that possibly part of that
investigation, as Mr. Lewis was referring to, was seeing this
through. Have any of your undercover investigators actually
accessed any healthcare through these plans?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. They have not.
Mr. CROWLEY. They have not. And they are paying a premium--
they are paying a premium, and the government is giving a
subsidy directly to the insurance companies, correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That is correct. As part of the investigative
scenarios, that is correct.
Mr. CROWLEY. So it appears as though you have operated a
very sophisticated criminal operation here, not that your
intention is criminal. In other words, if someone is thinking
in terms of a criminal mindset to actually exploit the system,
you are kind of working in that--that mode in an honest way, I
guess you could say, right?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, that is part of our tasking, to
investigate and----
Mr. CROWLEY. And I appreciate that.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. And it is the authority of the GAO to do
that, sure.
Mr. CROWLEY. And it is important from an accounting point
of view in understanding and saving taxpayers. This is not
accusatory towards you and what----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I understand.
Mr. CROWLEY [continuing]. You are doing. I want to make
that clear.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. No worries.
Mr. CROWLEY. But what is the ultimate price here for the
criminal? Is it a free colonoscopy? What is the ultimate
benefit to the criminal who is taking these risks to do this?
You know, this isn't like Medicare fraud where the doctor is
actually cooking the books to put more money into his or her
pocket. Why would a noncitizen, for instance, risk discovery by
applying for health insurance, or a fraudster with an illegal
Social Security Number use them for this purpose when there are
other obviously more lucrative ways in which to exploit those
things? Why would they do that?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I am afraid I wouldn't be able to comment on
the intent of anyone attempting fraud.
Mr. CROWLEY. Let me ask you this question, then: in
addition to the penalties in the Federal criminal law, the ACA
has civil penalties for providing false information. Is that
correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I believe that is my understanding.
Mr. CROWLEY. So, in a perfect world, if people--again, if
these were real criminals, if they were attempting to do this,
they would probably be--they would have some knowledge that
possibly there would be some penalties if this were uncovered.
Is that correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I can't speak for individuals. There is, I
think, sufficient information.
Mr. CROWLEY. And, in fact, the two penalties are as stiff
as $25,000 for failure to provide information and $250,000 for
providing false information. That is a substantial amount. Is
that not enough, or do you think we should maybe increase those
penalties? Do you think that those penalties would have some
impact on the criminal's intent to pursue this?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Again, Mr. Crowley, I would be hesitant to
comment on that.
Mr. CROWLEY. I appreciate that. I see that--I know that I
am running out of time, but I see that my colleagues once again
on the other side of the aisle are using this as an
opportunity, I think, to exploit their dislike of the
Affordable Care Act, and I know that they don't like it, I get
that, but today, I guess the theatrical selection is much ado
about nothing, because there is really nothing here yet until
we see what happens in the true-up what the follow-up of the
IRS would be in terms of determining whether or not that
individual was eligible for those credits. And I know that they
haven't helped in terms of making that even more helpful to the
recipient of the credits themselves, so I appreciate that. It
is just another attempt to try to smear, I think, the
Affordable Care Act.
More people are getting coverage, as my colleague from
Georgia has said, and they are liking it. All the doomsday
predictions haven't come true, and they are now trying to trump
up new accusations that ignore the reality of it that people
are actually accessing healthcare and enjoying it.
Yes, there are instances where people misstate or wrongly
estimate their income, and for those inconsistencies, they are
later verified and corrected, and if not, they have to pay it
back.
So I think, you know, Mr. Bagdoyan, as I mentioned before,
I do appreciate your work and you needing to do this and it is
important work that you are engaged in, but I think it has been
premature. It is like having an investigation of organized
crime, and talking about an investigation that is going on
before you have gotten to the conclusion. It tips off a lot of
people that we may not want to be tipping off.
With that, I will yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Which underscores why we are taking a serious look at
oversight early in this process, to avert problems and taxpayer
dollars going out to waste, fraud and abuse, rather than
letting this linger on for years on end and taxpayers being
caught up in this trap.
With that, I will now yield to Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bagdoyan, the gentleman from New York, Mr. Crowley,
said that this is an attempt to smear the Affordable Care Act,
and I would argue just the opposite. I think the Affordable
Care Act, to use his adjective--or his verb, is smearing
itself, and he posed a number of hypotheticals to you. Let me
move out of the hypothetical and into the actual.
So, actually, based on this investigation, there were 12
attempts to defraud the system, and 11 of those attempts were
successful. That is right, isn't it?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That is correct, Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. That is not hypothetical. Those are actual 11
attempts that came up where the bad actor rang the bell and got
a benefit that they weren't supposed to get. That is right,
isn't it?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That is correct in these 11 instances.
Mr. ROSKAM. I find that number, 11 out of 12, shocking,
jarring, troubling; you know, pick your descriptor. Have you
come to an opinion based on your experience as to how you would
characterize the robustness of the program? I recognize your
admonition at the beginning that you don't want to overlay, but
for example, accept this hypothetical: if this trend were to
continue and 11 out of 12 were to continue to be the trend and
you were to lay that out over this entire program, how would
you describe that net result?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, again, I would be reluctant to project
based on this very limited sample.
Mr. ROSKAM. I accept that at face value.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. But as I mentioned, again, and I will
underscore it in this instance, is that we have identified
several areas of control that need attention, and our audit
work will focus on that and benchmark against appropriate
standards for us to make any kind of judgment in terms of
forward looking in this regard.
Mr. ROSKAM. Have you come to an opinion about the
robustness of the Internal Revenue Service and their role in
the 11 cases that you came across?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Our work has not touched the IRS as yet, but
they are part of the overall scope of our work.
Mr. ROSKAM. So the IRS inquiry is ongoing?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. It is, yes. It is--it is active work as we
speak, and that is one of the agencies we will be touching on
in terms of their roles in controlling enrollment.
Mr. ROSKAM. And this GAO report, this investigation came
about as a result of a specific congressional inquiry. Is that
right?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. That is correct, at the request of Chairman
Boustany and others.
Mr. ROSKAM. I think that we are going to continue to have
these episodic insights into the weakness of some of these
things. And what we need to be doing and what Congress needs to
be doing is advocating an overall structure for oversight.
I have introduced H.R. 4158, which would create a special
inspector general to monitor the Affordable Care Act, or SIGMA.
Congress has appointed special inspectors general for things
like the Troubled Access Recovery Program, TARP, Afghanistan,
Iraq and elsewhere, where literally billions of dollars in
waste have been uncovered.
And if you think about the scope of what we are talking
about here, CBO projects that over a trillion dollars in
Affordable Care Act subsidies are going to be paid out over 10
years. Those types of numbers just absolutely take your breath
away. Even if a portion of the trend that you uncovered
continues, these numbers are really jarring.
The special inspector general approach that I have
advocated would have a similar role with jurisdiction that
spans all implementing agencies, and the ability to bring
important data to light and hold the administration
accountable. And in the case of subsidies, it is given specific
oversight over the IRS and its implementation of the law more
broadly, but also its subsidy verification and overpayment
recapture process. So I think that there is a real opportunity
here.
Your insight is incredibly helpful. I want to join my
colleagues in thanking you for the work that you are doing. We
are not over-characterizing it, but we are really concerned
about the depth and the problems that you have identified and
articulated. Thank you for your time.
And I yield back. Thank very much.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Paulsen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank you for taking the time to be with us this
morning. You know, we already knew that we were unable to
verify income and eligibility information. We have had that
discussion in this committee as the law has been put into
practice, for those that are applying for health insurance, but
this review, the review that you provide today, calls into
question whether the government is even able to verify that
these people who are applying for insurance are who they say
they are. I mean, just those folks, it is just--you know, the
11 out of the 12 cases that you mentioned earlier as a part of
this review.
And just to follow up a little bit on what Mr. Roskam had
said, it is troubling to follow on the heels of your report,
knowing full well that the inspector general for tax
administration has already found seriously inadequate controls
available in administering their part of the law. HHS, the
Office of the Inspector General has already found their
internal controls are deficient. And now we have this report
where you have laid out 11 of 12 successful cases in
defrauding, essentially defrauding the system. So we know that
improper payments in other Federal programs have cost money.
You look at the EITC over a 10-year period, costing taxpayers
$132 billion. If you apply that percentage to what would be
transpired into this extensive, expensive program with the
Affordable Care Act, Obamacare, we are talking real money here,
real money that can be prevented.
But let me ask you this. I want to just follow up on a
little different line of questioning, Mr. Bagdoyan. You stated
that six of your 18 applicant scenarios included in-person
applications through the navigators and those in-person
assisters, but you tested--your testing had one problem. In
five of the six scenarios, they were either unable to find
these individuals or they were turned away, correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, the six cases are independent of the
other 12, because they focused on testing the income control.
And the five who were unable to assist us was done, as I
mentioned earlier, for a variety of reasons. They said they
didn't have sufficient training to do so, they focused on a
narrow part of the applicant population, two of them were
experiencing some Web site access problems at the times, and
another one told us that we needed to make an appointment. When
we attempted to do so onsite, we were advised to call, but our
calls were unsuccessful.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. So you have worked through this
scenario. We know that CMS awarded these navigators that you
were approaching $67 million in grants to help consumers
complete their eligibility applications and the enrollment
forms, and then other in-person assisters received this money
as well, but your testimony, then, is suggesting that many of
these groups may be pocketing that money, taxpayer money,
without providing the services.
Can you just describe a little bit about what your
experience and GAO's experience was at trying to obtain in-
person assistance in your applications?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. I would refer you to my answer earlier.
There was a mix of having to make appointments, we were not
able to make them on the spot, and we didn't get our phone
calls returned, and there were also Web site problems. Someone
said that they didn't have sufficient training, so they were
uncomfortable in performing the service.
Mr. PAULSEN. So there is insufficient training, the Web
sites, you know, may be inaccurate or not working correctly. Do
you expect that later, GAO, through your ongoing investigation,
is going to name those entities where you sought assistance but
you were unable to obtain it? In other words, is there going to
be a trail of accountability here? Is that going to be part of
your recommendation? Do you see that happening?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, we will have to look at the assister
issue in the broadest context possible within the controls
focus of our work. I can't really comment beyond what the
implications are to the entire assister population, because
this was, again, a very narrow slice of that population that we
looked at. So we will take a variety of factors into
consideration, but in terms of naming names, I don't think that
at this time or in the future, we would necessarily go that
route.
Mr. PAULSEN. Well, and let me just ask this, then. So
knowing 5 of 6 or 11 of 12, we are talking high percentages
here, right, 80 to 90 percent of issues here. Is a part of the
investigation, I would expect, accountability, right, as a part
of your investigation, maybe not naming names, but naming those
that--where the contracts were let, where the navigators were
supposed to be providing these services, where there is no
accountability in essence, correct?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I think from the perspective of looking at
the controls in their totality, that is an area that we will
take a look at, but, again, I would emphasize the narrowness
and the smallness of our sample, and the percentages would be
out of whack if we had something that would be projected to
those populations.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Director.
It seems to me that this is a very interesting
investigation, that we are investigating what we think might
happen. And I guess from watching television, I am of the
opinion that much of the forensic work relative to
investigations are about things that have occurred, and we are
trying to find out how and why. It is interesting to me that
the focus of the investigation is on individuals who would
qualify for a subsidy, yet that there isn't anything that we
can project they are going to benefit; that the beneficiaries
become the insurance companies. It certainly does not become
them. So if we can't establish any intent relative to fraud,
then we can establish that maybe somebody who was helping them
or somebody who was giving them information had not been
trained as well as they should have been and, as a result of
that, mistakes occur, and yet we still focus on them.
Let me ask you, is the 11 out of 12, is that really
accurate? I mean, it is hard to determine the accuracy of
projections sometimes. Anyway, things don't always go as it
looks as though they would, but is the 11 of 12, is that a firm
level of accuracy that we really could expect?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Thank you for your question. The intent of
this sample was not to project in any way. It is too small of a
sample to do so, anyway. The intent of this phase of our work,
the investigative undercover phase, is basically to identify
areas for potential focus for our future work in terms of the
overall controls and then the specific controls and tools and
how they interact, where they are in the process and how they
might work or not work depending on their application. So it
was not intentional on our part to say, Well, 11 out of 12 we
can project to the entire universe of applicants. And that is
one of the limitations that I identified in my oral comments.
Mr. DAVIS. I have always thought and felt that a bit of
prevention is worth much more than the cure, and so surely if
we can prevent things from happening, but I guess I am
wondering, where would the money come from since we have not
passed an HHS appropriation bill, since ``cut, cut, cut'' has
been the theme of our colleagues on the other side? Where would
the money come from to do this broad investigatory work that
related across the board to these individuals who could get a
subsidy, but it wouldn't go to them? I mean, what is----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, certainly, sir, I can't comment on the
budget necessarily to do this work, but I would concur with
your earlier comment about the importance of preventative
controls, what we call the front-end controls. That is part of
GAO's fraud prevention framework. So I would agree to that
extent, that that is where the action has to happen, because
the back-end controls traditionally are less effective.
Mr. DAVIS. Well, thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Before we go to the next questioner, I also want to make
the point, and I think you--it is highlighted in your report,
that you--even though the sample size is small, you sampled
diverse areas of the country, rural and urban. So it sort of
gives us, even with a small number, kind of a broad snapshot
of--within the confines of those small numbers, that we have a
trillion dollar program over 10 years, we are very concerned
about the integrity of the program, and safeguards on the front
end, which we know are more effective than trying to go through
pay and chase, which as we know from other programs, that is
not effective in recouping and protecting taxpayers. And so I
just wanted to make that point, and if--and I want you also to
state for the record a little bit about the fact that you
looked at diverse areas, both urban and rural.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Certainly we tried to have a representation
of different geographic locations in the country, and within
those geographic locations, we attempted to represent urban and
rural settings so that we had, given, again, our limited
sample, as diverse coverage as possible.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And you will continue the investigation
along those same lines, so----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Right. As more information becomes available,
the more we analyze, we will identify, as appropriate,
additional steps in that regard, yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Marchant, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Director, for this report.
I guess the word is out to America that what we have
suspected all along is true. Wall Street Journal says
fictitious applicants get to U.S. health insurance tax credits.
The Washington Post says, Federal uncover investigation signs
up fake applicants for ACA coverage and subsidies. And then NBC
comes out and says, GAO sting finds it easy to fake it. Get
Obamacare premiums.
So what we have suspected since we passed this law and it
began to be implemented is that it is another Federal program
that is going to be easily scammed and easily accessed by
someone willing to commit fraud. We have several programs in
the Federal Government that we find out daily that that is
happening to.
I guess we also found out what the new definition of a
navigator is. The new definition of a navigator is a fraud
assistant agent. It is something that we have suspected since
the first TV and news stories came out when we found people in
these agencies not being able to answer questions, some of them
had criminal backgrounds. From the very beginning, we suspected
that the people that were going to be assisting people to sign
up to this program were not qualified to do so. This report,
this preliminary report completely ratifies that.
In one of these stories, it says that 4.3 million of the
applicants have some inconsistency in their application, 4.3
million, and the agents and the contractors that are supposed
to be vetting these inconsistencies are so far behind, they
will never catch up, never catch up to verifying these
inconsistencies.
This last year, this year, we will have spent $17 billion
on this program, another Federal program. Where did the money
come from? The money came from taxpayers. In the last year,
millions of taxpayers in the United States have found out that
they are paying for Obamacare; they are paying in extra taxes.
So it is the responsibility of this committee, it is the
responsibility of this Congress to make sure that those
taxpayers, those hardworking taxpayers do not have their money
wasted, and so I think that your preliminary report has done a
great service to this Congress and this committee, because it
is giving us some direction now in finding out exactly how to
address this problem.
When you gave the navigators the information, did you
provide income information?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Yes. I would refer you to my opening
statement where I said that the one person who did assist us,
correctly identified our income, which we gave this person, as
being outside the boundaries of qualifying for a subsidy. So we
did provide a number, and this assister assessed that number
and correctly told us that it was outside of that bound.
Mr. MARCHANT. So your--in these 11 to 12 cases--in all 12
cases, you provided the IRS with income that was verifiable and
you provided them with a Social Security Number that was
verifiable?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. We provided a series of data points as part
of the application, but I will remind you that the six
navigator scenarios are not intended to seek coverage like the
other 12 were. So it is a technical nuance, but it is a very
important one to make. But we did provide information online
during our online application process, and then when we
switched over to the telephone process, we were submitting
various bits of information, yes.
Mr. MARCHANT. So you could draw the conclusion that, as
flawed as the Web site started and as flawed as it is and as
flawed as it is, and now on the back end as you described,
catching those fraud and catching those inconsistencies, the
Web site, you found you--it was much more difficult on the Web
site to give them false information and sign up than it was if
you would switch to a navigator?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, we were flagged on the online process.
We were referred to the contractor, who was intended to clarify
or verify our identity. When they weren't able to do so, they
directed us to the call center, and that is where we got
through in terms of obtaining coverage.
Now, I would say that when we did provide information as
part of the application process, there were inconsistencies
that were flagged, and we subsequently received requests to
submit documentation which would be--to substantiate the
information we were providing, and that is the documentation
that is now at the back end with the contractor, who processes
that documentation. And as I mentioned earlier, in several
instances regarding two of our applicants, those documents have
been verified as authentic.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Director.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Jenkins, you have 5 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this important hearing.
Mr. Director, thank you for being here. We are very
concerned about this GAO report and your findings that the
premium tax credit offered by enrollment in the exchange is
vulnerable to abuse. In particular, it is concerning to me.
This subcommittee has held two similar hearings on this topic
this year. And your findings have confirmed our fears.
When Commissioner Koskinen of the IRS testified on this
subject back in May, he told this subcommittee that he hoped,
he hoped taxpayers would do certain things, such as notifying
the exchange of life events, so that their subsidies would be
adjusted, but acknowledged that more public outrage might be
necessary to ensure that the enrollees are compliant.
In June, a panel of tax experts told this subcommittee that
it was very unlikely that taxpayers would notify the exchange
of their life events. I am afraid that this will leave those
receiving premium tax credits on the hook for thousands of
dollars in penalties in the future.
Now this GAO report highlights the broader problem of
intentional waste, fraud, and abuse of premium tax credits by
providing that these agencies simply do not have the
infrastructure necessary to verify this information before
handing taxpayer dollars to bad actors. Instead of doubling
down on the investigating wrongful premium tax credits, CMS
issued a proposed rule in late June that will automatically
reenroll participants in the exchange for 2015.
So I have several questions for you. First, do you believe
that the administration currently has the ability to accurately
verify eligibility for these premium tax credits? And do you
believe that it will be possible for CMS to accurately verify
eligibility for the current enrollees in time for open season
in November?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Thank you for your question. At this point,
we haven't touched those areas, but they are within the scope
of our work. And as appropriate, we will follow up vigorously.
And again, within the broad context of looking at all the
controls, that would be part of the picture, definitely.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. But you saw nothing that indicated that
these----
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Not at this point. We narrowly focused on our
investigation at the beginning of our overall work to, again,
touch several controls and see which areas were candidates, if
you will, for additional focus.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Fair enough. Could you just comment on
whether you believe automatically reenrolling exchange
participants is a good idea?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I can't comment. That is really not part of
our scope right now. So I can't comment on that.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. My pleasure.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlelady.
We will next go to Ms. Black for 5 minutes.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you for having this very important hearing.
These are subject matters that we have been talking about for
quite some time, at least since I have been here for the last 3
and a half years and ones that are close to my heart.
I want to reiterate the fact that this is so important, as
you said, Mr. Chairman, that these dollars do not go out the
door and then us try to retrieve them. We know from other tax
credits that have been given, that there is billions of dollars
that go out and we never receive those back. So this is so
important that we get this right now and take care of this,
because those dollars are precious, and they need to be used
for people that truly need the assistance. So thank you again.
Let me ask you about something that is not in your report and
has not been mentioned here today, and that is there were two
major planks to the ACA. One is the verification of an income
to make sure that someone qualified for those subsidies. But
the second was that if you had employer-sponsored insurance,
you would not be eligible for those subsidies. And I don't see
anything here to show that that is one of the major planks that
we should be looking for. Are you looking at that major plank
in the work that you are doing?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I am not familiar with that particular
aspect. It is a big plan. But we would be happy to get back to
you on that particular point.
Mrs. BLACK. Well, I know that the data hub was supposed to
do a lot. And we looked at that data hub from the beginning and
knew that it was very complicated. As a matter of fact, a
number of people who are experts in the industry said it was so
complicated they didn't believe that it ever could be done. So
the data hub was supposed to be one of the mechanisms to be
used, but I am just really curious, because I don't know that
we know how many people currently are applying for these
subsidies that potentially would not be eligible because of
their employer-sponsored insurance. So I would really love to
hear back from you on what your thoughts are on that because it
is a major plank. And I think that we have got to make sure
that that one is covered as well.
As far as the income verification goes, again, the data hub
was supposed to be the mechanism to be used that it would then
ping into the IRS. The IRS would then get that information back
to say whether that was good information or not. But would it
make sense in your opinion that they would be using something,
say, like Equifax that is being used by the SNAP program to
verify income?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. I believe Equifax does have a role, but I
would have to, again, check and confirm that and get back to
you.
Mrs. BLACK. Do you also know in your investigation whether
this administration has provided any deadline for these
contractors to complete the remaining inconsistencies? Because
I understand there is a large number of those. So, in the
meantime, people potentially are getting the subsidies, but it
seems that it is going to take a long time to have those
inconsistencies verified. Do you have any information to share
with us on where this administration is going?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Based on our visit to the document processing
contractor's facility, they are actively trying to clear out
the backlog of inconsistencies. But in terms of timing, I would
have to again get back to you on that if there is a specific
end date for that process. But as you can imagine, there are
hundreds of thousands of application-related documents that
need to be vetted and cleared. And there are also, as my
statement alludes to, a number of documents which cannot be
matched against applications as well.
Mrs. BLACK. And then my final comments, really more
comments than anything, but when we looked at the navigators,
and I read all of the rules and regulations related to the
navigators, and noted at that time that it would be pretty
difficult for a navigator with a small amount of training that
they received to even be able to help somebody work through a
very complicated system, especially if that individual had a
complicated application process. So I would be very interested
to see what additional information you get back about what
navigators are able to do for those who come to get assistance.
And there certainly is a difference between the navigators and
the navigator assistants, the assistant navigators, because
there is a big difference in their training. So I would be very
interested to see, as you complete your report, on the kind of
information and help that are given to people, given the amount
or the lack of education that they really have in order to take
on that role.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Kelly, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Bagdoyan, thanks for being here today. I was reading
through your testimony last night. United States Government
Accountability Office. That is who you represent. What is your
job? I mean, why even create a GAO?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Well, GAO exists to serve the Congress in its
investigative and oversight capacity in its broadest term.
Mr. KELLY. Okay. So, I mean, it is kind of an early
detection, right? I mean, if you were in the private sector--I
got to tell you, I came out of the private sector. If I had the
ability to go to an agency before I made an investment, kind of
the look-before-you-leap type of philosophy, because in the
private sector you are not allowed to make a mistake. You go
out of business. To have the ability to look ahead and see what
the total cost of this program was going to be; where are the
traps on this? Where were the downfalls on this? What could
possibly go wrong? When you look at the numbers, these are
staggering. There is nobody in the private sector that would
look at this model and say you know what, I think that is
acceptable. My God, you just can't do those things, not in the
private sector.
Now, in government, it is kind of fun because we work with
OPM. And for those of you that aren't in the private sector,
that means other people's money, in this case hardworking
American taxpayers' money. So it is easy to throw those dollars
around and say you know what, unintended consequences. Doggone
it, we did it again. And we are going to have the GAO do a
study. And then you do a study, and we say, well, wait a minute
that is too limbed. You can't tell me that and expect me to
believe that somehow down the road this has a happy ending.
What do you see coming? And I am just talking about from a
practical everyday American's outlook on life. People that get
up every morning, throw their feet out over the bed, go to work
so that they can put a roof over their children's heads, spoons
on the table, clothes on their backs, and keep giving money to
a government who they are trusting to spend it the right way,
and we are finding out that they don't even trust us any more
than that because we have wasted so much of it. The district
that I come in, you know what people watch? They don't watch
dollars, they watch pennies. And the old adage is if you watch
pennies, you pay attention to pennies, the dollars will add up.
My God, $17 trillion and climbing in the red ink here, and we
are still saying, you know what, this is all hypothetical. Come
on, if we can't do these wonderful things. But it comes down to
this. Our job in this body is to protect the hardworking
American taxpayers' investment, their tax dollars, and make
sure that they are being spent the right way. And if we find
something wrong, early detection is always the best way to get
a correction. Certainly in your health it is much better to
find out early on that you are on the wrong trajectory and you
have to change your lifestyle or you have got to do something.
So just tell me, the GAO, the job that you are doing, you
are looking at things right now, and there has got to be bells
and whistles going off everywhere. And it is my understanding
that the administration was told, you know what, light is not
green. It is yellow, and it is about at the end of its yellow
term. It is going to turn red real quick. You better look
before you leap. You better make sure that you are spending
this money the right way because you are collecting it from
people who go to work every day and put that money in this
furnace. That is where the revenue comes from. It does not come
from Congress. It comes from the American taxpayer.
So I just wonder, as you go on with this study, is there
anything that you look at and think, well, my gosh, I think if
we keep going the way we are going, things are going to be all
right because this is all hypothetical. And I got to tell you I
am fed up with every issue that involves policy that affects
the American people to be about politics. Really? Really. If
you came here for a political career and you didn't come here
for the people that you represent, then my God, take a look at
the mirror and say, am I still doing what they sent me to do?
So you are sitting there every day. You are watching this go
on. You got to sit there and just pull your hair out and say,
you know, I keep telling them that it is not working. I keep
telling them that they are wasting dollars. And they keep
saying to me, too early. Too early. This is too partisan. You
are seeing this coming. Where does this lead as we go forward?
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Mr. Kelly, our work is definitely ongoing. In
the next several months, we will be looking again, as I
mentioned earlier, at a wide range of issues. And when we issue
our report, we are likely to have recommendations to address
the issues we have identified and direct those recommendations
to the relevant agencies. And they are supposed to get back to
us with their specific plans within 60 days of how to begin
implementing those.
Mr. KELLY. I hope it works better for you than for me,
because the people I have talked to said, you know what, Kelly,
you got to get reelected. I have just got to get through this
cycle. The people I talk to, the bureaucrats, the problem is
that you folks don't understand, this is our career. And we
will keep doing what we have to do. There is something
drastically wrong here. And I would hope that you are able to
stay on line and keep doing what you do best.
I just think that sometimes you try to help people, and
they turn a deaf ear and a blind eye to what you have offered
them. And I see that happening here. And at the end of the day,
it is the American taxpayer who foots the bill for every single
thing that comes out of their pockets. And they have co-signed
a note for the future that includes their children, their
grandchildren, and their great grandchildren. And we sit here
with our eyes covered and our ears plugged and say, no, no, no,
this is just politics. It is not politics. This is about
people, and it is about the American people. I thank you for
your work. And please keep doing what you are doing. God bless
you.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. I think he made a
very eloquent case for early and aggressive oversight because
he certainly made clear that the American people do want
accountability.
Thank you, Mr. Bagdoyan. Thank you to you and your staff
for appearing before us today, and the important work that you
are doing. Please be advised that members may have additional
questions they may submit in writing to you.
Mr. BAGDOYAN. Absolutely.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And we expect answers to be made part of
the record.
And with that, this subcommittee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:42 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Member Submissions For The Record

Rep. John Lewis 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Rep. John Lewis 2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Public Submissions For The Record

Tim Albright

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
