- TAX-RELATED PROVISIONS IN THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAX-RELATED PROVISIONS IN
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 5, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-OS1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

89-554                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

[[Page ii]]

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

[[Page iii]]

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of March 5, 2013 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Ph.D., President, American Action Forum,
Testimony......................................................     6
Dan Moore, President & CEO, Cyberonics; Chairman, Medical Device
Manufacturers Association, Testimony...........................    18
Walt Humann, President & CEO, OsteoMed, Testimony................    27
David Kautter, Managing Director of the Kogod Tax Center,
American University; Executive-in-residence, Department of
Accounting and Taxation, Testimony.............................    34
Shelly Sun, CEO and Co-Founder of BrightStar Care, Testimony.....    46
Hugh Joyce, James River Heating and Air Conditioning Company,
Testimony......................................................    55
Paul N. Van de Water, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities, Testimony...................................    60

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Farm Bureau Federation..................................    83
California Healthcare Institute..................................    87
Cook Group.......................................................    89
Dental Trade Alliance............................................    98
Kenneth H. Ryesky................................................   100
Medicaid Health Plans of America.................................   108
National Association for the Self-Employed.......................   110
The Brinks Company...............................................   112
The Center for Fiscal Equity.....................................   115

MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Questions for the Record.........................................   119

[[Page (1)]]

TAX-RELATED PROVISIONS IN THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 5, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:12 a.m., in
room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

[[Page 2]]

HEARING ADVISORY

Boustany Announces Hearing on the Tax-Related Provisions in the
President's Health Care Law

1100 Longworth House Office Building at 11:00 AM
Washington, February 26, 2013

Congressman Charles W. Boustany, Jr. M.D. (R-LA), Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means, today
announced the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the tax provisions
contained in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health
Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (``President's Health
Care Law''). The hearing will take place immediately following the
Subcommittee organizational meeting that begins at 11:00 a.m. on
Tuesday, March 5, 2013, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office
Building.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Subcommittee and
for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the
President's health care law contains 47 tax or tax-related provisions.
Estimates by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and the Joint
Committee on Taxation (JCT) confirm that tax increases associated with
the law total more than $1 trillion over the next ten years. Many of
these provisions are already in effect, and others will become
effective in 2014. Key provisions include: a tax on medical device and
drug manufacturers, and health insurers; a tax on individuals and
families who do not purchase government-mandated health insurance, a
tax on employers that do not offer government-mandated health
insurance, additional Medicare taxes and taxes on investment income.

In its review of the tax provisions of the President's health care
law, the Subcommittee will consider the: (1) status of implementation
of key tax provisions; (2) compliance issues associated with the tax
provisions and accompanying regulations; and (3) economic effects of
the provisions.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``The
President's health care law imposes a number of new taxes and reporting
requirements on individuals and various industries--and many of those
tax hikes hit the middle class. We are starting to see that these
provisions make it harder for businesses to create good paying jobs and
may adversely affect the quality and accessibility of health care. As
the Committee moves forward with comprehensive tax reform, it is
imperative that we examine the law's tax provisions and consider their
impact on the administration of the Tax Code as well as on individuals,
families, and employers.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on implementation of the tax and tax-related
provisions contained in the President's health care law.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submis

[[Page 3]]

sion for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Tuesday, March 19, 2013. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. We will now begin our hearing on the
tax-related provisions in the President's health care law.
Three months ago President Obama signed into law the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care
and Education Reconciliation Act. For individuals, families,
and small businesses struggling to pay for health care, this
milestone is no cause for celebration. Today we will examine
the impact of key tax provisions of that law.
The health care law contains over a trillion dollars in new
taxes on employers, medical device makers, families buying
health insurance, and others. These unprecedented new taxes
could hardly come at a worse time as our economy continues to
struggle through the slowest recovery on record.
With the Congressional Budget Office predicting that
unemployment will remain above 7 percent, the law's new taxes
make it more costly for employers to hire, more expensive for
families to purchase health insurance, and more difficult for
the health care industry to innovate.

[[Page 4]]

And it is getting worse every month. Federal agencies are
busy issuing new regulations to implement the law, adding over
150 million new compliance burden hours a year and billions of
dollars in cost that will be borne largely by employers. These
are time and red tape costs on top of the taxes. This is not a
recipe for economic growth and job creation.
Today's hearing will explore these new taxes and their
economic effects. The new medical device tax is particularly
destructive, as it targets one of the few remaining industries
in which America continues to lead the world in innovation.
This is an industry in which companies often go years without
making a profit, hoping to survive long enough to reach
profitability and introduce innovative, life-saving medical
products.
But the new tax hits employers regardless of profitability,
and has already resulted in layoffs and additional delays in
new products reaching the market.
The new insurance tax and employer mandate threaten to
stifle small business growth across all industries. Beginning
next year, job creators will be saddled with burdensome new
rules and taxes that disincentivize hiring new employees and
provide economic incentives to reduce employees' hours and drop
health insurance coverage altogether.
Before knowing whether the IRS will deem job creators a
large employer and thus subject to the tax, employers will have
to work out a complicated algorithm, aggregating the hours of
all part-time workers and adding in the number of full-time
workers. With the new law, Washington is effectively telling
many Main Street businesses to cut their workforce and stop
growing, hardly the incentives we need to be giving employers
in our current economic climate.
Today's hearing is especially important because we will be
hearing not only from economic and tax experts, but also job
creators from across the country. These are individuals who
spend their days trying to grow their businesses and expand
economic opportunity, but are forced to do so against
prevailing headwinds of new taxes and regulations from
Washington. They know the effects of the new law firsthand
because they live with these effects.
I was also hoping to welcome a witness who runs a small
business in my district, but unfortunately, he had to cancel
after his business partner had a medical emergency. I certainly
wish his partner a speedy recovery, but this goes to show how
unpredictable and how vulnerable a lot of our small business
operations truly are. Washington should be making their jobs
easier, not more difficult.
Last year the Subcommittee held hearings on a provision in
the health care law that requires holders of FSAs and HSAs to
get a prescription in order to use accounts to buy over-the-
counter medicine. The House subsequently passed legislation,
authored by Congresswoman Jenkins, repealing this provision, as
well as a medical device tax repeal, which was authored by
Congressman Paulsen.
I have introduced legislation repealing both the employer
mandate tax and health insurance tax. These issues all
reinforce the fact that the health care law was not simply a
health care law. It was an enormous tax change, and as such, it
is proper for the Sub

[[Page 5]]

committee to examine these laws, which are within the scope of
tax reform.
Now I'm happy to yield to the distinguished Ranking Member,
my friend Mr. Lewis from Georgia.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the Chairman
for holding this hearing on the Affordable Care Act. We are
always pleased to discuss our landmark health care reform law,
which will expand health coverage to 27 million Americans.
The last time the Oversight Subcommittee reviewed the tax
provisions of this law was in September 2012. Since enacted,
the Affordable Care Act has helped millions of Americans. For
example, the Affordable Care Act has protected over 17 million
children with preexisting conditions who can no longer be
denied health coverage, and more than 6 million young adults
who have health insurance through their parents' health plan
until age 26.
As another example, the health care law requires insurance
companies to spend a certain amount of the premiums they
collect on medical care. As a result, about 13 million
Americans received more than $1 billion in rebate payments last
year from insurance plans that failed to spend enough on
benefits.
Because of positive reforms like these, we are moving
forward. We must ensure that we act with all deliberate speed
to implement the Affordable Care Act. I know that this hearing
focuses on provisions that impose taxes on industries that
benefit from the law and wealthy Americans. This one-sided view
does not examine other provisions in the law that deliver
hundreds of billions of dollars of Federal tax credits to
millions of American families and small businesses.
These tax credit and cost-sharing subsidies will make
health insurance affordable for middle-class Americans and
families. Countless others now have peace of mind, knowing they
are not just one step away from losing their health insurance,
when it is needed the most.
Mr. Chairman, I am confident that the tax provisions of the
Affordable Care Act will be carried out on schedule. Today I
look forward to hearing where we are in the process, and the
issues that remain. I want to thank all of the witnesses for
their testimony and recommendations.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
Now it's my pleasure to welcome the panel of seven
witnesses we have before us today. Our witnesses today run the
gamut from academics to budget experts to business owners. I'm
delighted to have all of you here with us today. I think this
will be a very enlightening hearing.
First we will hear from Douglas Holtz-Eakin, President of
the America Action Forum here in Washington, D.C. Dr. Holtz-
Eakin has been Chief Economist with the President's Council of
Economic Advisors, Director of the Congressional Budget Office,
and fellow at various think tanks. We're pleased to have his
expertise today.
Next we have Dan Moore, President and CEO of Cyberonics, a
global medical device manufacturer. Mr. Moore also serves as
Chairman of the Medical Device Manufacturers Association, a

[[Page 6]]

trade association composed of smaller medical device companies.
Thank you, Mr. Moore, for joining us today.
Third, we will hear from Walter Humann, President and CEO
of OsteoMed, a surgical device manufacturing company based in
Dallas. Mr. Humann joined OsteoMed in 2001, growing the company
into a variety of surgical device markets. Mr. Humann, thank
you for joining us.
Fourth we will have David Kautter, Managing Director of the
Kogod Tax Center and Executive-in-Residence in the Department
of Accounting and Taxation at American University. Mr. Kautter
had a distinguished career at Ernst & Young, where he recently
served as Director of National Tax. Mr. Kautter also served on
Capitol Hill as a legislative counsel to Senator John Danforth.
Thank you for bringing your expertise to us today, Mr. Kautter.
Next we will hear from Shelly Sun, CEO and Co-Founder of
BrightStar Care, a premium health care staffing company.
BrightStar has 250 locations nationwide, providing the full
continuum of care, from home care to supplemental staffing for
corporate clients like nursing homes and physicians. Ms. Sun
just finished writing her first book, and was named
International Franchise Association Entrepreneur of the Year in
2009. Ms. Sun, thank you for joining us today.
Sixth we will hear from Hugh Joyce, President of the James
River Air Conditioning Company in Richmond, Virginia. Mr. Joyce
has been president of James River Air Conditioning for 19
years. He is here to speak from his experience as a small
business owner, as well as on behalf of the National Federation
of Independent Businesses. Mr. Joyce, thank you for joining us
today.
And finally, we'll hear from Mr. Paul Van De Water, Senior
Fellow with the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Dr. Van
de Water, we appreciate you being here, as well.
We welcome all the witnesses. We received your written
statements, and they will be made part of the formal hearing
record. You will each have five minutes for your oral remarks,
and I will start with you, Dr. Holtz-Eakin.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PH.D., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
ACTION FORUM

Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis,
and Members of the Committee, I thank you for the privilege of
appearing today. My written testimony contains a more detailed
analysis of some of the major taxes imposed in the Affordable
Care Act. Let me make four brief points as an overview.
Point number one is simply the scale of taxation is very
large--easily over 800 billion, reaching nearly a trillion, and
larger than the, I think, much more ballyhooed fiscal cliff
deal that was reached earlier this year. Any law that imposes
that scale of taxation ought to be looked at very carefully by
the conventional metrics of tax policy.
And those would be how distortionary are the taxes which
are imposed? What is the incidence of those taxes--that is, who
will actually bear the burden, and are they fairly distributed?
And then third, what will be the macroeconomic effects of those
taxes?

[[Page 7]]

Let me touch briefly on each. The ACA taxes are highly
distortionary. If you take the benchmark that non-distortionary
taxes will have a broad base and equal treatment of equals, the
ACA taxes look very different than that.
The device tax and the health insurers tax are sector-
specific taxes that will impact the ability to attract labor
and capital to those sectors. As I detail in the written
statement, each also has flaws in its design within that
sector, the device tax discriminating against relatively small
medical device manufacturers, and health insurers tax having a
whole set of what I view as very problematic provisions,
treating differently for-profit and not-for-profit insurers,
treating even more differently those who have extensive lines
of business in elderly and low income products.
It's a very distortionary tax, and is the only one that
I've ever seen that actually demands that you raise a fixed
amount of revenue, regardless of what it does to the industry,
beginning with 8 billion next year. And so it's a very
distortionary tax.
As you know, the so-called Medicare taxes, surtaxes on
payroll income and on net investment income, draw sharp lines
in the Tax Code. And even more troubling to me, those lines are
not indexed for inflation; indexing the Tax Code for inflation
has been a principle adopted by the United States since the
early 1980s, and doesn't represent good tax policy.
So as a whole, I think of these as not-particularly-well-
designed taxes, given the level of revenue they will raise.
They are also not especially progressive taxes. The taxes
that are levied on device manufacturers are going to end up in
health insurance costs, which will be then in turn shifted into
premiums. Health insurance is a broadly consumed product, with
the largest burden on the middle class in America.
Certainly the health insurance tax is going to show up very
directly in premiums, and given some of its peculiarities in
design--the inability to deduct this tax for the purposes of
corporation income tax--there will be even greater upward
pressures on premiums as a result.
And the so-called Cadillac tax on high-cost plans, despite
its name, is a tax that's going to hit the middle class. And
taken as a whole, these impacts are going to fall on the middle
class and exacerbate other premium pressures that are already
present in the ACA from benefit mandates and other regulations
that have been imposed.
And the final point is that the ACA taxes suffer from very
poor macroeconomic timing. As this Committee well knows, we are
struggling to recover from a financial crisis and very deep
recession. It is hardly a benchmark of great policy to levy
hundreds of billions of dollars in new taxes, which are poorly
designed, and to accompany them with a very heavy regulatory
load, and an expansion of entitlement programs at a time when
the U.S. debt exceeds the size of its economy and is being
driven by the existing entitlement programs.
So I think that probably the greatest lesson that can be
taken away from look at these taxes carefully is that even if
you wanted to raise this revenue, you could do it better, and
that thinking hard

[[Page 8]]

about this in the context of tax reform, which I know the Ways
and Means Committee is deeply interested in, is probably a good
idea.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 9]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 10]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 11]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 12]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 13]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 14]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 15]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 16]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 17]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 18]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Dr. Holtz-Eakin.
Mr. Moore, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN MOORE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CYBERONICS;
CHAIRMAN, MEDICAL DEVICE MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION

Mr. MOORE. Thank you, Chairman Boustany and Ranking Member
Lewis, for the opportunity to testify here today. As mentioned,
my name is Dan Moore, and I am CEO of Cyberonics, a Texas-based
medical device company that focuses on epilepsy and other
neurological conditions. I am also the chairman of the board

[[Page 19]]

for the Medical Device Manufacturers Association, and I'm
pleased to be testifying today in that capacity.
The medical device technology industry is one of America's
great success stories. We contribute to Americans living
longer, healthier, and more productive lives. We play an
important role in driving economic growth by employing high-
skilled manufacturing workers, who contribute to our industry's
trade surplus. We are the envy of countries around the globe.
However, I have real concerns about the future of America's
global leadership in medical devices. These concerns stem in
part from personal experiences as the son of a steelworker, and
I'm hoping that as a country we do not lose leadership in yet
another industry.
I was born in Gary, Indiana, which at one time was one of
two big American steel towns. My family, friends, and neighbors
were all employed in the steel industry. These hardworking
Americans had opportunities for advancement when the industry
was thriving.
I'm extremely proud of my father, who went from being a
laborer to having responsibility for maintenance in three mills
that were part of the Gary Works Corporation. He worked hard
and was able to provide for my mom and our family of eight
children. The United States was the global leader in steel
production and manufacturing, and the byproduct of this
leadership was great jobs that built communities and sustained
families for decades.
Sadly, we all know what happened to this chapter of
American manufacturing. I am here today to tell you today that
the global leadership position of the medical device industry
is at a crossroads, and not unlike what faced America's steel
industry years ago.
If we lose this leadership and the great jobs and all the
benefits that come with it, we will never get it back. And
countless communities, again, will never look the same. The
good news is that there is legislation to fix this problem, and
bipartisan momentum continues to build in support of it.
Beginning on January 1st, medical device innovators began
paying a 2.3 percent excise tax to the Government. I'm often
asked, a 2.3 percent tax, how could it be so damaging to
innovation, jobs, and patient care? After all, it's only 2.3
percent. Right? It's important to remember that this is a tax
on medical device company revenues, not profits. One study
estimated the tax will increase a company's effective tax rate
by an average of 29 percent.
Many companies are having their entire profits wiped away
because of the medical device tax. Others aren't even
profitable yet, but find themselves still having to pay a tax
that is destroying their ability to invest in research and
development to fund future medical breakthroughs. A study
showed that this onerous policy would lead to the loss of
43,000 good-paying jobs.
Regardless of company size, success, or stage of
development of medical technologies, a 2.3 percent excise tax
will have a significant impact, and at the end of the day a
negative impact on providers and patients, the people we intend
to help.
We all love the stories of innovators and entrepreneurs
coming up with ideas in their garages or spare bedrooms and
building American dreams into proud organizations. As I speak
before you today, physicians and engineers are working on new
technologies

[[Page 20]]

like an artificial pancreas that will allow diabetes to control
blood glucose levels automatically. Just weeks ago, the FDA
approved a new product that literally allows the blind to see.
Do we really want to risk the loss of these amazing new
devices by imposing an additional tax on medical device
companies? Medical technology innovators are pushing the
boundaries of science, all driven by American ingenuity and
American manufacturing. The medical device tax is putting an
end to some of these dreams and aspirations before they ever
get out of the lab, or perhaps one's garage.
I respectfully urge all of you to continue working together
to provide an environment where tomorrow's technologies and
devices will not be sacrificed as a result of misguided
policies today. None of us want to have to explain to our
children one day why they don't have the opportunity to work in
the same dynamic industry as their parents, focused on
improving the human condition.
I pledge to all of you that I will do everything I can to
help Congress and policy-makers ensure the 21st century is as
bright for medical technology innovation as was the last. I
urge you to support the repeal of this onerous medical device
tax, a tax on innovation, jobs, and most important, a tax on
patient care. Thank you for the opportunity to share my
concerns today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moore follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 21]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 22]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 23]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 24]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 25]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 26]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 27]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
Mr. Humann, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WALT HUMANN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, OSTEOMED

Mr. HUMANN. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis,
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you all for the opportunity
to testify before you today. Again, my name is Walt Humann. I'm
president and CEO of OsteoMed, a medical device company located
in Dallas, Texas. I am also on the board of the Medical Device
Manufacturers Association.

[[Page 28]]

On any Tuesday like today, I would normally be at
OsteoMed's facilities, ensuring that our company continues to
develop and produce innovative medical technologies that
improve patient outcomes, lower health care costs, and provide
well-paying jobs to hardworking Americans.
Instead, I am before you now to sound the alarm bell on the
devastating excise tax that is already having a negative impact
on thousands of medical device companies. Unfortunately, these
negative consequences of the excise tax have already been felt
at OsteoMed.
Like the majority of medical device companies, we have
humble beginnings as a startup company. OsteoMed was founded in
1991 in Glendale, California. We started supplying proprietary
patented instruments for the orthopedic industry, and quickly
expanded to design, manufacture, and produce various small bone
fixation devices, surgical implants, and surgical systems. I
want to highlight for you a few of our products that have
dramatic impacts on patient care.
One of our systems are used for children born with severe
head and facial deformities. Our product allows surgeons to
reconstruct very young babies for normal function and
appearance, and in many cases avoid the feeding problems, the
tracheotomies, and the other feeding and treatment problems
that would hinder normal childhood development.
Another system we produce focuses on repairing and
reconstructing the feet and ankles. OsteoMed recently was
fortunate to support a mission trip to Mexico, where these
products were used by surgeons to allow very young children to
walk normally for the very first time. However, our ability to
innovative and improve upon these projects is now threatened by
the medical device tax.
When Congress passed the Affordable Care Act in 2002, it
unfortunately also included this devastating tax on innovation.
In particular, the ACA includes a 2.3 percent excise tax on the
sales of most medical devices in the U.S. Again, this tax
applies to the total revenue of a company, not to profit.
In many cases, companies will end up paying more in taxes
than they actually generate in profits. As an example, two
years ago we started a project within OsteoMed that greatly
simplifies back surgery and reduces a two-hour operation to
just 30 minutes. This project is now producing revenues, but is
not yet profitable.
Unfortunately, the tax is clearly impacting the way that
OsteoMed and countless other companies select future R&D
projects. For some companies, the device tax has already led to
significantly reduced spending on research and development. For
others, it has led to a freeze on hiring and expansion
projects. Finally, many companies have made the painful
decision to let employees go. Unfortunately, at OsteoMed we
have done all three.
Supporters of the medical device excise tax claim that the
nearly 30 million new covered beneficiaries will use more
medical devices, and tax will be offset. This is simply not the
case. Many medical devices are products that are used on a
variety of patients.
For example, automated external defibrillators are found in
public places like airports, shopping malls, and here in the
halls of

[[Page 29]]

Congress. If a person goes into cardiac arrest today, he or she
will receive the treatment regardless of their insurance
status.
At OsteoMed, our products are used in trauma and
reconstructive procedures. We are fortunate to live in a great
country. People with injuries to the head, face, and
extremities are able to receive our products. Sadly, our
ability to continue to innovative on these products is
threatened.
There are numerous published reports regarding the impact
of the medical device excise tax. One report suggests that
nearly 45,000 jobs will be lost as a result of the tax. I am
here because I am concerned over 40 jobs in particular.
These are the 25 members of the OsteoMed family that had to
be let go because of the medical device tax. In addition, there
are more than a dozen future planned positions that now will
not be pursued at OsteoMed. In the 22-year history of our
company, we have never had to lay off an employee, much less
for a government-related tax. Therefore, Congress must do
everything it can to eliminate this devastating tax. Tens of
thousands of patients who use our devices are relying on your
leadership.
Nearly 300 employees and their families at OsteoMed are
ready for this barrier to be removed in order for us to
continue to improve health care. We must do everything in our
power to ensure that this great American industry remains a
truly global leader.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify before you,
and I'm happy to answer any questions later.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Humann follows:]

[[Page 30]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 31]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 32]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 33]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 34]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Humann.
Mr. Kautter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID J. KAUTTER, MANAGING DIRECTOR, KOGOD TAX
CENTER, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY, EXECUTIVE-IN-RESIDENCE, DEPARTMENT
OF ACCOUNTING AND TAXATION

Mr. KAUTTER. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
My name is David Kautter. I am Managing Director of the
Kogod Tax Center located at American University.

[[Page 35]]

The Kogod Tax Center is a tax research institute focused on
promoting balanced, non-partisan research on tax matters,
including complexity.
Primarily, we focus on middle income taxpayers, small
businesses, and entrepreneurs.
I have been a tax practitioner for over 40 years, and prior
to joining the Kogod Tax Center, I was the Director of Tax at
Ernst & Young.
Over the course of my career, I have watched the Internal
Revenue Code grow increasingly complex in its structure,
incomprehensible in its nature, and pervasive in its effect on
economic decisions.
It is estimated that the Internal Revenue Code and
regulations are over nine million words in length, and
Americans spend more than 6.1 billion hours a year filing
Federal tax forms.
The more than 45 tax related provisions in the Affordable
Care Act will not make things any easier.
I will focus my testimony today on two particular
provisions, the new tax on net investment income, and the new
Medicare tax on wages.
The statute proposed regulations and preambles for just
these two provisions are over 48,000 words in length, take up
over 85 pages in the Federal Register, and are estimated to
increase the time taxpayers will spend on compliance by well
over two million hours.
The tax on net investment income constitutes a new third
tax system within the Internal Revenue Code. It is its own self
contained tax system which sits along side the regular income
tax and the alternative minimum tax.
Like the regular tax and the alternative minimum tax, this
new tax system comes complete with its own unique set of
definitions, rules for computing the tax, and a threshold that
is not indexed for inflation.
This new parallel universe also comes complete with its own
set of new compliance obligations, additional tax forms, new
tax calculations, and new estimated tax requirements.
Compliance with these rules will not be a task for the
faint hearted.
From a tax planning point of view, taxpayers are already
focused on simultaneously managing two entirely new
calculations, modified adjusted gross income and net investment
income.
This is just the beginning. Make no mistake about it.
Planning to minimize and comply with the tax on net investment
income will consume tens of thousands if not hundreds of
thousands of hours every year for the foreseeable future.
That would be in addition to the two million hours of
compliance time, and that will be in addition to the 6.1
billion hours already being spent complying with the Federal
tax laws.
The additional tax on Medicare wages increases tax
complexity in three ways, and they are all first's. It is the
first time the Medicare tax is computed on an individual's
personal tax return. It is the first time the Medicare tax is
imposed solely on employees without a matching employer
payment, and it is the first time that

[[Page 36]]

the amount of the Medicare tax will vary with the taxpayer's
marital status.
These are by no means trivial changes. They bring with them
new rules for computing and paying Medicare tax, new
withholding rules, and plenty of opportunities from mistakes
and penalties.
The areas of complexity that concern me the most with
respect to the new Medicare tax are the rules relating to
withholding and the potential for the imposition of penalties.
The rules are just too complicated. Mistakes are going to
be made, and substantial penalties are going to be imposed.
I am also deeply concerned about the complexity and burden
this new law creates for small employers. Just like the tax on
net investment income, it is already clear that employees and
their employers are seeking to alter the behavior in response
to this tax.
I will conclude my remarks by saying a few words about a
common feature of both these taxes, and that is their
imposition on income in excess of a threshold.
A taxpayer's income can increase substantially in one year
due to an once in a lifetime event, such as the sale of a long
held asset or the payment of a bonus that took several years to
earn.
In situations such as these, taxpayers are taxed at higher
rates on income that accrued over a lengthy period of time, and
may never occur again in the taxpayer's lifetime.
Taxing such one time gains at higher rates contributes to a
perception of unfairness and tends to increase cynicism on the
part of taxpayers.
Not only that, in addition to the new thresholds for these
two provisions, two other new thresholds come into effect this
year, the so-called ``PEP and Pease threshold,'' and the
threshold for the top individual tax rate of 39.6 percent.
With three new thresholds, complexity is not arithmetically
increased by a factor of three, it is increased exponentially
because all three thresholds interact with each other.
The problem is made even more challenging because each of
the thresholds that come into effect this year start at
different levels of income and penalize married taxpayers
compared to single taxpayers.
That concludes my prepared remarks, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much.
[The information follows: Mr. Kautter]

[[Page 37]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 38]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 39]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 40]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 41]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 42]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 43]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 44]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 45]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 46]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Kautter.
Ms. Sun, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHELLY SUN, CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, BRIGHTSTAR CARE

Ms. SUN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee,
for this opportunity.
My name is Shelly Sun. I am the Co-Founder and CEO of
BrightStar Franchising. I am a member of the Board of Directors
of the International Franchise Association.
BrightStar Care is a franchise system of more than 250
independently owned and operated agencies that provide home
care for

[[Page 47]]

over 10,000 families in 38 states, 160 franchisees employ more
than 15,000 nurses and care givers.
My husband and I founded BrightStar over ten years ago with
$100,000 of our own money, and by guaranteeing $100,000 line of
credit with our bank with the equity in our home.
Small business owners take on this type of risk to start
their businesses, create jobs, and help the American economy
every day.
This is supposed to be the American dream as a small
business owner. Invest money, take a risk, work hard, build a
business, and pay back what you invested and earn a profit.
Part of what makes entrepreneurs so special is their
passion for creating and providing opportunity for others. This
law jeopardizes the ability of small business owners to create
more jobs and reinvest profits back into their businesses.
Small business owners must make difficult decisions every
day to protect their personal investments and their American
dream, and this law will compel entrepreneurs to do what it
takes, including reducing hours of their employees to keep
their business and their dream alive.
One of the biggest challenges we have with the law is how
it redefines ``full time employees.'' Business owners in every
sector of the American economy have for decades managed their
workforce to the current standard of 40 hours per week.
When Congress set the definition as 30 hours per week, it
forced employers to manage their workers to fewer hours. Thus,
reducing the earnings potential of hundreds of thousands of
employees.
Because the law requires everyone to have insurance, part
time workers will have to buy insurance on their own or through
an exchange. That expense will impact their personal family
budget as well as demands on Medicaid.
Clearly, these are unintended and significant consequences
of a law that was supposed to expand opportunities for health
coverage to all.
Simplifying the definition of ``full time'' would provide
small businesses with more certainty, allowing them to better
control costs, and make long term business plans for future
growth.
Fifty-five of my BrightStar franchisees are considered
large employers under the Affordable Care Act. The rest are on
pace to grow to that level in the next two to five years.
Thus, our franchisees, like many other successful small
business owners across the country, find themselves in a Catch-
22. They want to expand but if they do, they get hit with
significant new health care and compliance costs that impede
growth.
In this context, it is absolutely staggering to think that
as defined by the Affordable Care Act, an employer with 50 full
time employees is in the same category as an employer with
5,000 full time employees. We can absolutely do better.
If the 55 BrightStar franchisees who qualify under the
current definition of ``large employer'' maintain their current
scheduling level and all eligible employees enroll for this
affordable coverage, the average franchisee will spend $127,000
providing this coverage. This wipes out 50 to 100 percent of
the franchisees' profit.

[[Page 48]]

How can we ask small business to risk more, work harder,
and invest further with administratively complex and expensive
legislation like the Affordable Care Act?
We cannot. We must remove obstacles, and we must understand
small business owners will find a way so they remain in
business and protect the jobs they can offer. What choice do
entrepreneurs have if they want to remain in business?
My two requests today on behalf of my business, on behalf
of the 160 BrightStar franchisees and their 15,000 employees
across the country, and on behalf of the franchising community
and small businesses everywhere, first, change the definition
of ``full time employee'' to more closely align with the
current standard of 40 hours per week, setting the definition
as 30 hours per week simply forces employers to manage their
workers to fewer hours.
Second, define ``large employer'' as one with at least 50
full time employees instead of full time equivalents.
This simplifies the complexity of the law and a huge
administrative burden.
Specifically, this change reduces the 55 BrightStar
franchisees impacted by the unintended consequences of the
Affordable Care Act down to eight.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here with you
today to work together to prevent the devastating, unintended
consequences the Affordable Care Act will have on small
businesses, employees, and the American economy.
Thank you.
[The information follows: Ms. Sun]

[[Page 49]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 50]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 51]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 52]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 53]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 54]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 55]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Ms. Sun.
Mr. Joyce, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HUGH JOYCE, JAMES RIVER HEATING AND AIR
CONDITIONING COMPANY

Mr. JOYCE. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Lewis, and members
of the Oversight Subcommittee, thank you for having me here
today.
I am Hugh Joyce, and I own and operate a heating and
cooling business with approximately 152 employees in the
Richmond, Virginia area.
I come before you today to express my continued concerns
regarding the new health care law, specifically the negative
impact

[[Page 56]]

and the overwhelming confusion regarding the 47 tax provisions
in the law and their implementation.
In the spirit of full disclosure, I personally lobbied
heavily against this bill. Not because I did not want to pay
for insurance, because I was already doing that, but because I
felt the bill lacked provisions to drive down true costs.
There are lots of lines of code that are spread around who
is paying for the insurance. There is this Government kind of
thing, but there is little that addresses insurance pooling,
personal incentives to maintain health, standard insurance plan
design, hospital costs and competition, market transparency,
doctor monopolies on care, individual purchase models, and
strategies.
There are 47 tax related provisions that hurt businesses,
families and workers. Keeping up with the implementation of the
regulations will be costly, time consuming, and difficult.
Employers like me must track and monitor employee hours,
report, verify insurance coverage, all diverting valuable
resources from productivity.
Key areas of concern are the mandated coverage's in
indirect taxes that are driving costs up and affordability
down. The significant new taxes on investment and pass through
income reduce capital and limit the ability to expand and
create jobs.
Reporting, tracking, and paperwork is daunting, especially
for smaller businesses, and confusion.
Finally, the lack of simplicity. Look at our greatest new
world companies, Apple, Google, Geico, JetBlue. They are all
successful because they keep it simple.
I have great concerns that this health care plan and this
health care act are so complicated.
Since 2009 and its enactment, our insurance premiums have
risen from $664,000 to $924,000, with a flat head count. We are
projecting our renewal premium for this year to be $1.9
million, an 18 percent increase, which includes a two percent
premium tax on our fully insured product.
These numbers are not sustainable over time. Our entire
discretionary net profit will be absorbed by health insurance
costs in 5 years, if the current premium trajectory continues.
Fear is the most crippling emotion. I am convinced that
fear coupled with the uncertainty of new costs and frustration
regarding the health care law is a key reason we are not seeing
robust hiring and job creation today.
As I look across my competitive landscape, I see major
disparities. My average competitor is less than five employees,
if they provide insurance, they get a subsidy. My competitors
with less than 15 employees do not have to do anything.
I am over 100. I am required to provide insurance and pay
for it or I face penalties. Should not everyone be subject to
the same rules?
If we want to lead in a global competitive platform and
keep insurance affordable, we must revisit this health care law
and the tax provisions.
This can be done. I think we can provide health care
without major new tax increases and burdensome compliance
measures.

[[Page 57]]

Let's look at strategies for a simplified plan that reduces
costs, opens up market competition and transparency, and
provides every American with great benefits that they can buy
on their own.
These strategies will provide certainty for the private
sector and help us grow our economy.
[The information follows: Mr. Joyce.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 58]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 59]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 60]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Joyce.
Dr. Van de Water, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL N. VAN DE WATER, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER
ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

Mr. VAN DE WATER. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you this morning.
The Affordable Care Act will extend health insurance
coverage to 27 million people and help assure that Americans
have access to affordable coverage, and it will do so in a
fiscally responsible way.

[[Page 61]]

In fact, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated that
the Affordable Care Act will reduce the deficit modestly in its
first ten years, but substantially in the following decade.
The tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act not only
raise revenue but are also sound health and tax policy. Some
provisions will encourage consumers to be more cost sensitive
in purchasing health insurance and health care services.
Among these provisions are the inclusion of the cost of
employer sponsored health coverage and on W-2 forms, the excise
tax on high cost employer sponsored coverage, and limitations
on the use of tax advantaged accounts to pay for health related
expenses.
The Affordable Care Act also levies taxes or reduces
Medicare payments to businesses in industries that will
directly benefit from health reform. The taxes on drug
manufacturers and importers, medical device manufacturers, and
health insurance providers fall into this category.
Two other new taxes will affect only the wealthiest
Americans who have the greatest ability to pay: the additional
hospital insurance tax on high earners, and the new 3.8 percent
Medicare tax on unearned income.
Finally, health reform makes health insurance coverage a
shared responsibility for individuals and employers.
Individuals who do not obtain coverage for themselves and their
families and large employers who do not offer affordable
coverage to their workers will be subject to a tax penalty.
This structure follows the Massachusetts model of health
reform, which relies primarily on private health insurance
plans to provide coverage.
Taken as a whole, the Affordable Care Act will
significantly strengthen our nation's economy. CBO estimates
that health reform will slightly reduce premiums for employer
sponsored health insurance in the near term.
For employers with more than 50 workers who account for 70
percent of the insurance market, CBO estimates the law will
reduce average premiums by up to three percent in 2016.
For small employers, the estimated change in premiums
ranges from an increase of one percent to a reduction of two
percent.
All and all, the short term economic effects of health
reform will be small. Moody's Analytics terms the law's
economic impact ``minor,'' and says any disincentives from
higher taxes and fees will ``hardly make a difference.''
The Congressional Budget Office foresees a small net
reduction in labor supply, because some people who now work
mainly to obtain health insurance will choose to retire earlier
or work somewhat less, not because employers will eliminate
jobs.
Even that effect could be partly offset by increased
incentives to work for people who now face losing Medicaid
coverage if they work more.
Over the long run, health reform will have many positive
impacts on the economy. The lower budget deficits stemming from
health reform will hold down interest rates and free up capital
for private investment.
Health reform will increase labor market flexibility since
workers will no longer be locked into a job by the need for
health coverage.

[[Page 62]]

Expanding coverage will also improve health outcomes by
helping people obtain preventive and other health services and
improving the continuity of care.
Most important, the Affordable Care Act includes a wide
array of policies to improve health care quality and reduce
costs.
All these factors should enhance the nation's economic
productivity.
In conclusion, the tax related provisions of the Affordable
Care Act form part of a carefully thought out structure to
expand health insurance coverage and slow the growth of health
care costs without adding to the budget deficit.
Any effort to change these provisions must not be allowed
to undercut any of these critical objectives.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows: Dr. Van de Water]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 63]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Dr. Van de Water. We will now
proceed with questioning of the witnesses.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin, we have quite often heard ad nauseam that
the health care law, ACA, reduces the deficit. Is that true?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I think the original cost estimate
suffered from what are now widely recognized as a lot of budget
gimmicks, things like the CLASS Act, which has met its demise
since the initial passage, front loaded premium receipts and
back loaded spending.
There were a number of double uses of money like the
Medicare reductions being used to fund the insurance expansion.

[[Page 64]]

I think the answer would be no. The most important thing is
that our current deficits and the projections are driven by the
health entitlement programs and their rapid rate of growth, and
there has yet to be an objective and non-partisan assessment of
the law that says it will actually bend the cost curve.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Part of that calculation by CBO with
regard to the effect on the deficit was largely because ACA
raises taxes significantly, as you stated in your testimony.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Sure.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Let's assume for a moment, for the sake
of argument, that the underlying policy for health care is
correct.
As a physician, I happen to believe to the contrary, but
let's assume for a moment it is correct.
Let's also take it one step further. Let's assume that it
is reasonable or wise or good policy to extract $1 trillion
from the U.S. economy to pay for this.
Dr. Holtz-Eakin, I want you to comment, and Mr. Kautter,
looking solely at the methods by which this law raises taxes,
and I think you both talked a little bit about this in your
testimony, it raises these new taxes on innovation, innovative
companies, small businesses, many that are trying to make a
profit.
It raises taxes by taxing health insurance premiums, which
will be passed onto the purchasers of those premiums, raising
premium costs.
Employer mandate.
Are these rational ways to extract $1 trillion out of the
U.S. economy given we have very sluggish economic growth,
unemployment that is projected to remain above seven percent
through 2015, and maybe beyond.
We are also looking at tax reform. It is no secret that
this Committee has set a goal to fundamentally rewrite the Tax
Code to simplify it and lower rates, all to promote
competitiveness for American companies.
Is this a smart way to raise taxes? It seems to me ACA is a
very complex tax bill. We saw added complexity with the Fiscal
Cliff tax package. We are going in the wrong direction.
I would like both of you to comment on that.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I certainly would agree, Mr. Chairman.
This is going in the wrong direction. This is not good tax
policy. If you look at this by the standard metrics of
efficiency and equity, these are bad taxes.
I know Mr. Kautter does not love the excise taxes on
payroll and net investment income, and I share his concern with
the complexity and having a third Tax Code.
I think the health insurer's tax is the worse designed tax
I have ever looked at. If the Committee wants to raise $8
billion next year in some way for the insurance industry, you
could do a lot better than that, and more generally, I think we
should recognize the importance of broad-based taxes that are
less discriminatory and less interfering with the economy.
I want to comment just on this notion of somehow these are
benefit taxes. Benefit taxation is a well established principle
in tax policy. Benefits accrue to individuals and taxes are
paid by individuals in the end, and it is difficult to imagine
the ACA being a ben

[[Page 65]]

efit tax because the idea was in fact to give low income
Americans a benefit, which was insurance, very costly, and if
we make them pay for that benefit, we will un-do the
redistribution, which is at the heart of the law.
In the end, it is not the medical device manufacturers or
the insurer's who benefit from this tax. It is workers,
shareholders, and customers that ultimately should be looked
at.
You cannot defend this on the basis of benefit taxation.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. Mr. Kautter.
Mr. KAUTTER. Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about
complexity, and having spent 40 years in the trenches helping
all sorts of taxpayers comply with the tax law, I understand
the complexity matters.
This bill has got enormous complexity in it with respect to
the tax provisions. It is sort of like embarking on a great
archeological dig as you work your way through the pages of the
bill and now the regulations.
The tax on net investment income is a brand new third tax
system. This Committee and other committees have wrestled with
the alternative minimum tax and indexing the alternative
minimum tax.
The net investment income tax is similar to the AMT. It has
its own separate definition of income, its own method of
allocating expenses to that income, its own method of
calculating the tax. It determines which other taxes are
creditable against that tax. It is a free standing separately
contained system in the Internal Revenue Code.
I guess folks can discount it by saying well, only the top
four percent or so of all taxpayers will pay the tax, a lot of
those folks invest and innovate, and from a complexity point of
view, it is a large step backwards.
Chairman BOUSTANY. This Subcommittee is deeply concerned
about the ever rising level of complexity in the Tax Code, both
from the standpoint of those who are taxed, but also from the
standpoint of an IRS that keeps coming before us asking for
more resources to deal with this ever growing complexity in the
Code.
Mr. KAUTTER. I think the IRS has done as good a job as can
be done in trying to implement the tax on net investment
income. They have largely referred to existing provisions and
standards.
Unfortunately, the existing provisions and standards are
not very simple. You now have this new system that refers to
old principles which were controversial to begin with, and
these are just two of the taxes.
The Medicare tax, if someone knows they will be subject to
the Medicare tax because they and their spouse will earn more
than $250,000, and they individually earn less than 200, they
cannot ask to have the Medicare tax withheld from their wages.
They have to ask to have additional income tax withheld.
What sense does that make to most people who are trying to
fill out what is called the ``W-4'' for withholding. It is one
of the most misunderstood forms and the potential for
complexity and misunderstanding and penalties is rife.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. You pointed this out, I
think, in your testimony. The net investment tax is referred to
in

[[Page 66]]

the law as ``unearned income and Medicare contribution,'' yet
the revenue goes in the General Fund. It does not do anything
to help Medicare, does it?
Mr. KAUTTER. It does not. It goes right into the General
Fund.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The new law gives the impression that
there are provisions to help finance Medicare and improve
Medicare, but are there other examples of that, Dr. Holtz-
Eakin, in this law?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. In the end, this law has the flaws of many
laws that rely on these accounting gimmicks. Money flows into
the Federal Treasury. Money flows out of the Federal Treasury.
Any labels attached to them are strictly accounting fiction
because the money is gone and never saved in any meaningful
way.
Medicare right now, the gap between payroll taxes and
premiums coming in, spending going out, is about $300 billion,
with 10,000 new seniors every day. That is the true state of
Medicare's financial condition.
Any accounting ledger to suggest there is money in a trust
fund for anything or somehow the Medicare tax will be deposited
in it is in defiance of economic reality.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. That is all I have. Mr.
Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Van de Water, the
Affordable Care Act is a landmark law that helped millions of
Americans.
For example, 86 million Americans have received one or more
free check-ups or screenings to prevent and detect illness.
The Affordable Care Act delivered hundreds of billions of
dollars of Federal tax credits to many American families and
small businesses.
Some have suggested that the ACA is a massive tax increase
on the middle class. Others have argued the opposite, that the
ACA is a middle class tax cut.
The Washington Post did a fact check on the claim that the
ACA was a middle class tax cut and found the claim to be true.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to place this article
in the record.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection.
[The information follows: The Hon. Mr. Lewis]

[[Page 67]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 68]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 69]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 70]]

Mr. LEWIS. Dr. Van de Water, what is your opinion of
whether the ACA is a middle class tax cut or tax increase, and
please explain your opinion.
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Thank you for asking that question, Mr.
Lewis. I think it is an excellent one. It illustrates the
importance of looking at the Affordable Care Act as a whole.
We have heard a lot of discussion about individual taxes,
but as I mentioned in my prepared statement, one of the
important things to remember is the taxes in the Affordable
Care Act were not levied for the sake of imposing taxes, but
for the sake of financing the coverage expansions in the law.
Those are primarily of two sorts: first, the expansion of
Medicaid for people with incomes below 138 percent of poverty,
and second, financing the premium tax credits for people
between 138 percent and 400 percent of poverty. Those premium
tax credits, by their very nature, go to folks who are middle
class, defined as having income of no more than 400 percent of
poverty. And, as I recall, what that Washington Post fact
check, to which you referred, did was to take a look at was all
of these provisions together, not just the taxes, such as the
medical device tax and so forth, but also the effects of the
premium tax credits that will be provided to help people obtain
health coverage. And when you look at all of those tax
provisions together, I think what the Post concluded, and what
I think is in fact correct, is that that the law does provide a
net tax reduction for what we might consider to be middle class
folk.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to go back
to the issue of complexity that the chairman has talked about
and several of the witnesses have as well. Under the
President's health care law's employer mandate tax, which I
think is a very creative title that they give it, a Shared
Responsibility for Employer's provision, we know that there is
going to be a fairly complicated regulatory analysis to
determine what tax you are going to be hit with.
And I think Ms. Sun mentioned this when she talked about
deciding the definition of what full time is. So, you are going
to have to consider in that what employees count as full time,
what counts as part time, how many hours they worked, whether
the insurance they provide to employees meets Washington's
requirements and other sundry of complicated questions that
will have to be answered. And, of course, we all know this
starts at the end of the year.
Now, the answer to many of these questions of course is
going to be by the rules that are written by the Treasury. And
I hold in my hand here a temporary set of rules. We do not know
whether these rules are actually going into effect or not.
There are 144 pages that I hold here in my hand. These are the
drafts of the latest version. I think it is also interesting
that the Treasury Department admitted last week that the health
care law was, and I quote this, ``Not as artfully drafted as it
could have been.'' And that the Treasury Department is working
on fixing those flaws that may be in this new regulation.
So, my question, and probably the best one to start with,
would be, Ms. Sun and Mr. Joyce, since you are employers who
are going

[[Page 71]]

to have to implement whatever comes out in these rules, and my
question to you is do you feel that given the fact that we just
right now have temporary rules that you do not even see, not
knowing what time line is going to be when these rules are
going to be final, that you will have enough time as an
employer to be able to implement these provisions as you are
working within your business and looking at your own budget and
what you need to do for the year? Ms. Sun?
Ms. SUN. Thank you, Ms. Black. No, we absolutely do not.
And we have even engaged through the International Franchise
Association, bringing in Ernst & Young to try to help us and
try to help educate our franchisees. But it is a five step
calculation that I think you need to graduate degrees to try to
figure out how to even calculate it. And our franchisees seem
paralyzed to even to try to calculate it because they are
afraid if they get it wrong, what is the impact going to be.
So, we see hiring freezes at our franchisees level. We have
seen an unprecedented level of franchisees turning back in
territories where in prior years we have had most of our
franchisees opening two and three locations and employing many
more people in their local communities, turning those locations
back in and saying, ``You know what with the Affordable Care
Act, we just do not want to take on that risk.'' We do not want
to take on the complexity. We would just potentially want to
stay under 50 employees and leave the headaches until we can
hope that we can get to 2014 and everyone realizes what they
have done. And they see the impacts of what they have done. And
this is repealed or replaced in some way, in form or in
fashion, because right now we cannot figure it out.
And we have the best and brightest of Ernst & Young, which
my esteemed to my colleague to my right, used to work for, and
we still have difficulty trying to figure it out and trying to
help our franchisees figure it out.
Mrs. BLACK. And, Mr. Joyce, before you answer let me just
add one more question to Ms. Sun since she brought this up
about hiring a firm to give you some advice. Have you any idea
or calculation of what that might cost you in hiring this firm?
Ms. SUN. We have estimated, and we have done a pretty
thorough calculation, we have estimated it will cost each of
our 160 franchisees $8,455 for every single one of our
franchisees just to comply with the law at their current stage
and size of business without even looking at continued growth.
Mrs. BLACK. And that is complying with the law, that is not
what it is going to cost you----
Ms. SUN. So they could figure out how to comply with the
law, that is what we estimate it would cost them.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. Mr. Joyce, same question for you?
Mr. JOYCE. We agree with those--I agree with her comments.
And I will just tell you, I was talking to my insurance agent
last night working through my comp renewal, and I was just
asking him--we were talking about the Act--and I guess the big
concern is it is moving so fast there is a lack of information.
Everyone is making decisions, do I hire, do I not hire? And, as
I said in my comments, fear and frustration cripple business
and markets. And the best thing that we can do for our country
right now is excite

[[Page 72]]

markets and not cripple markets. And I am telling you I believe
with all my heart that the reason we are not seeing robust
recovery right now is consternation over small and medium and
big business with regard to these rules and regulations. It is
a major concern.
Mrs. BLACK. Paralysis from not knowing what to do, the
uncertainty. Thank you, and I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Holtz-Eakin, this
Subcommittee held a hearing last year that reviewed a provision
within the ACA that requires a physician's prescription in
order to gain a reimbursement through tax preferred accounts
like FSAs and HSAs for the purchase of over-the-counter
medicines. And some of my colleagues across the aisle claim
that only the wealthy use these accounts, but I know that over
19 million families alone use FSAs. What are your thoughts on
this provision and the impact on families on a budget and the
burden on physicians who are now seeing patients to prescribe
something that can be bought over the counter?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, I think that it is pretty obvious
and onerous compliance cost, just making the--getting
prescriptions impose a big cost on everybody. Past that, when
you think about the goals of this, if you want to make people
more sensitive to the kinds of things that they do, it seems
odd to single out these particular accounts as the way to do
it. This is a law that has a nearly infinite scope. It touches
every piece of an American economic life, and to target
something that has been relatively successful and popular like
the FSAs and the HSAs strikes me as a really narrow way to go
at it.
Ms. JENKINS. Would you consider this a tax on working
families?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. This is a repeal of a clear benefit that
was in the Tax Code to reach a policy objective, and it is
going to make their taxes higher.
Ms. JENKINS. Do you feel that the provision provides in any
way an efficiency for the health care system?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Again, I think if you want to get genuine
efficiency you have to do broad-based things, not these rifle
shots. And I think that would be the way to go.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, and on another note, several experts, as
well as the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee
on Tax, have estimated that the health insurance tax will
result in higher health insurance premiums for individuals and
families. Could you please explain why the tax will lead to
higher premiums and how the tax is at odds with the ACA's
stated goal of making coverage affordable?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. The way the tax is designed, the fixed
fee, $8 billion for example in 2014, is allocated among
insurance companies on the basis of market shares. And what
that means is that every time you sell another policy, you
raise your share and thus raise the tax that you have to pay.
That is just like putting a sales tax on insurance. And we know
what happens with sale taxes. If at all possible, you try to
shift that on to the customer.
This is exacerbated in this case by the fact that for the
for-profit insurers, those paying corporation income tax, they
are not allowed

[[Page 73]]

to deduct this tax. So if you have got a dollar of premium tax,
you actually cannot just raise premiums by a dollar and come
even because your tax liability is going to go up. So you have
to actually raise it by $1.54 if you do the arithmetic. That is
a real upward pressure on premiums that is built into this tax.
And you might like to think maybe it will magically come
out of profits, but these are insurers that operate in
competitive capital markets. They do not have excess profits
that you can identify. You might want health insurance workers
to work for less, but I think we are trying to have workers
have their incomes go up, not down and have more employment. So
the net effect of this is by and large going to be higher
premiums, and that is going to get shifted on to probably the
middle class.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, thank you, I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentle woman. Before I yield
to Mr. Davis, I want to mention that this Subcommittee did hear
testimony last year with regard to the Small Business Health
Insurance Tax Credit and the difficulties that small businesses
were having in complying with it. In fact, by the IRS's own
estimation it consumes about 40 million man hours per year,
which averages out to about 19 hours, man hours, to comply per
small business. So I thought that was important to mention.
And, secondly, the projection of the number of small businesses
that are availing themselves of this tax credit, it has been
way below what was originally anticipated. With that, I will
yield to Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank the witnesses. Especially, I want to thank you for
calling this hearing because it gives us an opportunity to look
at several dimensions of the Affordable Care Act.
One of the things that I have noted is 105 million
Americans have had a lifetime limit on their coverage
eliminated, which I find to be quite commendable, 6.6 million
young adults up to the age of 26 now have health insurance
through their parent's insurance, and 6.1 million seniors in
the donut hole have received savings on their prescription
drugs. These savings total $5.7 billion overall and averaged
$706 per senior in 2012. And, of course, these savings will
continue to grow as the donut hole becomes more fully closed.
Mr. Van de Water, if I could ask you, I have noted that
some commentators are concerned that the ACA will lead to a
significant reduction in the labor market. And while CBO did
state that the Affordable Care Act will reduce the labor
supply, CBO believes that this would be due in significant part
to the end of what is called ``job lock.'' In other words,
employees would choose to work less or perhaps work for
themselves because the Affordable Care Act would allow them to
obtain affordable health insurance from sources other than
their employer. What is your opinion relative to the effect of
the ACA on the labor supply?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Thank you, Mr. Davis. Yes, you are
exactly correct in describing the Congressional Budget Office's
assessment of the effect of the Affordable Care Act on labor
markets. CBO concluded that, as I think virtually all of our
personal experience would attest, that there are people,
particularly those who are approaching their retirement years,
who may be sort of hanging on to a job, even one that they are
finding very onerous, because that

[[Page 74]]

is the only way that they can retain health insurance. In some
cases, even at younger ages, people are not shifting to another
job if the current job that they have has health insurance but
the one that they prefer based on other factors does not. So
the availability of heath care coverage through the exchanges
on a guaranteed issue basis will eliminate that locking of
people into a particular job.
And in the case of some of the older workers, the
Congressional Budget Office estimates they may decide that they
will actually withdraw from the labor market a bit earlier, and
obtain coverage through the exchange instead of through an
employer. But even the extent to which that happens, CBO
estimates will amount to a very small drop in employment.
Mr. DAVIS. I have also heard people suggest that a medical
device excise tax will shift jobs overseas and investment away
from the medical device industry in this country. What is your
opinion of these types of arguments?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Again, that is an excellent question. The
assertion that you referred to is a common one, that the
medical device excise tax will cause jobs to shift overseas.
But it turns out that this tax is carefully structured so as to
avoid that particular effect. And the reason is as follows,
that the tax does apply to imported medical devices, as well as
to devices produced domestically, but the tax does not apply to
exported devices. So that means that if we are talking about
devices that are going to be used in the U.S., the tax is paid
whether the device is made domestically or abroad. But if we
are talking about devices that are to be used overseas, the tax
is not paid, whether the device is manufactured here or
overseas. So in either case the playing field between American
manufacturers and foreign manufacturers remains level.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is an honor today
for me to have a couple of Texans here on this panel. And,
welcome, thank you for being here today. Mr. Joyce, thank you
for your statement. I think your statement embodied exactly the
feelings of every business in my district. I represent a
district that has Addison, Las Colinas, all the DFW Airport and
all of the surrounding areas. And throughout the district every
single owner, every single CEO is sitting down with their
accountant, sitting down with their insurance agent, and they
are trying to figure out how they are going to do business next
year. And that is creating uncertainty and, in your words, it
is creating fear. And in a business environment of uncertainty
and fear, you do not have hiring. In fact, you have exactly the
opposite. So many of these fortunate individuals that will be
able to stay on their parents' insurance for another couple of
years, because of the abysmal hiring atmosphere, it may be that
those very individuals that have stayed on their parents'
insurance for an additional couple of years actually will not
have anywhere to go to work after they get out of college
because the hiring has been frozen, and there is such
uncertainty.
During the debate when we--when this Affordable Health Care
Act was adopted, one of the major arguments the Administration

[[Page 75]]

and supporters gave the companies, and the medical device
companies specifically, would receive a windfall because there
would be so many thousands and literally millions of people
that didn't have insurance, that would have insurance that
would now begin to access the health care system. And because
of that, your business, Mr. Humann, your business, Mr. Moore,
would have so many new customers and would be able to sell so
many more instruments that your profits would go up. And
because of those profits, you should help pay for this system.
So, I would like to give both of you the opportunity today to
address that argument?
Mr. HUMANN. Yes, thank you for the question. At OsteoMed,
we just have not seen that and do not expect to see that. First
of all, the products that we make patients are receiving
regardless. There are products that are for trauma and for
severe reconstruction issues. Secondarily, the majority of
newly insured patients are younger--younger people, and they
will likely not be utilizing the medical technologies that are
out there. And then third, when we look at Massachusetts, which
has had universal health coverage now for some time, we have
seen no up-tick in our business in that state whatsoever.
Mr. MARCHANT. So, basically, in your case, the Medical
device tax is just a redistribution? It is basically going to
your company and saying your company or your industry is going
to pay for the Affordable Health Care Act?
Mr. HUMANN. It is very simple. It is an extra cost on our
business. It is one less dollar that we have to invest in
innovation and new hires within OsteoMed.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you. Mr. Moore.
Mr. MOORE. And we ask that same question across many of our
members: is there an expected windfall? And I think coming back
to that Massachusetts experience, in our surveys 90 percent of
companies who had been through the Massachusetts experiment of
universal care did not see a windfall, did not see any growth,
any greater growth in Massachusetts than they did in the rest
of the country. So whether you are talking Cyberonics or the
rest of the industry, we do not expect to see that windfall.
Mr. MARCHANT. And do you--do either of you expect to be
able to pass--fully pass on the expense of the tax to your
customer?
Mr. HUMANN. The competitive environment is incredibly
tough. We have foreign manufacturers coming over. We have
domestic companies that we compete against. We need to look at
our costs first, and keep all of our options open and try and
make the ends meet at the end of the day. This is a new cost on
our business.
Mr. MOORE. Right, and, as I said in my comments, we see our
taxes going up with this 2.3 percent revenue tax. Across the
industry we see our taxes going up 29 percent. We are not
finding a way that we think we can recover the tax. Quite the
contrary, we are saying where do we cut in order to find some
cost savings to offset the tax increase? And those start
hitting things that we least want to hit. They hit American
people in the area of jobs. They affect projects, American
projects, our research and development. And fewer people
working on fewer R&D projects ultimately impacts in a very
negative way, ultimately patient care.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[[Page 76]]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also for holding
this hearing and for our witnesses for all being here today. I
do share the deep concern that has been expressed by many of
the members here as well as some of the folks that have
testified here this morning about how the Affordable Health
Care Act or the taxes that are in the bill, in the new law,
have actually contributed to the rising cost of health care.
And are putting now a heavy burden on some of our best job
creators, which we just heard about.
As co-chair of the Medical Technology Caucus and as the
chief author of the bill to repeal the device tax, I have a
particular interest in how this tax, this really destructive
tax, has been harmful not only to American jobs but also
innovation and also patient care. Now, already we have seen
thousands of layoffs in this industry. I mean that is pure and
simple. Thousands of layoffs in this very dynamic, very vital
industry. It is in Minnesota. It is around the country. The
President has repeatedly stated his objective to increase
domestic manufacturing, American manufacturing. And I think the
irony here is that this is a policy that is actually being very
harmful to achieving this goal, as our witnesses have already
pointed out. It is having the opposite effect primarily because
this is a tax that applies to sales, not to profits. And it is
going to raise the average tax bill by some companies by almost
a third. And other countries are absolutely incentivizing these
companies to makes these products overseas while we are taxing
and regulating unfortunately our best companies out of
existence. And so this American success story I think needs to
be protected. We cannot take that leadership for granted.
I want to ask this question though, Mr. Moore and Mr.
Humann. I am so glad you are here to testify about the very
real effects that the tax is having on your employees and on
your company and on medical--on the quality of health care, but
I am wondering whether there are other hidden costs that are
there as part of this device tax if we dive a little deeper,
beyond the tax itself? For instance, I know that due to the new
tax, medical technology companies have to keep track now of
which products are sold in the United States versus which are
sold overseas, which products are ``further manufactured,''
which are subject to the retail exemption. And on top of that
the tax is now paid every two weeks, every two weeks, this
excise tax. And I know many companies have hired full time
staff just to handle the device tax compliance.
And I have spoken to some larger companies that sell
thousands of unique products. Small companies have difficulty
complying with the new rules. One company said they have
129,000 products that needed to be individually analyzed, which
cost the company $10 million on the compliance side, including
two full time new tax employees, four to six dedicated brand
new consultants on site for a year and two new IT people as
well. So that is not on the research and development side. This
is on the compliance side. I do not think those are the types
of jobs we should be creating.
So, Mr. Humann and Mr. Moore, in addition to the $30
billion in the new tax that you are going to have to deal with
the next few years and the job loss and the innovation
struggle, how is it

[[Page 77]]

now--how is it for your companies now to calculate and pay the
tax?
Mr. HUMANN. Yes, without a doubt, the tax provides a
complexity that has not been there before. OsteoMed's whole
mission in life is to improve patient outcomes. That is what we
come to work every day to be able to do. And, again, anything
that we have to spend non-value added time and resources on to
administrate a tax, to figure out a tax, to pay a tax is one
less dollar that we have to, again, continue to innovate and
come up with great new products to help people reduce health
care costs and ultimately help patients.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Moore, are there other costs?
Mr. MOORE. Well, I have seen estimates across the industry
that reach into the hundreds of millions of dollars, which
sounds like a lot of money. However, what we know is this 2.3
percent revenue tax is going to cost our industry $29 billion.
So hundreds of millions versus the $29 billion, the bigger
issue is still the device tax. And I think Republican,
Democrat, there is agreement among many, bipartisan support,
that this device tax is bad policy, and that it needs to be
reversed.
So the implementation at this point is the least of my
concerns. The bigger issue is we are losing jobs. We are losing
the American manufacturing and the leadership that we have. It
is like deja vu all over again, back to my childhood as a son
of a steelworker. One of the most difficult decisions I have
had to make is to begin setting up manufacturing for the first
time in our 25 year history outside the United States. And,
unfortunately, at this point we have broken ground. I hope to
limit the number of jobs and get back to creating more jobs in
America.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. I want to thank
you for your leadership on that particular issue, but also for
raising the question of the complexity in complying with that
tax, especially for some of our larger companies with complex
supply chains. It has gotten to be a nightmare. So, I deeply
appreciate your raising that concern.
Next, Mr. Kelly, you have got 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here, especially small business owners. My whole life I
have been involved in small business. My father started a
business in 1953 after being a parts picker in a General Motors
warehouse, coming back from the war and starting a dealership,
a very small store, one car showroom, about four service bays.
So I know of what you talk. And one of the most fascinating
things since I have been here is to listen to the opinions of
those who are not on the field. I spent a little bit of time
playing football in my life, and I always thought it was much
more interesting to be up in the stands. I could really pick
out what people were doing wrong as opposed to being six inches
from somebody that is trying to take my head off. I watch you.
And, Mr. Moore, the area I went to school and I would go by
Gary, Indiana. What a great place it was at one time with all
the steel mills, and the same in my town of Butler,
Pennsylvania. We

[[Page 78]]

had great steel mills. We had great railroad companies. We had
a lot of great things that are no longer there.
But I think the disconnect here is that people do not get
it that there is a cost of operation that we keep messing with
all the time by increasing their tax load. And for some reason,
Mr. Paulsen just talked about medical devices. You cannot
increase the cost of your product and hope to compete in a
global competitiveness where people do not have to play by the
same rules. It is fascinating to me. One of the biggest items
we sell right now are cars or navigation systems because people
do not know how to get from Point A to Point B or they want to
find the fastest or the quickest or the most use of freeways.
And I would just tell you that most times it gets a little bit
confusing, and when it does, a little voice comes on that says,
``Recalculating.''
This Affordable Care Act, I mean I cannot imagine something
being named worse in my life, ``affordable''? Heavens, no.
Heavens, no. Try and work with it. I mean the people that
actually have to work it. Get up out of bed in the morning, put
their feet on the ground and go to work. They are the ones that
have to struggle with it. And I am fascinated by folks who have
never done it that can tell you how easy it is. All you need to
do is get a laptop. I will put the program in for you. I will
show you how it works. Tell me the struggles that you have just
trying to maintain your competitive edge.
And the other thing is one of the things says the employer
mandate is called the ``Shared Responsibility for Employers
Regarding Health Coverage Payment,'' which kind of suggests
that me as an employer all my life, I did not really know how
to take care of my employees. And that is kind of funny because
I have been to baptisms. I have been to communions. I have been
to weddings, and I have also been to funerals. So, I think I
understand my people pretty well. Tell me some of the concerns
you have? And I think this is absolutely insulting to tell
people who have lived their whole life with associates that
help make them successful that you did not know what you were
doing, and we have got to tell you because this is an outfit
that runs so well. We know how to do it.
Ms. Sun, your business has become very complicated for your
franchisees, has it not?
Ms. SUN. Thank you, yes, it has become very complicated.
And I think the biggest issue we have with having the health
insurance cost being forced on our franchisees potentially
before they are ready, we believe in providing health insurance
for our employees and doing the right thing. We often go to the
employee--our employees' baptisms and birthdays and funerals
and new births at the hospitals and when they are sick, but
many of our franchisees have only been in business for two
years, three years, four years. Many of them still do not have
bank loans. And to put a mandate of additional cost on their
business before they are out of debt and have paid back their
small business loans to the SBA, I think that is improper. And
it is not government's place to be telling our small business
owners how they should be interacting. That is a relationship
between the employer and the employee. And that is what is
scary for how the Affordable Care Act is being implemented.

[[Page 79]]

Mr. KELLY. As I go back in the district, that relationship
between the owner of the business and the associates that work
together, as one of you talked about having to lay people off,
there is nothing worst for an owner than to have to call
somebody and tell them, ``You know what, we are not going to be
able to keep you on the payroll anymore.''
I have got a friend in Erie, Pennsylvania who is in the
fast food business. He is going to have to reduce his workload
of people down from being fully employed to part time in order
to meet this. These are the costs that people who have never
done it do not get. They think they are so darn smart. What
they have caused is us to lay off people that we know, that we
have lived with, that we have suffered with, and that we have
gotten through tough times with.
One of you talked about it, 40, they talked about the 40,
right?
Mr. HUMANN. Yes.
Mr. KELLY. That is what is so critical here. We are telling
those people they cannot work full time anymore, not because we
do not love them, not because we do not need them, but the
government has made it impossible for us to keep them on the
payroll.
Mr. HUMANN. That is exactly right. They really are family
members within the company, but the greater responsibility to
the remaining almost 300 employees that are there. And the
costs, as they continue to increase, have to be addressed. And
the tax is a substantial cost.
Mr. MOORE. Mr. Kelly, if I could, I heard earlier that this
is not causing jobs to move overseas. Whether you are a company
of my size, and after 25 years, we have set up our first
outside United States manufacturing facility, or you listen to
some of the larger companies, one whom more recently announced
a $75 million new tax bill, job losses of a 1,000 in the U.S.,
while they are hiring more in China. I connect those two,
increased taxes and moving jobs outside the U.S. As we get more
tax burden, we have to find ways to make up for that tax. And
one way is to move jobs offshore. And I do not like it.
Mr. KELLY. No, nobody does. I have talked to more people,
it is not that they are unpatriotic, it is just that they are
not stupid. They cannot keep their companies open by trying to
work under a definition, under rules that make no sense. I
talked to our controller today at the dealership this morning.
Our costs now, we just got the bids back, $500,000, which is
nothing in Washington's terms, but for my little dealership,
that adds to our cost of operation which affects the cost of
labor. It affects the cost of every product we sell. It affects
the way we look into the future, and I think that is the real
bad part of this thing. We do not understand how badly we have
hurt people's looks into the future with any type of confidence
that they can survive in an area where the government should be
your friend. They should be helping you get to a prosperous
thing. And, you know what, we are just the opposite.
Mr. MOORE. And we do hear from those governments in other
countries. I get at least an e-mail a week from another country
soliciting our jobs.
Mr. KELLY. Well, thank you for staying the course, and do
not give up faith. I think we can still get this thing fixed. I
think we

[[Page 80]]

have got some people thinking a lot more clearly about this,
but thanks so much.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for having this hearing. I
think it is so critical that the folks that are actually on the
ground that face these challenges every day get a chance to
come before Congress and tell them exactly how hard it is to do
what they do every single day. And you are the ones that fund
the whole government. I mean we are killing the goose that laid
the golden egg. So striking it and keep saying, ``Lay hen,
lay,'' those days are gone. We better wake up and smell the
coffee. Thank you so much. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Kelly. I would ask the
panel to hang around for just a moment. We have two additional
questioners, Mr. Davis and Mr. Marchant. So, Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Van de
Water, let me ask you. There are those who argue that the
health insurance industry fee in the ACA will be passed through
to businesses and consumers in the form of significantly
increased premiums. These commentators do not seem to
acknowledge the downward pressure on premiums that the ACA will
have. Could you please discuss these countervailing factors and
include in your remarks what the CBO and the ACT believe would
be the impact on premiums?
Mr. VAN DE WATER. Yes, Mr. Davis, as you indicate, that if
taken by itself, the tax on health insurance providers, with
other things being equal, tends to increase the cost of health
insurance, there is no question that there are other features
of the Affordable Care Act, which are designed to increase
competition and reduce costs. And taking all of those factors
into account, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated
that for large employers, those with more than 50 workers, the
Affordable Care Act overall will reduce average premiums by up
to 3 percent in 2016.
For small employers, CBO has a range. They estimate that
there possibly could be a small increase in premiums of as much
as 1 percent, but there could be a decrease of as much as 2
percent. So the middle of that range actually would be for a
small decrease in premiums, illustrating once again that it is
important to look at the total effect of the law, not just the
effect of one particular provision.
Mr. Davis, if I might, I would like to comment on something
that was said a moment ago about the Medical Device Tax and the
effect on jobs, following up with a question you asked
previously. Clearly, there is no doubt that some medical device
manufacturers, like firms in other industries, are opening up
plants overseas, but it has been well documented and it is
quite clear by the structure of the tax itself, since the tax
does apply to imported devices that are manufactured overseas,
the tax itself cannot possibly be a reason to move production
overseas. There are indeed other cost reasons that apply in
particular cases that lead manufacturers to make that decision,
but the device tax itself does not change the balance of cost
between producing domestically and producing abroad.
Mr. DAVIS. Let me ask you--could labor supply and
production costs have something to do with movement?

[[Page 81]]

Mr. VAN DE WATER. Presumably, it does. The gentlemen here
who actually run the companies can speak to that in a way that
I cannot, but I would also note that there are other device
manufacturers who take a contrary point of view. And if I
might, I would just like to quote a couple of them. A fellow by
the name of Martin Rothenberg, who heads a device manufacturer
in upstate New York, says that the claims that the device tax
will cause layoffs and outsourcing, his word, not mine, he
calls these claims ``nonsense.'' The tax, he says, will add
little to the price of a new device that his firm is
developing. ``If our new device proves effective, and we market
it effectively, the small increase in cost will have zero
effect on sales. It would surely not lead us to lay off
employees or shift overseas production.''
Another gentleman by the name of Michael Boyle, who founded
a device firm in Massachusetts, says that the device tax is
``not a job killer. It would never stop a responsible manager
from hiring people when it is time to grow the business.'' So,
again, I just want to note that there are different views
within the device industry itself about the effect of the tax.
Mr. MOORE. You know, in my case I made that decision for
our company, and I can tell you I made that decision based on
interactions with the government, primarily driven by another
tax. After going through the process of a startup company, in
our first 20 years, we only made a profit, a small profit, for
one year, but cumulatively we had losses of over $250 million.
Around year 20, we were not yet profitable and losing $50
million a year. We needed to do something. Now, five years
later, we have some profitability, but we still have net
operating losses in a successful business.
When I look overseas, there is another reason beyond
taxation for opening a plant overseas, there is something
called country of origin, which says certain countries penalize
me for being solely a U.S. manufacturer in that they will not
allow me to go for a product approval in their country until I
have approval in my home country, where we manufacture. So,
yes, there are other reasons to set up manufacturing overseas,
but in our case I can speak to the decision because I am the
CEO who made that decision to set up in another country, to
invest millions of dollars to set up a plant in another
country, to hire our first OUS manufacturing employee who
starts on Monday. I made that decision based on our situation
and it is tied to the device tax.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. HUMANN. If I could add on that, the device tax in
general has on average across the industry effectively
increased the tax--the effective tax rate 29 percent. And so,
again, every dollar that goes to Washington is one less that we
can put into our development back in Dallas or throughout the
industry. At the end of the day, if it makes economic sense for
a company to look overseas to be able to reduce its overhead,
they have got to, and this tax certainly does not help in that
process.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
comments. Mr. Kautter, your testimony I have read, and I think,
Mr. Chairman, we might if we had the time, we could have a com

[[Page 82]]

plete hearing just on the idea of this complexity of this law
and the complexity of this tax changing the absolute behavior
of investors. I think--I have read through it, and there is one
page in here that just crystallizes it. And so if you are an
investor, if you are somebody nearing retirement and you are
trying to preserve your retirement, you are going to look at
this, and you are going to change your behavior.
And, Mr. Eakin, you know that American business and
American investors will spend a lot of money on tax avoidance.
And they will spend a lot of money on tax planning. And so I
commend you for your testimony here. I have read it. It is very
serious testimony, and I would like to thank Mr. Eakin, for you
have been on TV a lot the last two weeks and thank you for your
very commonsense comments.
But, Mr. Chairman, I would commend you for bringing up this
subject. This is the exact opposite of what our committee is
working on. Our committee is working on simplifying the Tax
Code and lowering tax rates. This does nothing to simplify the
Tax Code. In fact, it makes it so complex.
The most alarming figure that I read here today was the
threshold for trusts and estates is $12,950. That will
probably--that will completely alter the behavior of those
trusts in the States, and I contend they will not pay that tax.
Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. That figure was alarming when I read
your testimony as well. And I have gotten a lot--Mr. Marchant,
I have got a lot of questions about that tax and how it might
apply, the 3.8 percent tax, net investment--new net investment
tax. So a lot of my constituents were struggling for some of
the answers based on the very specific questions they were
asking me. And even their accountants were confused, but your
testimony helped us sort of understand generally the level of
complexity that this has added. And I do agree with you, we
might need to investigate this further. So I appreciate your
raising that concern and question, Mr. Marchant.
With that, I want to thank all of you who have presented in
front of the committee today and for being here and for your
testimony. I will remind all the members that if you have
additional questions, you can submit these, and they will be
made part of the record. And to the witnesses, there may be
additional questions that members may want to submit to you.
So, we will be accepting submissions for the record, which is
open for two weeks following the hearing.
With that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:50 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned.]

[[Page (83)]]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]

American Farm Bureau Federation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 84]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 85]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 86]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 87]]

California Healthcare Institute

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 88]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 89]]

Cook Group

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 90]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 91]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 92]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 93]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 94]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 95]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 96]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 97]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 98]]

Dental Trade Alliance

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 99]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 100]]

Kenneth H. Ryesky

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 101]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 102]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 103]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 104]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 105]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 106]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 107]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 108]]

Medicaid Health Plans of America

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 109]]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 110]]

National Association for the Self-Employed

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 111]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 112]]

The Brinks Company

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 113]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 114]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 115]]

The Center for Fiscal Equity

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 116]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 117]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 118]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 119]]

MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Questions for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 120]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 121]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 122]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 123]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 124]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 125]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 126]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
