- VERIFICATION OF INCOME AND INSURANCE INFORMATION UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VERIFICATION OF INCOME AND
INSURANCE INFORMATION UNDER
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

JUNE 10, 2014
__________

Serial No. 113-OS9/HL13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

VERIFICATION OF INCOME AND
INSURANCE INFORMATION UNDER
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 10, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-OS9/HL13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-427                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of June 10, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, President, American Action Forum, Testimony.     9
Ryan Ellis, Tax Policy Director, Americans for Tax Reform, IRS
Registered Tax Return Preparer, Testimony......................    20
Katie W. Mahoney, Executive Director of Health Policy, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce, Testimony.................................    24
Bryan C. Skarlatos, Partner, Kostelanetz & Fink, LLP, Testimony..    40
Ron Pollack, Executive Director, Families USA, Testimony.........    49

VERIFICATION OF INCOME AND INSURANCE INFORMATION UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:33 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Kevin
Brady [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Health] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Boustany and Brady Announce Hearing on the Verification of Income and
Insurance Information Under the Affordable Care Act

1100 Longworth House Office Building at 10:30 AM
Washington, June 3, 2014

House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman Charles
Boustany, Jr., M.D, (R-L(A) and Health Subcommittee Chairman Kevin
Brady (R-T(X) today announced that the subcommittees will hold a joint
hearing on the verification system for income and eligibility for tax
credits under the President's health care law. The hearing will take
place on Tuesday, June 10, 2014, in 1100 Longworth House Office
Building, beginning at 10:30 A.M

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) created an income-based premium tax
credit for certain individuals who purchase health insurance through
the new Exchanges. The accuracy of these tax credits, which began this
year, depends on multiple pieces of data, including an individual's
income and eligibility for affordable employer-sponsored insurance. The
Administration's 2013 decision to delay employer-reporting requirements
has further complicated the government's ability to verify an offer of
``affordable employer-sponsored insurance.''

Without accurate income and insurance information, the government
is unable to guarantee the accuracy of the tax credits, which are paid
directly to insurance companies. The consequences of this failure may
result in overpayments, which the ACA requires the IRS to recoup
directly from individuals during the 2015 tax-filing season.

The Continuing Appropriations Act, 2014 required that ``prior to
making such credits and reductions available, the Secretary shall
certify to the Congress that the Exchanges verify such eligibility
consistent with the requirements of such Act.'' Despite the
difficulties in the launch of the Exchanges and healthcare.gov, on
January 1, 2014, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius
provided Congress with such certification. Subsequently, reports have
indicated that the Department of Health and Human Services and the
Exchanges are in fact having difficulty verifying income. For example,
on May 17, The Washington Post reported, ``The government may be paying
incorrect subsidies to more than 1 million Americans for their health
plans in the new federal insurance marketplace and has been unable so
far to fix the errors.''

The hearing will explore the sufficiency of government's procedures
to verify income and insurance information and ensure the accuracy of
premium tax credits. The hearing will also examine the challenges
employers and individuals are likely to face in the 2015 tax-filing
year due to new employer-reporting requirements and unexpected tax debt
for individuals because of subsidy recapture.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany stated, ``As with many
other problems - from stimulus to healthcare.gov--the Administration
prefers to spend taxpayer dollars first and ask questions later. The
White House took a poorly written law and implemented it incompetently.
At the end of the day, employers and individual taxpayers will pay the
price. The Committee has been warning about this problem for some time,
and has an obligation to continue holding the Administration
accountable.''

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Brady stated, ``It's clear the
ACA income and eligibility verification system is not ready and not
complete. I'm deeply concerned about the fairness of imposing the risk
and burden onto individual taxpayers for the disastrous implementation
of this poorly designed law. Millions of Americans could be hit with a
large and surprising tax bill on April 15th, and the White House
doesn't appear to be doing much to fix the problems.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the government's ability to verify income
and insurance information, ensure accuracy of premium tax credits, and
the likely effect of these challenges on the 2015 tax-filing season.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on June 24, 2014.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments.Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BRADY. Good morning, everyone. This hearing will
come to order.
Before we start, I would like to recognize the ranking
member, Dr. McDermott, for a statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before we start today, I want to acknowledge the service of
Jennifer Friedman.
Jennifer has been with the Ways and Means Committee for 7
years and has handled Medicare things on a variety of levels,
and this is her last week of service. She is on her way to
Japan. Her husband is in the State Department, and she going to
take a Council of Foreign Relations fellowship there, and we
want to thank her for her service. Jennifer, please stand up.
Chairman BRADY. Jennifer, you will be missed, and best
wishes.
As we begin this hearing, you may remember then Speaker
Nancy Pelosi famously warned Congress and the American people
about the Affordable Care Act: We have to pass the bill so we
can find out what is in it. Over 4 years later, the American
people continue to learn and continue to be surprised.
Today the Health and Oversight Subcommittees will hear
testimony about yet another surprise. Today, 8 months after the
start of open enrollment and well over a month after the
extended open enrollment ended, the income and eligibility
verification system is not yet completed and the burden and the
cost of that failure will fall on the American people. That is
simply unfair and unacceptable.
What we will hear today from our distinguished panel is
trouble. Potentially millions of Americans are currently
receiving the wrong tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies,
including some people that are completely ineligible to receive
any at all. As required by the Affordable Care Act, individuals
who receive subsidy overpayments must repay the government.
Americans who tried to do the right thing could be hit with
unexpected tax bills from the IRS next April.
For many, this could mean thousands of dollars and while
the cost of the loss failures fall on the individual, the blame
for this mess falls squarely on the White House. Time after
time Republicans on this committee raised concerns with the
administration witnesses sitting in these chairs, including
cabinet officers and IRS commissioners, and we said the
website, the exchanges, the eligibility verification systems,
were not ready to go, but the White House pushed ahead,
focusing on the advertising campaign, launching healthcare.gov
instead of the steps to make the system actually work.
As a result, according to the Washington Post, piles of
unprocessed proof documents are sitting in the Federal
contractor's Kentucky office while incorrect subsidies continue
to be paid. Because the system isn't ready, these
inconsistencies have to be resolved manually one by one, and
there are over 1 million related to income alone, and the
contractors haven't even started.
As we will hear, for the verification system to work as
designed, a massive amount of reporting data is required from
employers, data the Government has never collected before. The
amount of data is so massive, that around this time last year,
the White House gave up and delayed reporting requirements for
2014, after legitimate complaints from businesses about the
cost of compliance.
We are not here to revisit the controversy that decision
set off, but it is important to understand that decision meant
very plainly and very clearly that for 2014, there is not a
working verification system.
In order to effectively manage the Affordable Care Act, the
administration either needs to employ a reporting information.
Why else would you impose such a high cost on employers? The
information is needed to enforce the so-called firewall, that
prohibits an individual with an offer of affordable employer
insurance from receiving tax credits, and yet it does not exist
for 2014.
All that is left is for the American people to verify their
eligibility for themselves. They need to understand the rules
around the offer of affordable health insurance. They need to
know it is on them to notify the Government if they have
received a raise or had a child or lost a loved one. If they
don't understand this, they could be hit with a tax bill for
thousands of dollars, and that is not fair.
Democrats and Republicans came together and passed a law
last October that stated very clearly that before any tax
credit went out, the secretary of HHS had to certify to
Congress that the verification system was working. Clearly
Secretary Sebelius erred in sending that certification. It
wasn't working then and it isn't working today, and the burden
and cost of that failure will fall on the American people. It
isn't fair and it isn't right.
Before I recognize Health Subcommittee Ranking Member Dr.
McDermott for the purposes of an opening statement, I ask
unanimous consent that all members' written statements be
included in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize Mr. McDermott for his opening statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our Republican colleagues have called us here this morning
once again to try to tear down the Affordable Care Act, to find
all the defects they possibly can before the election. They
have staged this political event, really, to blow another
implementation issue out of proportion. What is more, they have
decided that one subcommittee isn't enough. They needed to put
together two subcommittees to prove a purely partisan political
point.
It really is a disappointing choice on my Republican
colleagues' part, because they should accept that the ACA is
working. Seven million people have joined. Many states have
accepted Medicare expansions. Access to quality health care
coverage has expanded dramatically since we enacted the law.
Eight million people have bought insurance through the
exchanges. Six million middle class people have saved money
through tax----
[Audible alarm.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. There is a flash flood warning.
Mr. THOMPSON. Roll up your pants.
Chairman BRADY. Republicans did not make that announcement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. They did not.
The success of this act, though, is really unquestionable
and you can see it in the New York Times yesterday where they
had the story about Texarkana, Texas, on the border with
Arkansas, and people on one side of the street had health care,
and on the other side, they don't. You can see that this
information is seeping out across the country.
But access isn't everything, and we still have plenty to do
with the ACA even today. We must control the cost. I am hand in
hand with the chairman on that issue. That is why I have been
working to combat the fraud, the waste and the abuse in the
system and to promote shared savings programs that save
providers, taxpayers and patients money.
Reforms such as these will reform the ACA and provide
better health security to American families, but instead of
working on that issue and building on the success of the ACA,
we are called here today to talk about a distorted view of the
premium tax credit verification system.
Virtually none of the criticisms are sincere and there is
little or no facts to support their claims. Everybody knew that
when you tried to enroll 30 million people, you would have
errors. We might even look to ourselves in the mirror and
remember how many times we have filled out something wrong and
it was not considered fraud or abuse or waste, just human
error.
When my Republican colleagues talk about inconsistencies,
they are not telling the full story. Although there have been
inconsistencies, only a fraction actually impact anyone's tax
credits. In fact, many inconsistencies relate to applications
that were never even completed.
Now, just think about what the solution to the issue is. A
letter was written to Secretary Lew to stop all tax credits.
Now, you have got seven million people out there enrolled, and
suddenly we are going to put a blanket stop on everything. That
is trying to kill the law. If my colleagues on the other side
had their way, no middle class families, even those without
inconsistencies, would benefit from the tax credits for the
foreseeable future.
And when we hear the other side pretend that these
inconsistencies are unprecedented, let's look at the facts.
Medicaid, CHIP and other highly successful programs have
handled similar data inconsistencies before. We saw this
morning when we wrote the ACA--we saw this coming when we wrote
the ACA, which is why we included provisions to correct the
inaccuracies. It is important to get this right, and designed
the system to make sure that we did.
The more data that comes out, the more stories we hear of
people getting coverage, the more we can ensure the ACA is
working. Just this past Thursday, a new Gallup Poll showed that
the uninsured rate in America is at its lowest point since
Gallup began selecting such data. That is not political spin or
fuzzy math to say that the ACA has been a success. The
Republicans should join Democrats in discussing how to make it
even better and for that reason, I am glad we are having the
hearing, but it ought to be about how we control costs, not
about inconsistencies, which ultimately we will have a hearing
on this.
A year from now, if we haven't got a better system than we
have got today, that would be one thing, but when you take 3
months in and say you are going to have everything perfect, you
simply have never tried to do anything, whether it is build a
car, build a missile. How many failures do we have in the
missile system? Did we have them in every week to say, how many
failures have you had? That is what we are doing here. We are
jumping before it really needs to be done.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman BRADY. I now recognize the Oversight and
Subcommittee Ranking Member, Mr. Lewis, for his opening
statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. McDermott.
In my heart of hearts, I believe that health insurance or
health care is a right. When President Obama signed the
Affordable Care Act into law, a new day began, one that was
free of worry about what would happen if someone in their
family got sick. The Affordable Care Act has opened the door
for millions of Americans to access this sacred right for the
first time in our country's history.
Let us take a moment to review the many accomplishments of
the Affordable Care Act. Eight million people now have health
insurance coverage; 3.1 million young people are able to stay
on their parents' health plan instead of being uninsured; and
129 million Americans, including 17 million children, with pre-
existing conditions are no longer denied coverage or charged
high premiums.
Sometimes I think we forget what it is like to get sick and
not be able to go to the hospital or see a doctor. We forget or
maybe we do not know what it is like to look at the face of
your sick son or your sick daughter and know that you cannot
afford the treatment they need. The Affordable Care Act changed
that reality for millions of people.
Today women can now no longer be charged high premiums just
because they are women and 105 million Americans no longer face
a dollar limit on their coverage. This means that if faced with
an expensive disease like cancer, they know their treatment
will be covered and their family will not go bankrupt.
The Affordable Care Act did that. This is a law that has
literally saved people's lives by giving them health insurance
for the first time. We will not and must not return to the dark
days when many of our fellow citizens could not afford health
care and the Federal Government did nothing.
Republicans have voted 52 times to repeal the Affordable
Care Act. Whenever a topic about the ACA is on the table, it
seems to be a code for one thing: repeal, destroy, go back. We
have come too far, we have made too much progress, and we are
not going back. After 52 votes to nowhere, I think it is very
clear that we will not go back. Instead of focusing on repeal,
we should encourage improvement. For the good of all of our
citizens, we need to look forward and put an end to the
political games.
Realizing the dream of health care has meant a new
challenge for the Federal Government. It has not been easy, it
is not a light task. We must ensure that the agencies have the
resources, the staff, training and technology that they need to
help our citizens, our people to get the health care services
they need and deserve.
I hope that we can put our differences aside and come
together to make the transition smoother for our citizens, for
the most vulnerable people in our society and for those trying
to serve them.
Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
I now recognize the Chairman of the Oversight Subcommittee,
Mr. Boustany.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Chairman Brady, for convening
this really important hearing.
In recent years, the Ways and Means Subcommittees on
Oversight and Health have held numerous hearings on the
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, including the new
tax burdens under the law, the improper administration of tax
credits, and taxpayer rights.
This morning's hearing will explore the Affordable Care
Act's income and eligibility verification system, which lies at
the nexus of all three of these concerns. What is increasingly
clear is that even if this system works as intended, there is a
potential nightmare scenario developing for the 2015 tax filing
season.
Under the Affordable Care Act, the Internal Revenue Service
will distribute over $1 trillion in new premium subsidies over
the next decade, $1 trillion. To administer these subsidies
accurately, the Federal Government requires precise and timely
information about income, family status, the availability of
employer-sponsored insurance, and other eligibility
information. Yet after implementation delays, failures of
healthcare.gov, and other poor administration, the Federal
Government lacks this information, but has nonetheless begun to
pay out billions of dollars in potentially incorrect premium
subsidies. We know from experience where this story leads, and
it does not end well for the American taxpayers.
The rate of improper payments across the Federal Government
is 4.35 percent. The rate of improper payments for the earned
income tax credit, which like premium subsidies is paid based
on income calculations, is approximately 22 percent, the worst
error rate in Government. If this new subsidy is implemented
with the average degree of improper payment, the low end for
the IRS, the Federal Government will pay out over $44 billion
in improper payments.
If premium subsidies are administered with the same degree
of accuracy as the earned income tax credit, the Federal
Government will pay out a whopping $220 billion in improper
payments over 10 years. We have to get a handle on this and we
haven't gotten a handle on the EITC, and yet we have this whole
new area of implementation.
Although these subsidies are going correctly to insurers
next year, the IRS will be in the position of recouping
overpayments directly from individuals. Many of these
individuals will end up with unexpected tax debt through no
fault of their own, but from simply not understanding the
quirks and complexities of the President's health law.
The rules regarding employer-sponsored insurance, for
example, can leave a taxpayer owing the IRS the entirety of
their subsidy payments. These are not hypothetical problems in
the distant future. These are problems developing now and ones
that will haunt taxpayers and businesses during the next filing
season. I hope today's hearing will cast new light on these
issues.
And I want to thank our guests for joining us in this very
important discussion.
I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Today we will hear from five distinguished witnesses:
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum;
Ryan Ellis, tax policy director for the Americans For Tax
Reform, an IRS registered tax return preparer; Katie Mahoney,
executive director of health policy for the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce; Bryan Skarlatos, a partner of Kostelanetz & Fink law
firm; and Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA.
Welcome to all of you. I look forward to your testimony.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, we will begin with you. As usual, we have
preserved 5 minutes for the statement and questions as well and
because we are holding a joint hearing, we are going to stay
close to the limits today. Mr. Holtz-Eakin.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ACTION
FORUM, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, thank you, Chairman Brady, Chairman
Boustany, Ranking Member McDermott, Ranking Member Lewis. It is
a privilege to be here today to talk about the income and
subsidy verification systems in the Affordable Care Act.
I want to make three basic points in my testimony. Point
number one is that the system itself is very complex in its
best circumstances, if it worked exactly as designed, and that
the series of waivers and delays that have been implemented
over the past several years have made the system essentially
unworkable, in my view, and we will see more about that.
The second is that it complicates an already far too
complicated tax system. The Ways and Means Committee has spent
a considerable amount of time on tax implication and reforms.
Many of the features of the Affordable Care Act verification
system make things much, much worse.
And then the third is that the combination of the
complexity really does expose the taxpayer to additional
unwarranted burdens and the likelihood of spending above what
would be anticipated from the Affordable Care Act itself.
The first point is that it is just very complicated. There
is a graphic which we had hoped to show which my staff put
together, which shows the verification system. It is in my
written testimony. Yeah. That is a good faith effort to
replicate the sequence of decisions and rulings that would take
place in trying to verify the income and subsidies as the
system stands at the moment.
Just a glance at that tells you this is a system that is
going to overwhelm taxpayers. In particular, this is a tax
filing population that may not in fact be used to file tax
returns at all and will have to begin to do so only because of
the Affordable Care Act and to satisfy they verification. So it
is a very, very complex system. It adds new information
requirements, it adds new forms to reconcile to the actual
subsidies in the Tax Code, they are required to report
quarterly changes in their family status, changes in custodial
relationships with children, kids who graduate from college and
move out of the house, divorces. An enormous amount of personal
information must be reported quarterly and on a timely basis to
get the reconciliation right. This is all going to prove to be
quite complicated for this population to comply with.
It will complicate the Tax Code. We do not yet know for
sure how the IRS will do a lot of the implementation, but there
is a very real chance that many of these taxpayers will no
longer be able to file a 1040EZ form, for example, be forced
into a more complicated filing status, something with which
they are completely unfamiliar and will probably have to appeal
to paid tax preparers for low income individuals. It doesn't
make a lot of sense.
And the recapture itself will be very complicated. Many
people have finally begun to understand how the child tax
credit works or how the EITC works, and the recapture will
interfere with their receipt of their normal refunds and they
will find the system harder to manage.
And my concern is the one that Chairman Boustany mentioned
in his opening remarks, is that in the end, we have a system
which will have individual eligibility requirements that look
very much like the EITC, and these are layered--layered on top
of this are employer requirements for affordable insurance,
where the reporting is not yet in place but which in principle
they would have to provide.
That complicated system is likely to lead to error rates in
payments and as you mentioned, if we have a 20 percent error
rate, we are looking at $150 to $200 billion in inappropriate
payments over the next decade. It is not a trivial problem, it
is a serious budget problem at a time when the U.S. faces
chronic budget deficits and long-run spending problems, so I am
concerned about that.
If you step back, I think it would be important for the
committee to focus on two different things. The first is there
are a set of issues which really are about the startup and what
will a filing season look like next year, what will a
population that is not used to receiving a, you know, a form
1095A which says, this is what your subsidies were, they may
just throw those in the trash, will the error reconciliation
process work effectively, we have no idea, but a bunch of
startup problems.
And then there is the longer-run problem, which is that
this system is like the EITC, it is like Medicare. This is a
pay-and-chase policy: pay people and then go find inappropriate
payments. We have not proven capable of doing that in a very
efficient fashion. We worry about the $60 to $80 billion a year
in inappropriate payments to Medicare, we worry about the 20
percent error rate in the EITC. This is another program that
has the same fundamental character, and I worry about whether
it will be effective in the long-run.
But I am pleased to have the opportunity to be here today
and I would look forward to answering your questions.
Chairman BRADY. Great. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]

Chairman BRADY. Mr. Ellis, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF RYAN ELLIS, TAX POLICY DIRECTOR, AMERICANS FOR TAX
REFORM, IRS REGISTERED TAX RETURN PREPARER, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. ELLIS. Chairman Brady, Chairman Boustany, Mr.
McDermott, Mr. Lewis, Members of the Committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify today.
My name is Ryan Ellis. I come here today as a small
business owner of a tax preparation firm, in the Commonwealth
of Virginia and also as an IRS enrolled agent. I am also tax
policy director at Americans For Tax Reform, which is a non-
profit here in Washington, D.C.
Now I am here today to tell you that the upcoming tax
filing season has the potential to be one of the most chaotic
in years. One of the key elements of the Affordable Care Act,
popularly known as Obamacare, is the creation of advanceable
tax credits for the purchase of exchange health insurance
plans. Taxpayers applying for credit assistance must be
evaluated by government entities ranging from the SSA, to CMS,
to the IRS.
The goal is to have an educated estimate based on the most
immediately available government documentation, e.g., prior
year tax returns, et cetera, of the taxpayer's probable income
for the year, which in turn determines the size of the tax
credit. In an effort to get this tax benefit out quickly, the
estimated credit is advanced to the insurance company by the
IRS, which applies it to customer premiums. This is an
important point. The money has left the IRS's hands up to over
a year before the taxpayer actually calculates his final credit
amount. The insurance companies have collected it, and they are
not required to give it back.
Press reports this month indicated that the Government was
having a hard time doing all this, with 1.2 million of the 6
million Federal exchange applicants having to be asked for
additional income verification information from CMS. That is
not surprising. Applicants are asked to complete a detailed,
confusing 12-page application, which asks for income, family
size, et cetera. It is rather like trying to fill out a 1040 on
the fly. Added to this is the lack of employer reporting
requirements and the failure to complete the back end of the
website properly.
Inconsistencies, some of which are the results of failures
of the healthcare.gov system, some of which are poor records
from the government, and some of which are mistakes from the
individual are not surprising, but they are a problem.
Here it is the middle of June, and many people have now
been receiving inaccurate subsidies for 6 months. To the
public's knowledge, not a single advanced tax credit has been
adjusted this year.
So what happens if the flawed, confusing process results in
a tax credit larger than what the law calls for? A hypothetical
example might help illustrate. A health exchange customer
selects an Obamacare exchange plan, the Government estimates
that this taxpayer will earn $30,000 this year, which makes her
eligible for a $2,000 tax credit. This $2,000 is paid to the
taxpayer's insurance company to help with premiums. The next
spring, our customer slash taxpayer is filling out her tax
return. Unfortunately, the Government estimated the taxpayer
earned too little and paid out too large a credit. She actually
earned $40,000 and so only had a $1,500 credit coming to her.
Depending on the taxpayer's income level and availability
of verified affordable workplace insurance, she will have to
pay back much or all of the $500 overage to the IRS. This means
skinnier refunds and maybe even a tax liability, and it won't
be the taxpayer's fault, it will be the Government's fault. It
is also inevitable that many people are receiving tax credits
which they are completely ineligible.
The firewall of the offer of employer-sponsored insurance
is a new concept. Tax preparers will have difficulty figuring
out how it works in operation. There is virtually no way to
catch it on the front end, but come tax filing season, many
people will end up owing thousands of dollars and it will be a
complete surprise to them and to their tax preparer.
The burden of explaining why the Government allowed
individuals to accept too large a subsidy will fall on the tax
preparer community.
It is in the interest of the Congress to make sure that the
entirety of the Obamacare sign-up system is fully functional;
not just the front-end website, which got all the headlines,
but the really important back end, where this complex income
verification system must be able to work.
Thank you for allowing me to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Ms. Mahoney, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF KATIE W. MAHONEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF HEALTH
POLICY, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. MAHONEY. Thank you, Chairman Boustany and Brady.
Ranking Members Lewis and McDermott, and other Members of the
Subcommittees for the opportunity to participate in today's
hearing.
We appreciate this hearing's focus on the challenges in
verifying income and insurance information, given the delay of
the reporting requirements under the health reform law,
hopefully by examining the law's interrelated provisions and
how they were intended to work, we may be able to identify and
advance solutions to alleviate the challenges that remain.
My name is Katie Mahoney. I am the executive director at
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. While the Chamber opposed the
health reform law during the legislative debate, we are moving
forward to do whatever we can to help our member companies
understand and comply with the law. We continue to work with
the regulators to mitigate the burdens and challenges of
implementation and with members of Congress to provide relief
to business. We have made some progress, but much more work
needs to be done on both fronts.
Since the law was enacted, the Chamber has filed 77 comment
letters, many of which were in response to items issued to
implement the employer mandate. While today's hearing is on the
verification of income and insurance information, I have been
asked to testify specifically on the two reporting requirements
contained in Sections 6055 and 6056. These sections were
designed to provide the IRS with the data and information
necessary to implement at least three other major provisions in
the law: the employer mandate provision, the premium tax credit
provision and the individual mandate provision.
6056 requires employers subject to the employer mandate to
report information to the IRS and to their employees to
demonstrate compliance with the employer mandate. This
information is necessary to determine which employers may be
penalized and which individuals may be eligible for a premium
tax credit.
6055 requires those entities that insure individuals with
minimum essential coverage to report to the IRS and those
individuals the information necessary to demonstrate which
individuals are covered and what that coverage looks like. This
information is necessary for the IRS to know which individuals
have met the requirement to obtain minimum essential coverage
under the individual mandate and which individuals may be
subject to a penalty.
Even when described as simply as possible, the complexities
are striking. Clearly the challenge of drafting regulations to
implement these provisions is immense, but it is one that we
have found the Treasury officials to take very seriously and
approach very carefully. Efforts to promulgate regulations to
implement 6056 and 65 specifically began in 2012 in conjunction
with other efforts to promulgate regulations on the employer
mandate, which began in 2011.
At least ten regulatory items were issued in nearly 2 years
between May of 2011 and April of 2013. We had many exchanges
with Treasury during this process and filed numerous comments.
In addition to responding to Treasury's specific proposals, we
repeatedly asked for transition relief, safe harbors and
compliance assistance rather than strict enforcement of the
provisions. As I shared with the House Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee nearly a year ago, businesses needed more time.
On July 2nd of 2013, Treasury announced that the reporting
requirement regulations were not ready. As a result, transition
relief for 2014 was provided to allow additional time to comply
with the reporting requirements and the employer mandate,
delaying compliance with these provisions. It would not have
been possible to enforce the employer mandate provision without
the information that the reporting requirements would collect.
Following that announcement, Treasury continued its work,
soliciting feedback and issuing eight more items in roughly 9
months, including the NPRM's on 6055 and 6056. We have worked
with Treasury officials for the past 4 years as they labored to
implement these requirements. We found their commitment to
minimize the cost and burden to business while implementing the
law as intended to be commendable.
Many of the concerns and recommendations that we raised
were explored and incorporated into the final rule, including
several simplified reporting methods that will help ease the
burden for some business and reduce reporting of statutorily
specified but unnecessary data points.
We applaud the officials at Treasury for their efforts,
however, the extensive costs and time necessary to comply with
these reporting requirements continues to be daunting.
Many companies offer exceptional benefits, for which
employees pay only a small portion of the premium. These
businesses, like many others, are committed to improving the
health of their employees and offering coverage that is highly
valued. It is unfortunate that because of the way the statute
is written, these businesses must direct resources to report on
the coverage they offer rather than use those resources to pay
for a greater portion of the cost of that coverage.
Even more unfortunate is the extreme expense of these
reporting requirements and the challenges in identifying
precisely which month's coverage is offered to which employees
may incent employers to stop offering coverage all together.
Clearly this is not what was intended and it is not what is
best for employers or employees.
In conclusion, what is to be done? Well, enacting the
legislation passed by the House earlier this year to restore
the long-standing definition of full-time employment to 40
hours would be helpful. We urge you to consider legislation to
permit businesses greater flexibility and protection, and work
with stakeholders to identify possible ways to provide further
relief.
Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mahoney follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Mr. Skarlatos.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN C. SKARLATOS, PARTNER, KOSTELANETZ & FINK,
LLP, NEW YORK, N.Y.

Mr. SKARLATOS. Good morning, Chairman Boustany, Chairman
Brady, Members of the Committee.
Thank you for inviting me here this morning. My name is
Bryan Skarlatos. I am an attorney in New York, and my practice
focuses in large part on tax procedure issues.
I am here to talk to you today about how the IRS collects
taxes, and you may find that relevant to how the IRS may
collect overpayments of credits. When we talk about how the IRS
collects taxes, it is important to remember the IRS is not an
ordinary creditor like you or me. If somebody owes me money, I
have to go to court, start an action to invoke the authority of
the court to give me a judgment that I can use to collect the
property to pay the debt. I can't just take somebody's car or
take somebody's bank account.
It is different for the IRS. Because the IRS has a need to
collect taxes, Congress has given the IRS super creditor
powers. The IRS doesn't need to go to court. It can act
unilaterally, using its powers of lien and levy to collect
taxes. Those are the two main tools it has.
A lien is the first and most important concept. It is an
intangible concept. It is not something the IRS does; it is a
thing that arises by operation of law and the lien is what
gives the IRS the right to collect somebody's property, or to
take somebody's property. It is sort of like a string that the
IRS can pull to take property from someone.
A levy, is distinct from a lien. The levy is the actual
procedure it uses to take the property. It can go in and take
things that the taxpayer has an interest in, like a bank
account, a car, wages or something like that.
Now, the IRS can't just do this without first having an
assessment. It needs an assessment of taxes. Most taxes get
assessed on the tax return and taxpayers themselves say, I owe
a thousand dollars. That is a self-assessment and we indeed
have a self-assessment system. If the taxpayer doesn't pay the
taxes that they say they owe, then the IRS has these collection
powers, or if the IRS later comes in and says, you owe more
money, you owe $2,000, not a thousand dollars, then the IRS has
these collection powers, because the assessment arises.
Once the assessment arises automatically, it doesn't arise
automatically. Excuse me. What happens first is that the IRS
has to say, hey, you owe money, there is an assessment, and
demand payment. If the taxpayer then fails to pay the tax, the
assessment arises automatically and then the lien arises
automatically upon the assessment, giving the IRS rights to the
property.
The lien is the important concept, as I mentioned, because
it is very broad. It affects anything that the taxpayer owns or
anything that the taxpayer could have an interest in. It also
includes things like after-acquired property. So if the
taxpayer buys a car or receives an inheritance after the
assessment, the lien will attach to that after-acquired
property.
The IRS can also file a notice of tax lien. It does this in
order to give itself priority over other creditors. It files
the notice in the local county clerk's office or in the local
court office. That notice of tax lien by mere filing can have
an impact on the taxpayer's credit standing and it can affect
certain agreements it has, credit agreements, mortgages, it can
trigger events of default simply by filing the notice of lien.
But the lien itself, as I said, is not the thing that takes
the property. The thing that takes the property is the levy.
The levy and the seizure, and levy and seizure are basically
the same words for, similar words for two same concepts, is
when the IRS goes in and takes things. It can go to the
taxpayer or it can go to third parties like a bank or like an
employer or a customer who owes the taxpayer money.
The levy, though, unlike the lien, does not attach to
after-acquired property, so if a levy hits on a certain day and
somebody deposits money into a bank account the next day, the
levy does not attach to that. There is one exception, however,
and that is for a levy on wages. A levy on wages continues, and
continues on the taxpayer like a vacuum cleaner, continuing to
take the wages as they are earned.
The IRS has to give the taxpayer notice, 30-days' notice
before it is going to levy and take the property and at that
time the taxpayer has the right to request a collection due
process hearing to contest the levy or the underlying
assessment of taxes.
Now, the IRS doesn't just take things without giving some
notice and demand, and there are a series of notices that come
out in the usual case and in that case, the taxpayer can try to
negotiate an installment agreement or an offer in compromise
where they pay less than the full amount due, depending on the
taxpayer's current assets and ability to pay.
One other factor you should consider is that if there is an
overpayment of tax in another year, the IRS can offset an
underpayment simply by reducing the overpayment in another
year.
So those are some of the tools that the IRS has at its
disposal to collect taxes. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Skarlatos follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Mr. Pollack, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF RON POLLACK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FAMILIES USA,
WASHINGTON D.C.

Mr. POLLACK. Thank you, Chairman Brady and Boustany,
Ranking Members McDermott and Lewis, Members of the Committee.
Today's hearing is important, because it is essential that
tax credit premium subsidies be provided based on good and
accurate information. This is needed to ensure that there are
neither underpayments or overpayments of such subsidies.
In undertaking today's examination, it is crucial to single
out two important words, both with very separate meanings.
These words are ``inconsistencies'' and ``inaccuracies.'' The
two words should not be confused with one another, because they
are not synonymous, and conflating those two words, like some
in this Congress have done, does an enormous disservice to
today's inquiry. For example, two sets of data may be
inconsistent, one depicting a situation 2 years ago and another
depicting the situation today, and they both may be accurate.
It is crucial, therefore, to underscore the differences between
inconsistencies and inaccuracies as we examine the
discrepancies that appear to exist in application submissions
versus Government data files among 2.1 million people enrolled
in affordable care-related coverage.
Of the 2.1 million discrepancies, over half concern
discrepancies about applicants' income. This should not be
surprising, because applicants are supposed to provide
information about their current 2014 income, while the
Government's data reflects such households' income based on
their 2012 tax returns. Many significant changes occur in
income status over those 2 years.
Many people change jobs, resulting in gains or losses of
income; many people receive differences in compensation, again,
up or down; many people experience differences in real or
expected overtime. Changes in family composition significantly
impact income, and some families move from jobs to becoming
students, and vice versa. And many other factors cause incomes
to change over the course of 2 years.
These 2-year differences should be reviewed, but there is
little reason to surmise that these differences are
inaccuracies in applications that should cause reductions in
premium subsidies.
The same is true with the almost 1 million discrepancies
with respect to immigration and citizen-related information.
Keep in mind, people eligible for marketplace coverage include
citizens and nationals and others lawfully in the United
States. The only persons disqualified for coverage are those
who are not lawfully in the country, and those individuals are
hardly likely to contact an exchange or other governmental
entity.
The kinds of discrepancies that do exist in this area
involve matters that are innocuous and do not affect
eligibility for or the size of premium subsidies. They include
the precise Social Security Number, whether a person does or
does not have a hyphenated name, whether the person has a
permanent resident card or a green card, whether they are
missing a digit in an address.
There are other reasons to believe that the number of
inaccuracies are small, and when we see verification, that they
would be rectified, four reasons: one, similar verification
systems exist in programs like Medicaid and CHIP, and the vast
majority of instances consumers' information is found to be
accurate; second, Serco, which is the contractor responsible
for obtaining information from beneficiaries to address ACA
enrollment inconsistencies, briefed the House Energy and
Commerce Committee last week, and what they said, they
indicated that upwards of 99 percent of the inconsistencies
would be in, quote, ``innocuous'', end quote, or benign, and
easily resolved without impact on beneficiaries' costs or
coverage; third, consumers attest in their application form
under penalty of perjury, and that is not taken lightly; and
lastly, if a review shows a household's initial subsidy is
inaccurate, the marketplace will adjust it for the remainder of
the year, and places like the District of Columbia have
actually suggested to people that they only take 85 percent of
their subsidy so that they are on the conservative side of
this, and, of course, then there is true up and reconciliation.
The bottom line in all this is that it makes sense to
complete the examination of discrepancies as soon as possible,
but with respect to the number of inaccuracies, to borrow from
William Shakespeare, this is much about very little.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pollack follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. While some today try to dismiss this, this
as no big deal, the truth is Republicans and Democrats have
been concerned about this for some time, with the risk to
taxpayers by inadvertently committing taxpayer funded fraud,
unfortunately, if this is not fixed.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, on the screen, in barely readable type, is
the income verification system of the Continuing Appropriations
Act 2014. This was passed Republicans and Democrats, signed by
the President, includes language principally by Representative
Black of Tennessee, an important section reads this way: Prior
to making such credits and reductions available, the Secretary
shall certify to the Congress that the exchanges verify such
eligibilities consistent with the requirements of such act. And
Secretary Sebelius made that certification January 1.
One, was that certification in error, and two, as of today
as it currently stands, does this system meet the requirements
of the law?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. In my opinion, it does not meet that
requirement and the Secretary clearly made the certification
for reasons that she can defend, but by delaying for 1 to 2
years depending on the size of the firm any collection other
than voluntary of information from the employer side, you
cannot know if someone has an offer of affordable insurance.
That is a key piece of the eligibility requirement.
Second, there are essentially different rules for Federal
exchanges and state exchanges, and my understanding is that the
administration is going to treat differently those states that
did and did not expand Medicaid. You cannot make a sweeping
statement that there is an overall certification system in
those circumstances.
Chairman BRADY. As of today----
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Yes.
Chairman BRADY. As of today. Here we are June 10th, we have
not even begun to resolve, even begun to resolve income-related
inconsistencies. CMS acknowledges there is well over a million
of these. They hope to get through them by the end of the
summer; not yet known if that will happen or not. Obviously
everyone acknowledges there is a long way to go in this.
Some will say this is all working out, no problem, this
will work itself out, but even if they fix all the technical
items, will HHS and the IRS really ever have a working income
verification system? Doesn't the law, based on a very poor
design, really prevent any agency from verifying income
information before sending out the tax subsidy?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. There is no existing program that does
what you described effectively. My concern is from experience
with the earned income tax credit, from experience with the
Medicare payment programs that this is yet another program that
will, in fact, place a premium on getting money out the door,
it will then make a good faith effort to identify errors in
payment and recapture, but we have as a Government never done
that particularly successfully.
And so, I understand the folks who point to particular
details that can be fixed and done better, but as an overall
track record, these kinds of programs have large errors in
payment, and those are large taxpayer sums of money.
Chairman BRADY. So the problems that we will see won't
merely fix themselves. The design of the system really makes
it, as you indicated in your testimony, creates that pay-and-
chase process, again, where we will always be paying out
incorrect subsidies, chasing them down with some degree of
success or not.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Absolutely. And indeed, this law, in fact,
exacerbates that slightly by making it the case that the
recapture comes from taking money out of refunds. If there is
no refund from which to take the overpayment, the taxpayer
has--the recipient of the payment has no obligation to repay
the Federal Government and thus the taxpayers.
So, you know, you have designed it so as to not get back
all the overpayments. There is no doubt about that. It is going
to be in particular, people like Mr. Ellis in a bad position.
If you are a tax preparer, you can have an individual sitting
in front of you saying, I am not going to pay what I owe, and
will he sign off on that as a tax return? I won't answer for
him, but I wouldn't want to be in that position. This is really
a poorly designed system from that perspective.
Chairman BRADY. And in your testimony, you made the case
that many of these individuals may not be as familiar with the
tax preparation system. You are asking them to follow a very
complex set of rules that they may have really no experience in
dealing with?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Yes. I mean, there are two people on this
panel that can speak to this better than I can, but I worry
about what happens next February. There are going to be people
who have not traditionally filed returns who are going to get
an information form in the mail, it is a 1095A, and my guess is
half of them will toss it, they will have no idea what that is.
They will then have an obligation to file a return and
reconcile the information on that form through another form, an
860--890--8962 form, and if they don't put that form in, the
IRS will reject the filing and send it back to them. They won't
get their earned income tax credit, they won't get their child
care, they won't get anything.
I think there is going to be enormous amount of confusion.
This population is not used to this process, the forms are new.
The way error checking and reconciliation is going to happen
is, in fact, not clear.
You know----
Chairman BRADY. And if I understand it correctly, because
of the way Ms. Maloney talked about, if taxpayers don't catch
it this next tax season, with the reporting requirements put in
place in 2015, they will be caught in the 2016 tax system,
which means they could be on the hook for 2 years of either
overpayments or ineligible subsidies; is that correct?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. That would be my reading of the law and
the practice. I would encourage you, you know, to have the IRS
commissioner come up and explain how they do in fact plan to do
that. I think there is some uncertainty about that at the
moment.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ellis, to sort of follow up, there is really a second
group of taxpayers we are concerned about, and you identified
them in your testimony. And so if an individual, if I go to my
employer and ask, is the insurance you offer me affordable
according to the Affordable Care Act, will that employer
necessarily know what that means?
Mr. ELLIS. No, because the employer doesn't have all the
information that it needs in order to make that judgment. The
definition of affordable insurance from the workplace is nine
and a half percent of someone's adjusted gross income, of an
individual's adjusted gross income, but, of course, individuals
if they are part of a family unit don't file taxes as
individuals. That only happens if they are single.
If you are married or if you have dependent children and
all these other things that come into a more complicated tax
return situation, the employer is not necessarily going to have
all that information.
That is why the employer community was so insistent upon
having this waiver of reporting, I think, for 2014, because
they knew that they didn't want to make an attestation to the
Government based on information that was incomplete.
Chairman BRADY. So if I have asked that question of my
employer, they may not necessarily know what that means. So
Serco, the Government contractor hired to process all the paper
applications, resolve the conflicts of data, contact taxpayers
and all, if they ask an employer today, is the insurance you
offer John Q employee affordable, is the employer going to know
that answer?
Mr. ELLIS. Probably not, because that employer probably
doesn't have any more information than he did at any point this
year.
Chairman BRADY. So, the Government can supposedly check,
and they are doing this manually, so doubt they are doing much
checking right now, but can they check and get the wrong
answer?
Mr. ELLIS. Absolutely, they can get the wrong answer, and
they will.
Chairman BRADY. And then, who pays that back if the answer
is wrong? Is it the individual?
Mr. ELLIS. Ultimately the final liability lies with the
taxpayer himself or herself that has received this advanced
credit.
Chairman BRADY. Okay. Final point. Mr. Ellis, in his
testimony, Mr. Pollack stated the Affordable Care Act
envisioned a modern, streamlined application system for health
insurance and premium tax credits that would avoid the need for
people to bring shoeboxes full of documents into Government
offices. The Washington Post reports, piles of unprocessed
proof documents are sitting in a Federal contractor's Kentucky
office. Quite literally there are millions of documents, much
of which presumably came from someone's shoebox.
As the tax preparer, does the Affordable Care Act meet the
goal envisioned by Mr. Pollack, and do you expect it to be
overwhelmed by the contents of these shoeboxes next April?
Mr. ELLIS. I expect it to be overwhelming, in that
taxpayers will not know what they don't know when they walk
into a tax preparation meeting. I think tax preparers are going
to have to learn themselves what it is taxpayers are going to
need to bring. We are probably going to have to send them back
home, send them back to the Government agencies that maybe they
threw away forms from and come back and do follow-up meetings.
So it is going to be burdensome on the entire process next
filing season.
Chairman BRADY. The purpose of the hearing is not to
minimize the problem, it is to shine line on it. So both
individuals, employers, others who could be caught up in this
can take action now to try to prevent it, and the Federal
Government can actually do the job it was supposed to do under
this law.
So I now recognize the Health Subcommittee ranking member,
Dr. McDermott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
God, it sounds like the game is over, it is all--it is
hopeless.
Mr. Pollack, the ACA--doesn't the IRS have a process at the
end of the year that will take the income that you report that
year and match it up with what you said you were going to have?
Mr. POLLACK. Yes, of course they do and, you know, what is
really important in this inquiry is not to confuse two
different sets of things.
One is verification of information that looks
retrospectively, which is really the issue that is currently
being considered when they say there are a couple million
inconsistencies. The other is prospectively. When people
provide the best information which is accurate at the time they
provide that information, you and I don't know, they don't know
whether in the middle of the tax year their employer is going
to give them a bonus, whether their employer is going to
increase their salary, whether there is going to be a
difference in overtime pay. Those are the kinds of things that
will be checked later on at the end of the tax year. That does
not mean that the application that has been filed has current
inaccuracies.
I am concerned that the retrospective effort--I am sorry,
that the effort at trying to adjust tax credits in the
following year, which may have to look at things that nobody
predicted and that are not contrary to what the information
that was provided in good faith could result in a tax
liability, but that is very different than saying that there
are current inaccuracies.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It sounds to me like the testimony of some
of the other witnesses is fear mongering to make people afraid
to say, I think my income this year is going to be $30,000, and
therefore I would be eligible for X amount of subsidy, and to
take it, because it may turn out that something changes during
the year and suddenly they are faced then with, it was $40,000
you made, you owe $500 back. Is that a fair statement of what
the----
Mr. POLLACK. Yeah. There is no question that those who have
opposed the Affordable Care Act have tried to deflate the
number of people who apply for coverage and seek subsidies.
Thankfully, the Affordable Care Act did better than anyone
predicted. Over 8 million people actually enrolled in private
coverage, about 5 million people enrolled in Medicaid coverage,
another 1 million enrolled in Medicaid coverage in April after
the first enrollment period expired, but thankfully people,
when they get counseling--and they are receiving counselors.
There are navigators and assisters that are providing
information to people so that those who are unfamiliar with the
form and have difficulties with the form can fill it out
accurately.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And was there anything in that process when
they were filing that said, give us your income for 2 years ago
so we can match what you tell us with what you received 2 years
ago? Was that the earliest--the best data available to the IRS?
Mr. POLLACK. Yeah. Well, of course when we move away from
this shoebox mentality that we have had with social welfare
programs where people have to come in with W-2's and 1099's and
a host of other data, now we are doing it digitally, and what
we then do is verification digitally. What we can only do with
the best data that we have, and the best data that we have with
respect to income is income in the tax files of a couple years
ago.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So if I am making $30,000 now, maybe I was
making 27 when I--the last time, in 2012. So when I report
$30,000 as my income today, it will be matched against that 27
of 2012, and it will look like an inconsistency, right?
Mr. POLLACK. Yes and especially any inconsistency that
exceeds 10 percent, and that--from $2,700 to--$27,000 to
$30,000, that is an increase a little above 10 percent, that
will appear to be an inconsistency, but it doesn't mean that
the $30,000 response was inaccurate.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So what is being created here is the
impression that there are thousands of people sitting out there
saying, I think I will put my income down real low so I can get
a big subsidy and see how far I could get with it. Is that a
fair way to characterize?
Mr. POLLACK. Well, I don't think people----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. POLLACK. I don't think people are looking at it that
way.
Chairman BRADY. If you would like to answer in a later
question or submit it in writing, that would be perfect.
Mr. POLLACK. I would be happy to do so.
Chairman BRADY. Chairman Boustany.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Chairman Brady. The Oversight
Subcommittee of Ways and Means has had multiple hearings
looking at improper payments in various areas of the Tax Code,
and we have tried to focus on this nexus of complexity in the
Code and how it leads to improper payments, what is the IRS
trying to do to deal with all this, and the compliance burden.
We know that improper payments come about from identity theft,
honest miscalculation, or the government's inability to
administer credits properly. We know that refundable credits
are very difficult from an administration standpoint, and that
is based on multiple conversations I have had with the IRS
Commissioner, privately as well as in hearings. And I
referenced government-wide, just under 5 percent improper
payment rate. EITC is more problematic, and we still have not
gotten a full handle on this. But Mr. Holtz-Eakin and Mr.
Ellis, comment on the vulnerability that this premium tax
credit is going to pose in terms of creating significant
improper payment, and what can the Federal Government do
better, if we are going to have this system, and I would
submit, I think, the policy prescription is pretty flawed, and
we are seeing the implementation flawed as a result; but given
that scenario, what can we do?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I guess the thing I would like to
emphasize is that the reason I am concerned is because of the
EITC experience, and this committee has looked at it for a
number of years I know. There is no income attestation in the
EITC. This is not about inaccuracies in attestations. It is
about correctly delivering the right amount of a refundable
credit to a deserving individual, and we get that wrong at
alarmingly high rates, 1 in 5, hundreds of billions of dollars.
And that track record is the focus of my concern.
It can be improved by effective electronic information
sharing, and there is, you know, great efforts by the IRS to do
that. I think at the startup of the ACA, there is going to be
big problems there. We know that, in fact, the States have
simply not been asked to do that. If you are on a Federal
exchange, there was an attempt to check the records a few years
ago; but I think for a number of years, until the employers are
fully in the system and the matching and error checking is done
effectively, it is going to be impossible, regardless of
attestation, to simply line up the records and give the right
amount of money out, and that is my concern.
Chairman BOUSTANY. This level of complexity, especially
with the problems they are having with the employer mandate and
the reporting is significant. Ms. Mahoney laid out a number of
major concerns in that regard. And I know we have talked, I
think you have testified before about the additional $30
billion in regulatory compliance on taxpayers because of the
Affordable Care Act. How does this situation with the subsidy
eligibility process, employer reporting as we know the status
today, these requirements, how will they really add to the
compliance cost, and what is the effect going to be both on tax
compliance and economic growth?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I have been concerned for quite some time
that the Affordable Care Act does not cost you anything like a
pro-growth policy at a time when the U.S. is recovering poorly
from a very deep recession. And so as a whole, it goes in the
wrong direction. This is not what you would do to stimulate
economic growth. The particulars of the compliance costs are
quite troubling because the number is high, the paperwork and
self-reported compliance cost--these are all figures from the
agencies themselves--look like $300 billion over a 10-year
horizon. Much of it is going to be visited upon a very low
income population, the deserving targets of the exchange
subsidies. They are the ones who are going to have to report
every change in their personal lives quarterly to these
exchanges. They are the ones that are going to have to identify
the information statements that come in the mail, file new tax
forms that they did not previously have to file, do the
reconciliation, perhaps be denied their EITC until a second
filing confirms the appropriateness of their subsidy. Those
compliance costs are going to visit on that population, and
that is not going to improve their economic lives.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Pollack quoted Shakespeare earlier
to the tune of much about nothing, but I would submit that $220
billion over 10 years is significant; and this is just one
piece in a budget problem that we have. I would like you to
comment. I mean, this $220 billion estimate, give us a little
more insight into where that figure might have come from?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. How big is that? I mean, where it came
from, if we spend $1 trillion in exchange subsidies over the
next 10 years at roughly 20 to 22 percent inappropriate payment
rate, that is a $220 billion taxpayer finance mistake. And that
is not entirely hypothetical because we have had that
experience in the EITC, which is a smaller program. For
perspective, right now the gap between payments coming in,
payroll taxes and premiums, and spending going out in Medicare
is $300 billion. Crucial piece of the social safety net, $300
billion deficit every year, that is the size of the mistake
that we are potentially making that could be applied to
legitimate taxpayer goals like funding programs they want and
reducing taxes they don't think they need.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Do you think the error rate, we are
basically, for the sake of calculation, using a 20 to 22
percent error rate, do you think it is going to be higher? This
strikes me as being actually more complicated than the EITC and
suggests to me that the error rate could be higher.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, the EITC asks you to provide at the
individual level, household level, your income, family size,
the parameters of qualification for your credit. This is that,
plus the employer side on affordable insurance, and it is by
definition more complex and leads the situations that Mr. Ellis
talked about where you might decide something is unaffordable
for an individual, send them off to the exchanges, look at the
family unit as a whole, decide it was affordable, they got the
subsidies inappropriately. They are now in a very bad position
of owing the entire amount back, perhaps with quite large
penalties. It is going to be difficult to operate effectively.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Mahoney, do you want to add anything
to this? You focused a little bit on the employer reporting
requirements and the complexity there. Is there anything that
you would like to add?
Ms. MAHONEY. I think that one thing to consider is that
businesses are very different in terms of their population of
employees, in terms of the size of their company, in terms of
whether they self-insure or do not self-insure. And so one of
the things that we would like to continue to see is flexibility
in terms of what compliance means for the reporting
requirements because there are so many different types of
businesses and different types of employees with variable
hourly employees as opposed to seasonal employees as opposed to
a population that you anticipate their hours very clearly. So I
think that adds a huge layer for the employer.
Chairman BOUSTANY. To put all this back into perspective,
some very disturbing trends have already emerged, and as a
physician, I know what the impact of this will truly be. We are
now seeing more people in the emergency rooms across the
country. This means that a lot of people who need medical care
are getting their first line care in the emergency room where
it is more expensive, typically later in the process, and it is
certainly not the best way to establish a high-quality doctor-
patient relationship. I don't think this was the intent of this
law, but this is the consequence of a flawed policy. With that,
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Chairman. Ranking Member Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Pollack. It is good to see you again. Thank
you for being here. Thank you for continuing to fight the good
fight. Almost 50 years ago you were down in Mississippi in the
heart of the Delta trying to help people get registered to
vote. Fifty years later you are still fighting, standing up for
what is fair. Just thank you for being here. As you travel
around the country, what do you see? What do you hear about the
Affordable Care Act? What are the American people saying about
it? And I want you to take your time, and if you want to
respond to anything, I want you to use my 5 minutes to say what
you want to say.
Mr. POLLACK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Lewis. You know, the
last Census Bureau report tells us something that is truly
extraordinary. What the Census Bureau reports said was that
there were 48 million people in our Nation who are uninsured.
You know, it is hard to put your arms around that number, 48
million. So think about it this way: Take the entire population
of Oregon, and then Oklahoma, and then Iowa, and New Mexico,
and Mississippi and Utah, Nebraska, Montana, North Dakota,
South Dakota, Connecticut, Arkansas, Kansas, Nevada, West
Virginia, Idaho, Hawaii, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
Delaware, Alaska, Vermont, and Wyoming, 24 States, and you
aggregate the population together and throw in the District of
Columbia, and you have fewer than 48 million people.
What the Affordable Care Act does is it changes that, and
we have seen some significant improvements already. For
example, we just learned from the Gallup Survey that the number
of people who are uninsured has reduced very significantly, and
that is very important. But the Affordable Care Act is doing a
whole lot more. It is providing peace of mind to people, people
who had preexisting health conditions like asthma or diabetes
or high blood pressure or history of cancer, they no longer
have to worry whether they can get health insurance from an
insurance company. Young adults who can't afford insurance are
now getting coverage, over 3 million of them, through their
parents' policy. And a lot of people who could never afford
health insurance before are now receiving significant subsidies
that makes premiums affordable and that make out-of-pocket
costs affordable. And community health centers are receiving
more money to serve more people.
So the Affordable Care Act has taken some very important
steps that are long overdue, and in the process, it is also
doing something about health care costs that Mr. McDermott
talked about. It is aligning payments so we pay for quality
rather than quantity of care. It is improving quality
effectiveness research to make sure that the care we get is the
best care possible. It is improving coordination of care. Those
are all very important steps, so I am really thankful that the
Affordable Care Act, which is by no means perfect, but it is an
extraordinary step in the right direction.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can't say what I
want to say. You know, defenders of the President's health care
law claim the problems we are talking about today are
predictable challenges in implementing new programs, the
administration is working out the kinks and the problems will
go away. I don't think that is true, is it? Mr. Holtz-Eakin,
are the problems of income reconciliation, unexpected tax debt
or potential waste, fraud, and abuse issues of implementation,
or do they go to the very core of how this law operates?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. As I said in my opening statement, I think
there are lots of issues that will arise in the first filing
season due to the deferral and waiving of some of the
provisions, but the fundamental issue is much like the EITC and
other programs and will not disappear. It is a problem in the
design.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, I guess we have to wait and see. Mr.
Ellis, as a tax preparer, what are your biggest concerns about
the 2015 tax filing season?
Mr. ELLIS. My biggest concern is that there is a lack of
education that is happening on both the preparer side and on
the taxpayer side, that there is going to be a completely
different dynamic in the tax interview for many of these
clients next spring than we have had up until this point. We
are going to have an added dimension of having to deal with
this, and really everyone I think is going to be caught flat-
footed in this. Taxpayers are not going to expect it coming.
They, frankly, come in with a big pile of paper and have no
idea what they are bringing to a tax meeting. That's the honest
truth. This will simply be added to that pile.
They won't be prepared to answer the type of questions that
we are going to have to ask as tax preparers, tax preparers
having to deal with a completely new set of forms and a
completely new process to interview taxpayers are also ill-
prepared for this.
So my biggest concern is that we are going to have a lack
of information all around, and then that doesn't even bring
into account the agency, the IRS, and their ability to educate
both taxpayers and preparers in that regard.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, and they are going to be unable to
fathom all the facets of this law I think ultimately. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
want to thank the witnesses. You know, I was in church Sunday,
and I was kind of touched with the message that the pastor
gave, and he was trying to figure out why it is that sometimes
we see things and just refuse to believe it, that he was
pushing the fact that what the eyes see, the heart must
believe. And so it amazes me that we continue to hear that ACA
is not working when we can see, if we put in perspective, more
than 8 million people have marketplace health insurance plans,
including more than 6 million who are receiving tax credits.
Approximately 6 million lower wage individuals have enrolled in
Medicaid coverage, 6 million young adults have been able to
stay on their parents' health plan; 129 million Americans with
preexisting conditions, including 17 million children, can no
longer be denied coverage or charged higher premiums because of
their conditions; and more than 100 million Americans no longer
have a dollar limit on their coverage, providing them and their
families with peace of mind that they will not go bankrupt if
they are diagnosed with an expensive disease.
The bottom line is that the ACA helps people with
preexisting conditions, those who are between jobs wanting to
become self-employed, and obviously this is a tremendous amount
of improvement.
Mr. Pollack, you have indicated that as you have talked to
people and get the impressions from them how they see this, if
they see it one way, I am wondering, why do so many other
people seem to see it another way? Or if their hearts just
refuse to believe what their eyes see. How would you respond to
that?
Mr. POLLACK. I think there are three words that really
reflect what has happened to people who are gaining coverage
through the Affordable Care Act. Those three words are "peace
of mind." People now know that when they or a family member
need care, they will be able to receive it, and I think that if
you take a look at the surveys of those people who have
enrolled, you will find that by an extraordinary margin, people
are very happy with that. And I think as more people get
enrolled, and more people will get enrolled over the course of
the next year and the following year, I think you are going to
see that the American public understands that the Affordable
Care Act provides a very significant contribution to the
improvement of America's health care system. It is by no means
perfect, and we are still going to have to make some changes to
it, but it is a big step in a positive direction.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, and I just hope that their
hearts will catch up to their eyes, and they too will see that
the Affordable Care Act is what America needs, and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mrs. BLACK. [Presiding.] Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I
noticed the first point that you made in your opening remarks I
thought was interesting, and you cited the complexity of the
Affordable Care Act, and I want to follow up on that. You know,
one of the reasons that we have this hearing today is because
it is so complicated that the administration is calling upon an
honor system that just basically says, you know, you all just
report in, and we will attribute, give that the imprimatur of
actuality on it. We will just assume that what you say is true
because it is so big and it is so complex and it is so
difficult that the administration can't deal with it. We know
that the Congressional Budget Office recently came out, and
they said, in part, that some of these elements of the
Affordable Care Act are so complicated and so difficult to
discern that the Congressional Budget Office can't get its arms
around the totality of this impact, and not to indict the CBO,
they are just saying this is the reality, and the footnote in
part says that CBO and Joint Committee on Taxation can no
longer determine exactly how the provisions of the ACA that are
not related to the expansion of health insurance coverage have
affected their projections of direct spending and revenues.
Then it goes on, isolating the incremental effects of those
provisions on previously existing programs and revenues 4 years
after enactment of the ACA is not possible.
In other words, it is so big and it is so complicated and
it is so overwhelming that a few months ago they were able to
estimate that the 10-year cost was $1.3 trillion, and now they
have said it is too big, there is no way to get our heads
around this.
One of the remedies, I believe, and I am interested in your
insight in this, is legislation that I have introduced along
with 80 Members of the House calling for a Special Inspector
General to monitor the Affordable Care Act. The thinking is
this incredibly complicated piece of legislation that
implicitly is so complicated that the administration can't get
its heads around it is implementing the honor system.
Explicitly, the Congressional Budget Office says it is so
big and complicated, we can't get our heads around this thing,
that I think it is time for us to enact similar to what
happened with the Troubled Asset Recovery Program, similar to
Inspectors General on Iraq and Afghanistan, and an overall
Inspector General to get the information to report back and to
get our arms around these big questions. Can you give us any
insight or thoughts you have, particularly on a large Inspector
General and how the need for that? Am I overstating this? Am I
overcharacterizing it? How would you think of that.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, first of all, I would, you know,
issue the caveat that I haven't read your bill.
Mr. ROSKAM. It is really good reading. You would love it.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I am remiss, I know I should have. The
Inspector Generals have been very valuable additions to
agencies, they have, and I think the track record of their
bringing to light inefficiencies, outright malfeasance, things
like that is superb. What is unique about this law is really
its breadth, the number of agencies it encompasses. I wouldn't
even be able to list them all. You have got DHS, IRS, Treasury,
you have got HHS, you have got the Social Security
Administration, the list goes on. Each of the IGs in those
agencies is probably very good and looking as carefully as they
can at the operations, but they are not going to see the big
picture, they are not going to ask the question, are we seeing
an efficient, good-faith implementation of the law that the
Congress passed and the President signed. It makes sense to me
to put someone in that position, particularly for such a very,
very large amount of money. This is an extraordinarily
important and large program. It makes perfect sense from that
perspective.
Mr. ROSKAM. Let me just direct you specifically to three
questions that we prepared in advance. Is there any entity
today that could give us an accurate report of how taxpayer
dollars are being spent for this law across the entire Federal
Government, the interactions with State government and the
private sector?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. No.
Mr. ROSKAM. Do you agree that SIGMA would bring, that is
this Special Inspector General Monitoring the Affordable Care
Act, as you have come to understand it would bring much needed
clarity to the law that has been haphazardly implemented, and
where there are strong concerns about waste, fraud, and abuse?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Yes, because the implementation is now
more important than the law. It has been so uneven.
Mr. ROSKAM. And regardless of someone's perspective on the
Affordable Care Act, isn't it a rational thing to say more
information as it relates to the implementation of the law is a
better thing?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Absolutely.
Mr. ROSKAM. I yield back.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Smith, is
recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Ellis, can you
explain the difference between inconsistencies, that is, the
difference between information entered on an application and
government records, and then ineligibility based on an offer of
affordable employer-sponsored insurance? Now, in the case of
inconsistency the applicant will receive a notice of
inconsistency; is that correct?
Mr. ELLIS. That is correct.
Mr. SMITH. And then they will have the opportunity to
rectify those inconsistencies, would that be accurate?
Mr. ELLIS. That is accurate.
Mr. SMITH. So in the case of an applicant, I would say
someone acting in good faith who receives a tax credit not
realizing or fully understanding they are ineligible because
they or a family member were offered employer-sponsored
coverage will receive an inconsistency notice. What will they
owe when the error is identified?
Mr. ELLIS. If the taxpayer in question was eligible for
affordable employer-provided insurance, they would owe the
entirety of their advance tax credit back. If they were simply
given an overage, they would owe back the extra amount
presuming that they make more than a certain amount of income
as set in law by statute.
Mr. SMITH. Now, if they did not have a refund coming, what
would happen in that case? In that case they would have a
straight liability to the IRS. They would have to do a payment.
That payment could potentially have interest, and also if
payment does not happen, the liens and levies that were
discussed earlier could also come into play.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Mr. Pollack, would you agree with that
analysis?
Mr. POLLACK. Yes, I do.
Mr. SMITH. So that a taxpayer acting in good faith could
see a lien coming as a result of the complexities of the Tax
Code?
Mr. POLLACK. Is that a hypothetical potential? Of course
there is. But the real issue here is really not the error
scenario that we are focusing on right now. The real potential
is for liability is not significantly in errors as we talked
about errors before. It is because when people honestly,
accurately portray their current circumstances, and they
receive a tax credit subsidy accordingly, where the potential
for liability is significant is that despite the fact that the
response was honest and accurate, things change over the course
of the year. Someone may have gotten a bonus in terms of their
compensation. They may have received an increase in their
salary. They may have had more overtime than they had expected.
There are a variety of factors like that which mean that
the accurate, not error, information provided by an individual
changes over the course of that year. And that will result in a
potential liability. That is what I think may very well happen
in April of 2015. I do not believe that we are going to see
liability to any significant degree because of errors as we
have been talking about it in this hearing. It is what happens
prospectively that was unpredictable, rather what happened
retrospectively that was reported inaccurately.
Mr. SMITH. My concern is that the Tax Code was already very
complicated before we added more complications as a result of
this healthcare issue, and my concern is that a taxpayer acting
in good faith and wishing to do the right thing could see a
pretty significant penalty. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman yields back. The lady from
California, Ms. Sanchez, is recognized.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you. I want to thank our chairmen and
our ranking members for this hearing. I want to begin by
pointing out that the Affordable Care Act is working. Gallup
recently found that the percentage of uninsured Americans has
dropped to 13.4 percent, which is the lowest recorded rate
ever. More than 8 million people have signed up for exchange
plans, with 6.8 million of those receiving an average tax
credit of $4,400 to provide the peace of mind of having health
insurance, many for the first time.
Another 6 million have enrolled in Medicaid thanks to the
ACA's Medicaid expansion, including 1.4 million people
enrolling in California's medical system, and I could go on and
on with numbers, but the bottom line is that the ACA is helping
people, people with preexisting conditions, people between jobs
and many, many others.
Now is the law perfect? Well, no law is, but a tremendous
improvement over the discriminatory, dysfunctional, and
irrational market that existed prior to its enactment, it is
doing much better. And we can agree that some of the issues
that HealthCare.gov have encountered are unacceptable. However,
it is not the first time that we have seen a troubled rollout.
The implementation of Medicare Part D was riddled with false
starts and complaints, but we didn't defund it and we didn't
repeal it. We didn't throw our hands up in the air and woe is
me because it is complex or it is a little bit difficult or it
could change.
So let's just all stop kidding ourselves and admit that
there will be glitches with the ACA, but if we spend our time
working together to ensure that the law worked, maybe we could
make it easier for families to buy affordable health insurance.
But the hearing today unfortunately does very little to
accomplish that goal. It is clear that this hearing is just
another attempt to bash the ACA and play politics with
Americans' livelihoods.
Like most Republican hearings we have had recently, this is
meant to produce a lot of noise and some crocodile tears but
very few solutions moving forward. The majority is playing up a
false sense of populism and claims that they are worried about
people owing a huge tax bill to the IRS during the 2015 filing
season. Well, I think that is ironic given that the Republicans
eliminated improvements made by Democrats, and they want
Secretary Lew to halt all tax credits that make health
insurance more affordable.
I think it is unconscionable, and that kind of demand
demonstrates that Republicans are out of touch with everyday
American families. Life is complicated, yes. And it is full of
surprises. People get new jobs, they get married, they have
children, they move from State to State. The verification
system known as true-up ensures that tax credits accurately
reflect the changing nature of people's lives, and I am one of
those examples.
I have a biological son and I have stepchildren. I come
from an immigrant family, and I use an accent over my last
name. And my life, like so many southern Californians, could be
considered complicated, but the ACA will recognize those
complexities through the verification process during next
year's tax filing season. HHS has been transparent about the
process and has tried to be proactive in its outreach. We
shouldn't deny Americans the assistance they need to buy
affordable health care just weeks after they have received it.
So if we spent a little more time really caring about the needs
of real people instead of trying to tear down the law and
defund it or repeal it, we might be able to work together in a
constructive way, in a bipartisan way, to help ensure that
Americans receive quality, affordable health insurance, and I
am sorry for stepping on my soap box just now, but I felt it
was important to point that out through this entire hearing.
What I would like to do is I would like to ask Mr. Pollack
what happens if we repeal or defund the Affordable Care Act as
Republicans have suggested time and time again? What happens?
Mr. POLLACK. Ms. Sanchez, I don't think we are going to
repeal the Affordable Care Act. We are not going to defund the
Affordable Care Act. There are 8 million people who are now
receiving subsidies, who are receiving coverage. Most of them,
85 percent are receiving subsidies. Five million people are
receiving coverage through the Medicaid program, or CHIP. Three
million kids are getting coverage through their parents'
policies. We are going to see those numbers increase
substantially. I don't think that this Congress, I don't think
any Congress is going to take away these benefits that are so
important that make health coverage affordable for the first
time.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Let me ask you what I hope is a constructive
question, which is how can we work to improve the application
process for immigrant families in particular?
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Pollack, the lady's time is expired. We
will ask that you submit the answer to this question in
writing. Thank you.
The gentlelady from Kansas, Ms. Jenkins, is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing and thank you all for joining us today. A
month ago, our Oversight Subcommittee was able to host IRS
Commissioner Koskinen at a hearing on the IRS filing season. At
that hearing, I asked Mr. Koskinen about the administration of
the Affordable Care Act's premium tax credit reconciliation
process. As we have already covered at today's hearing, the
ACA's premium tax subsidy will be based on folks' income
estimates, and these estimates will often use the prior year's
tax returns. Taxpayers will eventually have to reconcile the
premium subsidies they received with the amounts they were
eligible to receive based on their actual income. In many
cases, whether it is due to a salary increase, move across
State lines, or other change in situation, they could find
themselves owing thousands of dollars back to the IRS.
Recently CMS data indicated that 1.2 million enrollees had
discrepancies related to income, and this is before we begin to
factor in life changes that will occur throughout this year. I
have asked Mr. Koskinen if he believes that taxpayers fully
understand the risk that comes with failure to report a life
change to the exchange and how they will handle the
reconciliation process. He responded that the IRS is concerned
that taxpayers need to understand the risk, and they are
beginning to publicize this so that taxpayers have various
modes of outreach, including their Web site and that he hopes
that taxpayers will notify the exchange so that they will not
be surprised.
Mr. Ellis and Mr. Skarlatos, would you be willing to answer
a few questions for me? Do you think that taxpayers are at all
aware of their obligation to notify the exchange with their
good news of getting a raise or marriage throughout the year,
and do you believe that taxpayers understand their risk of
failing to do so? Mr. Ellis.
Mr. ELLIS. No. Because if there is one constant in the tax
preparation industry, it is that people forget about the IRS as
quickly as they can once they file their tax return, and they
don't think about it again until the next January.
Ms. JENKINS. Mr. Skarlatos.
Mr. SKARLATOS. I don't think taxpayers are aware. I think
that is what tax preparers should be doing with them. They
should be educating them as much as they can.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you. Do you believe the IRS'
efforts to publicize this information, either through a YouTube
account or their Website, will make taxpayers understand their
obligation?
Mr. ELLIS. That requires taxpayers to have the interest to
go to IRS.gov or to be recipients of the information in some
other way that they would actually see it. Based on my
experience with real world people that actually file their
taxes, I think that is incredibly unlikely.
Mr. SKARLATOS. I agree. I think it is unlikely. I think the
burden again should be on the tax return preparers to educate
the taxpayers. Ms. Jenkins. And as someone who has prepared tax
returns and has had to deliver bad news to taxpayers regarding
refunds, are you concerned the tax preparers will be the real
frontline of taxpayer education at a time when it is too late.
Mr. ELLIS. There is a joke inside the tax preparer world
that it is always the taxpayer's fault when you are in a
meeting with a client, and I think that is probably going to be
exacerbated here. I think the tax preparers themselves are
going to be very unprepared for this. They are going to be
talking to people who make a modest amount of income by
definition. The 400 percent of Federal poverty line is not a
very high level of income. These are not people that have a lot
of liquidity to be able to deal with surprises. So, yes, I
think it will be very tense, those conversations between
preparers and clients.
Mr. SKARLATOS. I agree. The Tax Code is very complex. The
tax return preparers are the gatekeepers to the system, and it
will be difficult for them to educate taxpayers in this way,
but it is really the only way it can be done.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Paulsen from Minnesota, you are recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you also for
presiding over the hearing today.
Just to recap, when the President's health law was passed
back in 2010, the law called for verifying individuals' income
in order to determine if they are eligible to receive a
subsidy. The administration said we are not going to enforce
that provision. So Congress moves in, re-passes legislation,
the President signs into law that includes the provision once
again that we require income verification. But then today now,
we know that there are over 2 million people of the 8 million
that are in the exchanges, these applicants, have unresolved
inconsistencies. So that means 25 percent of applicants in the
exchanges had discrepancies. This isn't a glitch. This is
clearly a systemic issue, and so the May 17 Washington Post
report showing that as many as 1.5 million people; there are
cases of significant inaccurate subsidy payments now due to
incorrect income data.
In other words, there is no verification resulting in
millions of taxpayers, families being on the hook potentially
for billions of dollars in waste and fraud, and some of those
cases bear out, I think, with Mr. Holtz-Eakin had mentioned
earlier in terms of the EITC. So we are no longer talking about
hypothetical problems regarding the new healthcare law. We are
talking about real risks that are in place now, and this harm
is happening as we speak, and during next year's tax filing
season millions of Americans are going to find out that they
owe the IRS money because their premium credits were paid
incorrectly.
And the IRS and the administration in general is going to
have to face a choice. One, they can go after innocent
taxpayers creating financial hardship and confusion for those
millions of families; or two, just and choose to once again
ignore the law and force other taxpayers to cover billions of
dollars in excess premium credit payments. Those are both very,
very bad choices, and it didn't have to be that way. That is
what comes when you pass just a one-sided partisan law without
bipartisan buy in. Mr. Ellis, is this really how the law was
supposed to operate?
Mr. ELLIS. Well, if you look at the actual letter of the
law, it is operating the way it is supposed to operate. That
speaks more to think the process not having been thought
through properly when the law was drafted. As you point out, if
the IRS implements the law as written, it is going to face that
very difficult choice between going after people who have very
modest levels of income and savings in order to pay this
overage or simply ignoring their mandate to carry out the laws
as written by the Congress.
Mr. PAULSEN. Let me just follow up because as a tax
preparer, you know what questions to ask when people seek your
services. But what about the people who don't seek your
services? Typically how are they going to know? How are they
going to know what they are responsible for as a part of
verification, and aren't those typically lower income Americans
or individuals or families that aren't seeking your services
that are going to be trapped in this situation?
Mr. ELLIS. Well, by definition if you look at the upper
band of who is going to be affected by this, people that are
receiving premium credits at all, 400 percent of the Federal
poverty line is about $44,000 for a single person. It is about
$90,000 for a family of four. So it is everybody between that
and below all the way down to Medicaid eligibility. So many of
those people are not today using tax preparers. They will
continue to file their tax returns or not as they have up until
the past. When they are going to find out about it is when they
are going to get a notice of deficiency from the IRS after they
file.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I just want to give you a
chance to respond too real quick maybe to that or a couple of
those points if you could.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I think that's exactly right, and my
concern is that for this population, they are going to be in
uncharted waters. There is a question about whether some of the
State exchanges will be able to get the information statements
to the recipients, their subsidy payments. Once people receive
it, will they know to hold on to it, this is something they
need or it was about that health thing they already did. Do
they know to go to a preparer and thus send a reconciliation
form? If they don't send in a reconciliation form, my
understanding is the IRS is simply going to reject the tax
return and tell them to start over. That will be a shocker,
particularly if they are used to getting an EITC. It can be a
bumpy ride in 2015.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
New York, Mr. Crowley, is recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Madam Chair. It is really a
remarkable hearing today. It is unbelievable in many respects
to me that my colleagues are willing to say and do just about
anything to tarnish the Affordable Care Act and undermine
access to health care in this country. Let me be very clear
about a few things: One, the vast majority of what we are
talking about when we hear inconsistency isn't fraud. It isn't
malicious or a sign of anything bigger. These are expected,
anticipated issues that happen with any Federal program
checking various items of data.
Two, there is, in fact, a verification system. It happens
now as we speak and it is clearing the majority of
inconsistencies. And three, there was a backup verification
process that happens at the next tax filing when we know what a
person's actual income was for that filing year. This
reconciliation process is necessary and helpful because
people's incomes, as has been stated over and over again, and
family circumstances change over the course of a year,
hopefully for the better. Some people maybe didn't get all the
tax credits that they were entitled to, in fact. But what's
shocking to me is all the fake outrage from my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle about this reconciliation process
when they have voted time and again to make this process harder
on working families.
After passage of the Affordable Care Act, Democrats worked
to improve this reconciliation process, so families wouldn't
see their income taxes raised if they received even a small
end-of-the-year bonus. But opponents of this law in their
unending zeal to undermine the Affordable Care Act and to scare
away people from accessing health insurance went back to this
again and again to undo all the improvements we made and
actually made it worse than before.
I guess using Speaker Boehner's metric of judging this
majority based on what the undo rather than what they do, they
consider what they have done a success.
And that is not even enough for them. Twice more, they put
forward proposals to completely repeal all protections for
families to repay tax credits that turned out to be more than
they needed. So when you hear them now crying crocodile tears
about the burden on people to pay back some or all of their tax
credits, remember that they themselves have themselves to thank
for increasing this tax burden.
Madam Chairlady, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record each of these Republican attempts to
force a tax increase on working families, H.R. 4, H.R. 5652,
and H.R. 436.
Mrs. BLACK. Without objection.
[The documents follow: Rep. Joseph Crowley 1, Joseph
Crowley 2, Joseph Crowley 3]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. CROWLEY. We tried to get our colleagues on the other
side of the aisle to see what they were doing. We told them it
was a tax on working families. Mr. Ellis, even your boss,
Grover Norquist, admitted as much in his letter he sent to
Chairman Camp back in 2011, calling this a gross tax increase
but then saying never mind. It is okay because it is tucked
into a bigger bill. Every time, and they brought it back up
repeatedly. We asked them to not put this burden on American
families. What did we hear in response? Crickets. We heard
nothing. Last summer right around the point that these same
colleagues were beginning to change their tune to the so-called
sympathy that is on display today, one of my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle said that they had been told, and I
quote, in a pretty loud tone that this would be a tax increase.
I think that was aimed at me. I, from time to time, use a
bellowing Queens accent, and I am proud of it. Because you know
what I will say is this; I will speak up in a pretty loud tone
when my constituents and hardworking Americans across the
country are being targeted for baseless attacks.
Mr. Ellis, I see that you are concerned about the, quote,
liability the taxpayer will have at the time of tax filing. I
share your concern, and that is why each of the numerous times
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle tried to scale
back or remove altogether protections for working families on
how much they would have to pay back, I tried to stop it. Did
your organization ever raise this concern to members of the
majority? No. In fact, I have a letter here from your boss, as
I mentioned earlier, to Mr. Camp reassuring him that your
organization was okay with raising taxes on families as long as
they also cut taxes and created loopholes for businesses. Your
boss may be okay with raising taxes on individuals to cut them
for businesses and industry, but my constituents in Queens and
in the Bronx are not okay with that. But maybe I am just using
too loud a tone, and I yield back, Madam Chair.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
New York, Mr. Reed, is recognized.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Madam Chair. And being from New York,
I don't share that Queens accent. I am from the real part of
New York, the country lawyer section of New York. I thank the
gentlemen, Mr. Crowley, from New York. His friendship has
always been appreciated. I just want to bring this down to day-
to-day folks, being that country lawyer from western New York
and being an area that is very rural, and I can tell you I
remember first getting out of college, getting out of law
school, being with my wife, filling out my returns, filling out
my tax returns, and, you know, I got a refund check. And like
millions of Americans, you know, I got that refund check, and
we did a little something with it. My wife and I would go on a
trip for the weekend. We would maybe buy something, maybe a new
stove or something like that that we needed around the house.
Just so I clearly understand what is going to happen here,
and I get a lot of Americans aren't going to do this
intentionally. It is not going to be done fraudulently. What is
going to happen is someone is going to misreport their income,
they will go to fill out their return, their 1040EZ just like I
did with my wife, and they are going to get a notice saying you
know what, that refund check that you thought you were going to
be able to rely on that millions of Americans have grown
accustomed to getting every year, they are not going to get it.
Is that correct, Mr. Ellis?
Mr. ELLIS. It will at least be smaller because they are
going to have to somehow some way, assuming their income is
over a certain level, pay back any overage, yeah.
Mr. REED. So they get an excess credit, tax credit, premium
support payment, something of that nature, and that is equal to
the calculated refund that they would typically get in their
tax refund check; they are not going to get that check. Is that
fair to say?
Mr. ELLIS. Yes.
Mr. REED. That is going to happen. And that is where, Mr.
Pollack, with all due respect, when you say this is much about
nothing, I remember those days. I remember those days. And I
know millions of Americans are going to be looking at that
saying wait a second. I was going to take my kids on a
vacation. I was going to take them maybe to the zoo or
something like that and spend a weekend with their families.
You say, you know, to us this is much about nothing.
Mr. POLLACK. That's not what I said.
Mr. REED. That was your testimony.
Mr. POLLACK. What I said, Mr. Reed--let's get it correct.
What I said, Mr. Reed, is that the number of inaccuracies are
going to be small, and that is much about very little. I didn't
say----
Mr. REED. Sir, with all due respect, I don't appreciate you
pointing at me, and I will tell you, you said much about
nothing.
Mr. POLLACK. But you are misquoting what I was referring
to.
Mr. REED. Why aren't we telling them about it? No one wants
to talk about this. All my colleagues on the other side, if you
want to stand with the law, I stand for the repeal of the law.
I disagree with it. Doesn't mean I don't care about Americans.
I care about Americans. That is why I ran for this job. That is
why I am doing this. If they want to stand with this law, why
don't you tell Americans what is coming. Why don't you tell
them what is coming down the pipeline. What is coming down the
pipeline is Americans don't understand what this is going to do
to them. What is going to happen in 2015, when they get that
notice from the IRS? Are they going to say, oh, I should have
seen that coming?
This is what my home State of New York did. The health
exchange circulated a notice saying during the following year's
tax season you are expected to pay back whatever actual amount
you took in the form of health insurance subsidies that you
weren't eligible for after your income change. Depending on
your situation, this can be a huge amount of money. That is
like buried on the health exchange. I can tell you, Americans
are working hard, just like me and my wife were. So is this the
best that we can do to warn Americans as to what is coming? Mr.
Holtz-Eakin, I have a lot of respect for you. Is this the best
we can do?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. No. I think there is a real place for an
IRS taxpayer advocation effort in this regard. I think it has
not happened so far and it would be time to get going.
Mr. REED. I have to also make a comment in response to my
colleague from New York, that somehow by waiving this
overpayment, and that is essentially what he is talking about.
He is just saying we are going to just waive it. You don't have
to pay it back. What kind of responsible leadership is that?
They have developed a system. They have stood by a law that is
potentially going to overpay taxpayer dollars to people, and
the best solution they can offer is, well, what we are going to
say is don't worry about paying it back. Well, someone's got to
pay it. That is one of the things I am frustrated in
Washington, D.C., about. This is taxpayer dollars. It is not
free money. This is their money. Somehow it is their money that
they can say wave their magic wand and say we are just not
going to pay it back. We are going to waive it. Is that the
responsible, sensible solution that you would recommend us to
pursue when we deal with this situation in 2015, Mr. Holtz-
Eakin?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Absolutely not.
Mr. REED. That is why I am frustrated. I am frustrated, and
this isn't much about nothing. This is a real problem. I am
interested in solutions, but I am interested in responsible
solutions that stand up for the hardworking taxpayer and not
just say don't worry about it. We are not going to pay it back
because your taxpayers are going pay it back. With that I yield
back.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman's time is expired. The gentleman
from Georgia, Mr. Price, is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I want to commend
these two subcommittees and the committee for holding this
hearing. I want to thank the witnesses, and I apologize for not
being here earlier. I had a conflicting hearing. I want to draw
attention to what title of this hearing is: Verification System
For Income and Eligibility For Tax Credits Under the
President's Healthcare Law. We are not talking about the health
consequences of the healthcare law. As a physician we can go on
and on about that. This is about the financial aspect of the
healthcare law to real people. I want to associate myself with
Mr. Reed's remarks. This is real stuff for real people. We are
going to be harmed in big, big ways. Not just on the healthcare
side, but on the financial side personally as well.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I had a chance to read part of your
testimony, and in your testimony you likened the ACA premium
tax credits to the EITC, Earned Income Tax Credit. I wonder if
you would explain how the two are the same and how the two are
dissimilar?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. As I mentioned earlier, the EITC is a
refundable credit, as are the premium tax credits from the ACA.
They are based on family size and earnings in the same way that
the ACA has subsidies up to 400 percent of the Federal poverty
line, different amount, bigger for lower income individuals.
The key difference is that is where the EITC stops. It is based
strictly on the household's tax return, and you could do it
based on that information. To fully implement the ACA, you need
to have employer information as well, particularly the offer of
affordable insurance or not, the value of that insurance, and
its characteristics. It is a much more complicated system than
the EITC for that reason. The matching that will go into
multiple employers during a single year, different work hours,
all of that complexity will become clear as time passes.
Mr. PRICE. And the error rate in the EITC is, I think, 1 in
5, or about 20 percent?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. In the ballpark of 20, 23 percent,
somewhere in that range.
Mr. PRICE. So you have got a system that is much more
complicated than the EITC. We already see how the Federal
Government is doing on an error rate for the EITC, which is a
simpler system at 20 percent; so what would you estimate the
error rate to be for this verification system?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. We have no track record, so I think it is
always important to be conservative. So if you apply the 20-odd
percent to the $700 trillion of insurance subsidies, you are
looking at $200 billion, something in that range.
Mr. PRICE. Hundreds of billions of dollars.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. And, of course, the systems are set up already
to verify the income eligibility and the like, are they not, or
the ACA, the subsidies?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. No.
Mr. PRICE. The systems aren't set up?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. No, sir.
Mr. PRICE. So we have already started this program. We have
got an error rate on a program that is similar in some ways of
20 percent; and the systems aren't even set up to provide the
income and eligibility verification?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Again, I think there is going to be two
very big sets of problems that are different. One is the
fundamental character of the system, which we have talked
about. The second is next year, and the startup when
information sharing is incomplete, the employers are not yet
required to provide information, and the taxpayers are not yet
understanding their obligations under the new law.
Mr. PRICE. So let me take it in a little different
direction, if I may. I serve on the Budget Committee as well.
This appears to be a huge potential liability to the budget
itself, does it not?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. So the amount of money that is projected to have
been required to be spent by the American taxpayers to fund
this program may, in fact, be expanding significantly; is that
correct?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. That is a concern, yes, sir.
Mr. PRICE. And any quantification of that? Any way to know
how much that would be?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, I mean, the 20 percent error rate is
the best estimate that we have at the moment. From your time on
the Budget Committee you know that in systems of this type, and
the two other great examples are the EITC and then in Medicare
where we have set up a system of pay and then go find
inappropriate payments. Those estimates are on the order of 10
percent, 60, $80 billion a year. So $800 billion over 10 years.
You start adding up $800 billion there, $200 billion here,
another, you know, $100 billion out of EITC, you can make
significant progress on some of our problems.
Mr. PRICE. So at a time when we continue to run significant
deficits, at a time when we have an overall debt for the
country of over $17.5 trillion, the spending increases in
Washington continue, we have got a program in front of us where
we don't even have the systems in place that will continue to
add to the national debt?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. The decision has been made to add to the
national debt. My hope is that we would run it efficiently
enough to keep it as small as possible.
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Ellis and Mr. Skarlatos, I wonder if in my
brief seconds remaining, what tools does the IRS have to
provide income and eligibility verification set up right now
for this, Mr. Ellis?
Mr. ELLIS. That is still not clear at this point in the
middle part of the year. To the extent that they do it
retroactively, it is going to have to use the W-2 system, and
that is going to have to be a lag system because as you know
that goes to the Social Security Administration first. So that
remains to be seen.
Mr. SKARLATOS. I am not aware of any other tools, sir.
Mr. PRICE. Sounds like a real headache, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Mrs. BLACK. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Pascrell
from New Jersey is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Now here is the real headache. Let me tell
you what the real headache is. You are sitting over there and
talking about taxpayers and liability when you just voted on
$600 billion, $600 billion in tax relief which is unpaid for.
You got a problem. You got a serious problem, and it is not
just inconsistency. So I have heard the term ``inconsistency,''
and I have heard the term ``premium tax credits'' over and over
again. Mr. Pollack, you have some friends here. I have heard
that over and over again. Here is the problem. Flashback like
they do on television at a sporting event, flashback 10 years
ago. The Prescription Drug Bill. Do you remember that, Mr.
Pollack?
Mr. POLLACK. I do.
Mr. PASCRELL. Do all of you remember that? Mr. Ellis, do
you remember it?
Mr. ELLIS. Absolutely.
Mr. PASCRELL. Good. Then you will follow what I am saying.
Do you remember what happened in the passage of that bill?
Democrats, for the most part, did not accept it, voted against
it. We were here until 3:00, 4:00 in the morning, if you will
remember that. It passed. And what did Democrats do after the
passage? Democrats, after the passage, went back to their
districts--I will speak for myself--went to towns which were
not Democratic, spoke so the seniors about, yes, I was against
this, but now we have to make it work. Here is the equalizer.
And you don't understand it. Here is the equalizer, Mr. Ellis.
Instead of sour grapes and instead of burying our heads in
the sand, we said we only have one country here. We have been
talking about helping seniors out with the prescription drug
plan, Plan D, for a long time, and while it wasn't the plan
that I voted for--I voted against it--we got to make it work.
Here is how it works. Here is how you register for it. Here is
how you get involved.
In fact, it was so terrible, talk about a rollout. You guys
got short memories. You really do. You really do. You got a
major problem here. Not only was it a poor rollout, but you had
to depend upon the States to bail you out of the plan, to make
it work. The States had to come up with the money.
Mr. PASCRELL. That is only 10 years ago. I am not talking
about ancient history. I am talking about the United States of
America 10 years ago.
Mr. Pollack, let me ask you this question. This is
especially interesting. We have twice tried to repeal a
provision in the ACA, the Affordable Care Act, that would place
limits on the premium tax credit reconciliation, once as a way
to pay for the repeal of the medical device tax and another to
pay for the Republican plan to replace defense sequestration
cuts.
Mr. Pollack, can you discuss the impact that repealing this
provision, the one we are talking about today, would have on
consumers?
Mr. POLLACK. Well, there really is an irony. I have heard
from on both sides of the aisle concern that people may have a
liability in April of 2015 and that liability, mind you, is
most likely to come not because of an error, it is more likely
to occur because there have been changes of circumstances over
the course of this calendar year that were unpredictable.
Somebody got a raise, somebody got a bonus, somebody had more
overtime pay. And I challenge us on both sides of the aisle,
let's work to try and ease the difficulties that people will
experience, who provided information with no errors, no fraud,
but changes occurred.
And for those changes that occurred where somebody was
conscientious, let's try and ease the burden of reconciliation.
Let's go in the opposite direction and I think that makes a
great deal of sense. It reflects the concerns that people
expressed on both sides of the aisle, and I hope this is
something we can do in a bipartisan way.
But in response to your question, if we eliminate the
protections, particularly for lower income folks, it is going
to mean they are going to experience significant hardship.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Eakin--can I have a quick question of Mr.
Eakin?
Mrs. BLACK. Your time has expired.
Mr. PASCRELL. What is time?
Mrs. BLACK. I would like to now ask Ms. Mahoney and Mr.
Holtz-Eakin a question.
During the regulatory writing process, the E-FLEX
Coalition, made a specific recommendation to the administration
of the tax credits, to make the tax credits more accurate, and
this is what they suggested, and I am going to quote, ``giving
employers the option of prospectively filing information with
the IRS about coverage available to employees through an annual
certification process.'' Their letter went on to say that ``we
believe that this is in the collective best interests of
individual Americans, employers and the administration to
ensure that the accuracy of such upfront determinations to
avoid subjecting individuals to unexpected repayments of tax
credits for which exchanges incorrectly deemed them to be
eligible.''
Now, the Treasury rejected this recommendation. Do you
believe that was a mistake and should be revisited, and
further, would it help employers and would it help more
accurately administer the tax credits if this were put into
place? Ms. Mahoney?
Ms. MAHONEY. Thank you. I have very high regard for the
members of the E-FLEX Coalition and their efforts. We are not a
member of that coalition, but I would imagine that proposals
that they put forth have viability and value to different types
of employers. Again, it is a coalition that focuses on a
certain segment of types of employers, and we continue to
believe that there are a variety of different scenarios that
employers are looking at and need a variety of different
solutions.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, do you have an opinion on
that?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I have no great detail of the specifics.
It sounds like the kind of approach that says let's give prior
approval before you start sending out payments. There is a lot
of merit to those kinds of situations. You can always do audits
and other checks to make sure that it has been done in good
faith on a regular basis and see how that system works.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you for that.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I want to ask you, do you know how much
taxpayer funds that we estimate are being issued every month
without a verification system in place? Do you have an idea
about that?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Off the top of my head, no, but I would be
happy to get a number for you.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. Well, on the estimated number that I have
seen in some of the reports is $10 billion a month, $10 billion
a month and I might say that when this law was initiated, there
were two major planks to this law: one is that if someone did
not have employer insurance, that they would be eligible for
the exchanges and the subsidies, and two, that they would also
have to have verification of their income to ensure that
whatever those subsidies were accurate.
We have now seen, this was the law, that neither one of
these really is in place. One, the employer mandate has now
been delayed until 2016. So there is really not a way other
than attestation to say that someone does not have employer-
sponsored insurance or that what is employer-sponsored
insurance that they are unable to afford; and, two, we see a
verification system that is not properly in place, yet we have
been told by this administration on several occasions and the
attestment of the Secretary of HHS as of the first of last year
that there were--or first of this year that this verification
process was in place.
We now see that either they were incompetent in believing
that it was, or we see that perhaps that was a malicious
statement to convince us to just get off their backs.
Regardless, it is clear that the implementation of the
President's health care law under this administration is
harming Americans, we have heard that today, placing billions
of taxpayer dollars at risk as well.
Now that we know that 1.2 million applicants have
inconsistencies on their basis of income, it is time that we
put a temporary halt to the issuance of these taxpayer-funded
subsidies until HHS can get their act together.
And I specifically want to say that there is a bill out
there, a bill that I have offered, H.R. 4805, the No Subsidies
Without Verification. It was passed originally by the House and
not taken up in the Senate and I do believe if we were to put a
stop on this right now, it would protect taxpayers from getting
a tax bill that they did not expect.
In addition to that, it would also protect the American
taxpayer from subsidies that were inappropriately given to
folks either inappropriately because the verification wasn't in
place or because there was fraud.
I want to just ask one last question of Mr. Holtz-Eakin,
because I know that you have certainly been in the forefront of
Government and the monetary piece of what we do here at the
government level. What have you seen in other programs where
there potentially were fraudulent dollars given out, and in
specific in programs like the EITC? Can you tell us what you
have seen in the past about when those dollars are fraudulently
given out, how much of that money is ever brought back into the
Treasury?
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. It is very difficult to recapture funds
once they have been inappropriately paid, and the things that
have happened with EITC, for example, is it is a refundable
credit but there were also efforts to make it advanceable,
arrive on a monthly basis. Those proved to be fraught with even
more in the way of payment errors and the potential for fraud.
Again, if you look at the Affordable Care Act, its basic
intent is to identify, out of 310 million Americans, those who
are eligible for subsidies, calculate the subsidy correctly,
deliver it in advance each month to the exchange in the state
of the residence and the insurance company that has the plan of
their choice. It is an extraordinarily difficult task in the
best of circumstances, and it will be difficult to do well.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you very much.
I also want to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today, and I appreciate their continued assistance in
getting answers to the questions that were asked here at
committee that you may not have had time to answer.
As a reminder, any member wishing to submit a question for
the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, I ask that the witness respond in a timely manner.
Mrs. BLACK. With that, this subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
