- SUBSIDIZED JOB PROGRAMS AND THEIR EFFECTIVENESS IN HELPING FAMILIES GO TO WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUBSIDIZED JOB PROGRAMS AND THEIR

EFFECTIVENESS IN HELPING FAMILIES

GO TO WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 30, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-HR13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-398                      WASHINGTON: 2016
_____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington, Chairman

TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania             JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
JIM RENACCI, Ohio                    DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of July 30, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Sandra Collins, Assistant Manager, Goodwill Olympics and Rainier
Region, Testimony..............................................     7
Amy Dvorak, Employer Relations Coordinator, New York State/Erie
County Department of Social Services, Testimony................    13
Robert Doar, Morgridge Fellow, Poverty Studies, American
Enterprise Institute (AEI), Testimony..........................    19
Dan Bloom, Director, Health and Barriers to Employment Policy
Area, MDRC, Testimony..........................................    26

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

APHSA-NASTA......................................................    51

SUBSIDIZED JOB PROGRAMS AND THEIR

EFFECTIVENESS IN HELPING FAMILIES

GO TO WORK AND ESCAPE POVERTY

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave
Reichert [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CONTACT: (202) 225-1025
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, July 30, 2014
No. HR-13

Chairman Reichert Announces Hearing on

Subsidized Job Programs and Their Effectiveness

in Helping Families Go to Work

and Escape Poverty

Congressman Dave Reichert (R-WA), Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Human Resources of the Committee on Ways and Means, today announced
that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on subsidized jobs programs
and their effectiveness in helping families escape poverty. The hearing
will take place at 2:00 p.m. on Wednesday, July 30, in room 1100 of the
Longworth House Office Building.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only.
Witnesses will include individuals with experience administering
subsidized employment programs and experts who have studied the
effectiveness of these programs. However, any individual or
organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written
statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the
printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

Helping people find full-time jobs is the best way to reduce
poverty. Over 97 percent of individuals age 18-64 who work full-time
have earnings that place them above the poverty line, while almost one-
third of individuals in that age range who do not work are in poverty.
Working full-time also helps individuals move up the economic ladder.
Of households in the bottom 20 percent of the earnings distribution,
fewer than one in five had a household member working full-time, and
more than 60 percent included no one who was working. Households in the
top 20 percent of earners had on average two household members working,
in almost all cases full time.

The major accomplishment of the 1996 welfare reforms was to help
more low-income families and individuals find jobs, so they could
escape poverty and dependence on government benefits and move up the
economic ladder. Since the work-based welfare reforms were enacted, the
employment rate of adults receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) welfare benefits has more than doubled. Child poverty
rates fell dramatically in the years immediately after welfare reform,
while welfare caseloads declined by 60 percent through June 2013. In
addition to expecting more welfare recipients to work and prepare for
work, welfare reform provided more flexibility for States to support
work by providing child care benefits, transportation assistance, and
other work supports.

While welfare reform moved many low-income families into work, more
can be done to help welfare recipients work and escape poverty. States
now report spending only a small share of their TANF funding--6 percent
in FY 2013--on activities designed to get welfare recipients jobs.
Although States are required to engage 50 percent of welfare recipients
in work or work-related activities, 22 States face effectively no such
requirement because of loopholes in the law. Further, in the most
recent State data on work performed by welfare recipients (FY 2011),
States reported that almost 60 percent of adults performed no hours of
work or work-related activities, such as education or training.

A number of States have taken steps to more quickly move welfare
recipients into the workforce, in some cases providing wage subsidies
to employers to hire these individuals so they can earn a paycheck
instead of receiving welfare. State approaches to subsidizing
employment have been varied, including by the type of recipient placed
in subsidized jobs, whether the placement is in the public or private
sector, the length of the subsidy, and the amount of the subsidy.
Specific Federal funding for this purpose was provided under the 2009
economic stimulus law (P.L. 111-5), under which $1.3 billion was spent
on subsidized jobs programs between 2009 and 2010. Placing welfare
recipients in subsidized jobs can help these individuals gain skills
that will help them find and maintain full-time employment. However,
because research on the long-term impacts of subsidized jobs is mixed,
it is important to review the structure of different subsidized jobs
programs to determine which features appear most likely to make these
programs successful.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Reichert stated, ``Our nation's
welfare programs should be focused on one thing'' helping people in
need find work, so they can escape poverty and move up the economic
ladder. The 1996 welfare reforms achieved this goal by requiring States
to get welfare recipients working or preparing for work. One of the
ways States have done so is by connecting recipients quickly with
employers, sometimes by subsidizing their wages. Welfare
reauthorization is on hold as the Administration continues to insist--
despite 15 years of TANF law and precedent to the contrary--that it can
waive the critical TANF work requirements. So now is a good time for us
to review how these subsidized job programs are working. I look forward
to hearing more about these State efforts so we can improve our
nation's welfare system and move more people out of poverty.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

This hearing will focus on State subsidized jobs programs designed
to move individuals from welfare to work, including what research
reveals about the impact of such programs on employment and earnings.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Please click here to submit a
statement or letter for the record.'' Once you have followed the online
instructions, submit all requested information. Attach your submission
as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by August 13, 2014. Finally, please note that due to the
change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse
sealed-package deliveries to all House Office Buildings. For questions,
or if you encounter technical problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or
(202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons,
and/or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A
supplemental sheet must accompany each submission listing the name,
company, address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available
online at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman REICHERT. The committee will come to order.
I had a chance to visit briefly with our witnesses. They
are so excited to be here, and we are excited to have you. A
couple of them are a little nervous, so I told them we would go
easy on them. So it will be no big deal.
I want to thank you again to our guests and witnesses for
joining us today for this important hearing to review what we
can do to help more parents go to work and help families escape
poverty. We clearly have lots of work to do as we enter the 6th
year of the so-called Obama recovery. Not only has this been
the worst recovery for jobs and growth ever, but record numbers
of Americans are not working or working only temporary jobs.
More people dropped out of the workforce during this recovery
than during the recession that preceded it. And the median
household income is down over $2,000 since this recovery
started. All of which may be why nearly half of Americans think
that the U.S. is still in a recession.
Over 5\1/2\ years after Democrats' trillion-dollar stimulus
plan, Americans are still asking, where are the jobs? Make no
mistake, work is not only what parents need and what they are
looking for, it is the only real path out of poverty.
We know this implicitly, and the data confirms it. Less
than 3 percent of full-time workers are in poverty, while the
poverty rate for people who don't work is 10 times higher. Work
also addresses inequality, the inequality of households in the
bottom 20 percent of the earnings ladder. Less than one in five
had a household member working full-time, and more than 60
percent had no one in the household who was working at all. In
contrast, households in the top 20 percent of earners had an
average two workers in the household, with almost all of them
working full-time.
Looking back, we see the 1996 welfare reforms confirm the
centrality of work to reducing poverty. Since the work-based
1996 welfare reforms were enacted, the employment rate of
welfare recipients more than doubled and child poverty rates
fell dramatically and are still below the level in the early
1990s. Welfare caseloads have declined by 60 percent. And still
in many places loopholes have allowed States to keep welfare
recipients on the rolls too long without working, reducing
their income and increasing their dependence on taxpayers.
States now spend only a small share of their TANF funding,
6 percent in 2013, on activities designed to get welfare
recipients back to work. The most recent data from States for
2011 shows almost 60 percent of adults on TANF who were
required to work had no reported hours in any work or work-
related activity.
So the question is this, how can we get more low-income
adults into jobs so they can better support their families and
move up the economic ladder? And as we will learn in the
testimony today, one approach to achieving this goal is through
supporting subsidized jobs. For years, some States have placed
welfare recipients in subsidized jobs, providing payments to
public and private employers to hire welfare recipients so they
earn a paycheck instead of just collecting a welfare check.
The goal of this approach is for the job to continue even
after the subsidy ends, but it doesn't always work that way,
and raising concerns about effectiveness and cost of such
efforts compared to other approaches is legitimate. We hope to
review those sorts of issues today to determine how these types
of programs can help low-income families escape poverty.
The bigger picture is important, too. If we want to promote
subsidized jobs or any other way of helping welfare recipients
go to work, we simply will not make any progress while the
administration continues to insist it can waive precisely these
sorts of policies. The irony is, when the administration
announced its TANF waiver policy 2 years ago, we were working
together across party lines to close loopholes that weaken
welfare back-to-work rules.
Those loopholes remain wide open today. We can and should
revisit ways to close those loopholes along with discussing
ways to implement ideas like promoting subsidized jobs in the
months ahead. But if the administration continues to insist it
can simply waive any of the rules Congress creates, it is very
unlikely that that will happen.
I look forward to today's testimony and our continuing work
together on ways to help low-income parents find the work they
so desperately need and want.
And, Mr. Doggett, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I believe that our objective should be to encourage
innovation without wasting taxpayer money on programs that
don't work that are not cost effective. There is not enough
TANF block grant money available now to adequately fund
existing programs designed to help poor people secure stable
employment and that is despite the fact that each year TANF
continues to serve a smaller and smaller share of poor
families.
Since no additional resources are being proposed to help
lift people out of poverty, we are really in a zero-sum game
situation here. Every dollar that we shift to subsidize
employment means a dollar less for some other initiative. That
doesn't mean it is not a good idea to shift money into
subsidized employment. It just means that we need to scrutinize
what we are moving it into carefully and what we are moving it
out of carefully. Our decision should be guided by what the
evidence shows, not what ideology dictates. Before we divert
more TANF funds to any particular initiative, let's ensure that
we have that kind of objective evidence to justify how the
money is being allocated.
Probably the greatest potential for subsidized employment
is for those individuals who face the greatest barriers to
being hired: ex-offenders, those with serious physical or
mental health issues, long-term unemployed, and older workers
who often face discrimination. I know that one of our witnesses
that I look forward to hearing from, Ms. Collins, will tell us
about the transformative effect that such a program had on her
life, and I am sure that is true of many others.
Overall, however, the evidence is modest and it is mixed as
to whether subsidized employment programs are actually
effective, cost effective, in helping a substantial number of
poor people secure a stable job at a wage that will help them
escape poverty. Certainly the offer of free or almost free
taxpayer-financed labor would have appeal to most any business.
The question is whether when the taxpayer subsidy ends,
does the job end also or does it truly open the way to long-
term employment? Does subsidized employment offer an
opportunity or is it just another windfall? I think the verdict
is largely still out. Probably to ensure more opportunity
through subsidized employment where it does appear to work, we
need some strong safeguards in place to protect the taxpayer
investment that is at stake.
Today's hearing is another way to scrutinize the potential
of expanding subsidized employment programs to more people, and
it deserves the same care and attention that this subcommittee
has applied in previous hearings to other types of public
expenditures. I note Mr. Bloom's testimony indicates that most
subsidized employment programs that have been tested have not
produced the sustained increases in unsubsidized employment we
would like to see, and Mr. Doar writes that in his experience
running a subsidized employment program sometimes proves to be
an expensive intervention that was not necessarily more
effective than some less costly strategies at trying to get
people from welfare to work.
Today is an opportunity to learn more about these programs
and their effectiveness. It will also help us to determine
whether we can make decisions to support programs based on
evidence or whether we will simply rely on ideology as a guide.
I agree that the TANF program, set to expire at the end of
September, very soon, is long overdue for serious examination.
I voted for the 1996 welfare reform law that established TANF
because I support reducing poverty by promoting work. It is
just a matter of determining what the most effective way to do
that is. And indeed this law, in combination with a very strong
economy and improvements in the earned tax credit, did help
prepare more individuals into the workforce back in the 1990s.
Unfortunately, nearly all of the progress that we
experienced from the law in increasing employment levels for
single mothers or reducing poverty for children ended in about
2000, and ever since then most of the major trends have been
negative. Four years of success followed by 14 years of
shortcoming is not the greatest record.
Why are we seeing this failure? Well, I think to start
with, the amount of resources available for TANF, the size of
the block grant has declined in real terms by almost a third
since 1996. And some States, including my home State of Texas,
have seen a much sharper decline because Congress refused to
renew TANF supplemental grants that expired in 2011.
As I said earlier, a smaller and smaller portion of poor
families, poor children, receive TANF, and when folks aren't
receiving TANF, they are not participating in TANF work
activities like working, education, training, so forth.
I look forward to the testimony of each of you so that we
can learn how to make genuine improvements that really make
effective use of our taxpayer money to accomplish the objective
of helping people move from welfare to work and stay in that
workforce with a living wage.
Thank you.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Doggett.
And without objection, each member will have the
opportunity to submit a written statement and have it included
in the record at this point.
I want to remind our witnesses to limit their oral
statements to 5 minutes. And, however, without objection, all
the written statements and all your written testimony will be
made a part of the permanent record.
On our panel this afternoon we will be hearing from Sandra
Collins, assistant manager of Goodwill Olympics, Rainier
Region; Amy Dvorak, employer relations coordinator, New York
State/Erie County Department of Social Services; Robert Doar,
Morgridge Fellow, Poverty Studies, American Enterprise
Institute; Dan Bloom, director, Health and Barriers to
Employment Policy Area.
Now, the first witness we will have testify today is one
that I am personally proud to have here and to have the
privilege to introduce. Ms. Collins came all the way to
Washington, D.C., from Washington State to be here today to
share her story, and it takes a lot of courage to share a story
that has been a struggle. I think all of us can relate to
stories within our own families that maybe get retold and told
and maybe you are going through a current story in your own
family that you can identify with. But those stories build
character, build strength, and build a person like Sandra.
And we are so happy to have you here to share your success
with us, and as Mr. Doggett said, to help us, members of this
committee, subcommittee, and members of the full committee
understand what we can do to help people get back to work and
off welfare and have a smile on their face like you have right
now. And I know you are a little nervous, but you are going to
do just fine. So you are recognized for 5 minutes, Sandra.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF SANDRA COLLINS, ASSISTANT MANAGER, GOODWILL
OLYMPICS, RAINIER REGION

Ms. COLLINS. Chairman Reichert, Ranking Member Doggett, and
Members of the Committee, it is an honor for me to sit before
you today to tell you my success story. I am Sandra Collins,
and I am now the assistant manager at Goodwill Outlet store in
Kent, Washington. I am about to become a homeowner. I have come
a long way.
In April of 2007, my life looked very different. I was
homeless, living in a shelter with two children, had been a
meth abuser for 17 years, a victim of domestic violence, and I
felt alone. I had burnt all my relationships with my family and
friends, I had zero credit, no high school diploma, and a stack
of legal offenses that kept me from a driver's license. My
self-worth and confidence were at all-time lows. It was time
for a change, but I didn't know how to get it started.
I went to apply for TANF and enrolled in the WorkFirst
Community Jobs program. I was assigned to my caseworker, Cindy,
and she was the first of many trusting relationships for me. I
was closed about my problems with her at first for fear of
having my children taken away, losing my financial assistance,
or being put in jail. My license had been suspended, and I
didn't tell Cindy that I was homeless. It took a few months to
start to build trust.
Cindy got me placed into a work program at a Goodwill
outlet store close to my GED class site. It turned out to be
the best job for me and would change my life permanently.
Without a car and living 2.5 miles from the bus stop, my
commute was 4 hours a day round trip, but I was punctual and I
worked hard. I even volunteered to do additional work. Things
were real dark, but there was a glimmer of hope breaking
through.
I knew the power of having a job would help me escape
poverty. My manager was willing to flex with my commute
schedule. Not only did I expand my work skills, but coworkers
showed real happiness to see me. I felt special and important.
I had meaning in my life and gained self-worth. It made me want
to return every day.
Cindy enrolled me in a program that provided me with
transportation to the bus stop, making my commute so much
shorter. Cindy's role as a case manager was critical.
Eventually I did open up about my problems, and Cindy provided
resources or solutions for all of them. I didn't feel as
helpless or alone anymore. She even helped me get my license
back. When the Community Jobs program ended, I had my GED, and
my Tacoma outlet store manager, impressed with my hard work,
recommended me for the perfect full-time job at a Goodwill
store.
I remember my first day very clearly, January 15th, 2008. I
started at the Lakewood Goodwill as a production worker. That
April, the original Tacoma outlet store had an opening and
asked me to return. It felt like a great accomplishment to be
wanted back. I remember thinking that I am somebody.
In July of 2008, I was promoted to supervisor at the Tacoma
outlet store. Work had changed my life. The people were
supportive, as I worked hard and proved myself. While working,
other Goodwill services also made a huge difference. I took the
Goodwill financial literacy course and opened a bank account.
The course taught me how to set goals. My short-term goals
were to focus on staying clean and sober, getting to work every
day, keeping my kids safe and on a good path. My long-term
goals were get a car and a house and become a manager. I jotted
them down as a pie in the sky.
In 2009, I enrolled in a Goodwill Wheels to Work program,
and I was able to get financing for my own car. I am proud to
say I will be buying my own home for my family in August.
Since becoming a supervisor, I have had an amazing
opportunity to bring on people who have faced similar problems.
Out of the 36 employees at my store, 13 are community job
program graduates and a few others are enrolled in the program
now. I take great pride in serving as a mentor and helping
them. People call me the volunteer queen because I always have
community job participants placed at my site.
Because of my experiences, Community Jobs participants open
up to me about their lives. I am able to give back to them what
was given to me--support, encouragement, challenges, and
resources. Now it is time for me to set some new goals. I just
interviewed for a Goodwill store manager position, and I got
it.
In closing, people like me need a second chance to get our
lives back on a better path. Goodwill and the Washington
WorkFirst Community Jobs program gave me and many others that
chance. I could not have done it alone.
Thank you, and my family thanks you, for the Federal
funding and support that has helped me get to where I am at
today. These programs make a difference, and I am living proof
of it, because jobs change lives. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Collins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman REICHERT. Well, Sandra, that was pretty powerful
testimony.
The other three still want to continue?
Congratulations on your promotion, and congratulations on
the purchase of your home, too. Good job.
Ms. Dvorak, unfortunately, you get to follow. You are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF AMY DVORAK, EMPLOYER RELATIONS COORDINATOR, NEW
YORK STATE/ERIE COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES

Ms. DVORAK. Good afternoon, Chairman Reichert, Ranking
Member Doggett, and Members of the Committee. Before I begin, I
would like to thank you for this opportunity to speak to you on
behalf of the Erie County Department of Social Services and the
PIVOT Program.
In September of 2000, the Erie County Department of Social
Services initiated a job training program called the PIVOT
Program. This unique wage subsidy initiative was designed to
bridge the gap between the local business community and welfare
recipients and is based on the premise that welfare reform
success requires that TANF recipients play an active role and
become a part of the business community.
The goal of the PIVOT Program is to provide incentives to
employers to hire clients with multiple barriers and those that
may need more time-on-the-job training. PIVOT provides quality
job opportunities for the employable TANF population while
serving as a resource for the hiring needs of local employers.
Job developers match employable TANF clients with companies
looking to fill existing positions. All candidates are
prescreened for job compatibility, including matching up
client's skills, abilities, and education with the job specs.
The employers must be an existing company and have permanent
long-term positions.
PIVOT is always looking to work with companies where there
is room for advancement and higher-paying wages. The employer
benefits include a 6-month subsidy that covers 100 percent of
the client's wages. Employers are involved in the interviewing
process and provided an opportunity to select from multiple
candidates. The employer receives a 3-month advance when the
client is first hired to cover initial training costs. The
contract is then reconciled before final payment is made to the
employer. The employer is able to reduce hiring and training
costs and is able to participate in monthly job fairs, enabling
the company to interview and recruit new prospective employees.
Many clients' cases close within a month of obtaining
employment, and case management is provided to help guarantee
these clients do not return to welfare and receive public
benefits. The benefits of the social services include client
placement into employment and reduction of the cash grant and
the closing of cases due to employment. Another benefit is the
development of community partnerships for placement of
unsubsidized clients. By developing good working relationships
with employers, job developers are able to make additional
placements for other DSS client not eligible for PIVOT.
We have learned from employer feedback that prospective
employees lack soft skills needed to be successful in jobs. In
an effort to address this need and broaden the base of PIVOT-
eligible candidates, the PIVOT Program works hand-in-hand with
the work experience program. Erie County has developed a model
of neighborhood hub sites at various not-for-profit sites
located in the north, south, east, and west of the city. These
work experience hubs were developed to increase participation
in federally countable work activities by making worksites more
accessible to TANF clients. These sites are located in
neighborhoods where TANF clients live and combine work
experience with vocational and education programs, computer
training, high school equivalency, and English as a second
language classes.
There is a job developer assigned to every hub site. This
person goes out weekly and meets with the clients that are
ready to be placed into employment. The client will continue to
work with the job developer until placement occurs.
Several of our supervisors at these hub sites are former
clients that were working with our development unit. They were
referred for positions based on their leadership qualities,
excellent attendance, and motivation at the worksite.
One of the biggest problems businesses have is attracting
and retaining high quality employees. Businesses want employees
that can come to work every day, be punctual, communicate with
their supervisor, and be a good team player. The number one
reason people lose their job is time and attendance. The number
two reason is problems with their supervisor.
With PIVOT, the job developer initially acts like a mentor
between the client and supervisor. The client is provided
extensive case management services when they first begin their
employment. Follow-up is provided to assure supportive services
are in place, which include transportation and child care.
Some of the businesses that have been targeted and
successful with PIVOT are nursing homes, hospitals, banks,
hotels, call centers, manufacturing and industrial companies,
small and large businesses, food service, not-for-profits, and
community agencies. The PIVOT Program currently works with over
300 businesses in western New York and is always evolving based
on the time of year and labor trends.
Since 2000, over 4,300 clients have been placed in PIVOT,
with an average of 460 per year. The PIVOT Program is funded
through the Flexible Fund for Family Services, which is a
Federal allocation. The success of PIVOT has proved that when
people are given support and the opportunity to work, they can
be successful in their lives, role models for their children,
and can be self-sufficient.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Ms. Dvorak. Good job.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dvorak follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Doar.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT DOAR, MORGRIDGE FELLOW, POVERTY STUDIES,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. DOAR. Thank you, Chairman Reichert, Ranking Member
Doggett, and other Members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I greatly appreciate being
invited to discuss subsidized jobs programs and their role in
alleviating poverty.
My name is Robert Doar, and I am the Morgridge Fellow in
Poverty Studies at the American Enterprise Institute. Prior to
joining AEI, I spent 18 years working in government social
services programs for the State and city of New York. My
experience with the management of subsidized or transitional
jobs programs has given me considerable insight into how these
programs are actually serving welfare recipients, insight which
I would like to share now.
The most important objective and key outcome for assistance
programs is lasting employment for the recipient. Not only is
full-time employment the surest way to avoid poverty, but
earnings are the most important form of income for a family.
Only 3 percent of all full-time workers are defined as being in
poverty by our Nation's official poverty measure. The strong
emphasis that programs such as the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families place on helping applicants and recipients move
into employment as rapidly as possible clearly acknowledges the
fundamental role employment has in helping people out of
poverty.
In the years following the passage of the Welfare Reform
Act of 1996, it became apparent that resulting increases in
work opportunities and consequent earnings was the main reason
child poverty and overall poverty fell during those years. More
workforce participation, especially by single mothers, resulted
in higher earnings and a substantial decrease in poverty.
While employment and its consequent earnings are key to
alleviating poverty, it is also important to remember that we
already subsidize jobs. The earned income tax credit, public
health insurance, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
benefits, and child care assistance are the largest but not the
only government assistance programs that can greatly increase
the resources available to low-income working households.
It is in this context, with the recognition of existing
programs that already work to shore up low wages and the focus
on rapid employment in unsubsidized jobs, that we must evaluate
whether subsidized or transitional jobs are an effective tool
to help people in need. In New York City, we ran a large and I
believe effective subsidized jobs program, but it was only a
limited part of our overall effort.
In New York, we HAVE worked with the Parks Department to
form the Parks Opportunity Program, which created job positions
lasting 6 to 9 months and consisting of 4 workdays and 1
training day each week. The program was designed to serve a
discrete subset of welfare recipients. Participants were
primarily compliant, hard-to-place clients who had been on
welfare assistance for more than 1 year and were not in
sanctioned status.
Additionally, for a time we offered subsidized jobs to
clients in shelters who agreed to leave the shelter. We also
offered transitional jobs to compliant, though out-of-work
noncustodial parents whose children were on welfare assistance.
While this program worked well for some recipients,
participants did not exit the program with any increase in
their probability of finding future employment over those cash
assistance recipients in our regular program. The placement
rate was similar to the rate for welfare recipients in our
program in both our back to work and work first programs.
The key lesson we took away from the Parks Department
program was while the availability of subsidized jobs was
beneficial for a portion of our caseload, the program itself
was more costly and not effective enough to justify more than a
limited investment. Upon exiting the program, placement rates
were roughly equal to other work programs, but they had
incurred a much higher cost.
Ultimately, we need to ensure that the actions we take in
creating job opportunities end in positive results and provide
paths to consistent long-term employment. While subsidized jobs
programs may produce those results for some individuals in some
sectors, they cannot replace the focus on rapid attachment to
unsubsidized employment for regular public assistance
recipients.
I should also point out that there were also other benefits
associated with the Parks program. First of all, the Parks
Department got additional assistance in manpower to do jobs
they might not have been able to do without the support of a
program like ours.
In addition, for those members of our public assistance
caseload who would not be able to receive the generous work
supports that generally go to households with children in them,
these are mostly single individuals and often young men,
subsidized programs were an avenue to get them into work that
we did not have and we did need. Thank you.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Doar.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doar follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Bloom, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN BLOOM, DIRECTOR, HEALTH AND BARRIERS TO
EMPLOYMENT POLICY AREA, MDRC

Mr. BLOOM. Good afternoon, and thank you for inviting me to
testify about the research evidence on subsidized employment.
My name is Dan Bloom, and I am with MDRC, a nonprofit,
nonpartisan research organization. I would like to use my time
to make three general points about subsidized employment.
The first point is about goals. Subsidized employment is a
broad term that means different things to different people.
Some subsidized employment programs are designed primarily to
provide work-based income support, that is, to put money into
the pockets of unemployed workers during periods of high
unemployment. These are sometimes called countercyclical
programs. The best known of this type of program operated
during the Great Depression, but many of the State programs
that were supported by the TANF Emergency Fund in 2009 and 2010
also fit into this category.
Other subsidized employment programs are explicitly
designed to improve people's long-term success in the labor
market. They are much smaller, and they target people facing
serious obstacles to steady work--people coming home from
prison, long-term TANF recipients, and others. Some models,
called transitional jobs programs, place people into what might
be called practice jobs with nonprofit organizations so they
can learn to work by working. Others offer subsidies to private
employers to hire program participants, and some programs do
both.
When assessing the success of a particular program, it is
critical to consider the program's goals. A large, broadly
targeted countercyclical program might be judged on its ability
to get going quickly and provide meaningful work to large
numbers of people who would not otherwise be working. In this
respect, I think the TANF Emergency Fund experience was quite
positive. States were able to scale up programs in a very short
period, and they put about 280,000 people to work, including
youth in summer jobs.
In contrast, transitional jobs programs that are designed
to improve participant success in the labor market could be
assessed at least in part based on the longer-term employment
patterns of their participants, as well as other related
measures, like reduced recidivism for ex-prisoners or reduced
reliance on public benefits for welfare recipients.
My second point is about evidence. Over the last 30 or 40
years there have been a number of rigorous evaluations of
subsidized employment programs. Many of these studies use a
random assignment design, which is the gold standard for
studies of this type. These studies tested the kinds of
programs that were explicitly designed to improve people's
long-term success in the labor market, and the results are
mixed.
On the one hand, we have seen that programs can generate
very large increases in employment initially because they give
subsidized jobs to lots of people who would not otherwise be
working. We studied one program for ex-prisoners that also
reduced recidivism and saved money for the government.
On the other hand, most of these programs did not lead to
sustained increases in unsubsidized employment. In other words,
it doesn't look like the subsidized work experience helped
people get or keep regular jobs. The main exception to this
pattern is a few programs that provided temporary wage
subsidies to private employers who hired people from certain
disadvantaged groups. There is some evidence that these
programs have increased employment even beyond the subsidy
period. The issue has been that most of these programs have
been small and selective in who they served.
One key question for any program that subsidizes private
employers is whether employers are receiving a windfall for
hiring the same kinds of people they would have hired anyway.
Unfortunately, this is a hard question to answer. Studies can
test whether providing subsidies for a particular group of job
seekers improves the odds that they will find work, but it is
almost impossible to know for certain whether this ends up
displacing other similar workers.
My final point is that I think there is some hope for the
future. The Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services
are both conducting multisite evaluations of the next
generation of subsidized employment programs. Although the
projects were developed separately, DOL and HHS are
collaborating closely in carrying them out, and MDRC is
fortunate to be leading both projects.
Together, the two projects are using random assignment
designs to evaluate about a dozen different subsidized
employment models. Here is one example. In Los Angeles, we are
testing two programs for TANF recipients who completed an
initial job search activity but were unable to find work. One
model provides fully subsidized jobs with public or nonprofit
employers for up to 6 months.
In the other model, participants are placed with private
employers but remain on the program payroll for the first 2
months of employment. Then they move to the employer's payroll
and the employer receives a partial subsidy for 4 additional
months. Employers are expected to retain participants after the
subsidy ends.
All of the models in both projects are aiming to address
the limitations of earlier transitional jobs programs, in part
by using subsidies to help participants get a foot in the door
with private employers. A key question is whether these private
sector-focused models can be effective for less job-ready
participants. Results from these projects will start to become
available next year.
In sum, subsidized employment is a valuable tool for
providing work-based income support, particularly during
periods of high unemployment. To date, the results from
programs that try to use subsidized employment to improve long-
term employment outcomes for hard-to-employ groups are mixed,
but we are now testing a new set of models that were developed
specifically to address the limitations of earlier programs.
Thank you.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bloom follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman REICHERT. We will now move to our questions.
Ms. Collins, thanks again for being here, and I know maybe
sometimes you don't get to pause or maybe you do get to pause
and think about how far you have come from being homeless and
without work in 2007, beating the addictions that you have just
talked about, and getting your GED, being hired as a full-time
employee, now being promoted to manager, buying your own home.
And now here you are in the Capitol testifying before Congress.
You have come a long way, as they say.
We want to make sure that others have that kind of success,
and your testimony is powerful, but I am wondering if you could
just share with me a little bit, given your experience as a
participant in the program and now someone who supervises other
people--and as you said, you were described as the volunteer
queen, people want to be around you and they want to learn from
you and watch you work--what do you think are some of the key
features of the programs that made you successful and that will
help those that you are working with now be successful?
Ms. COLLINS. I think the biggest thing was, was that I was
uncomfortable with the case manager being into the Washington,
you know, the Department of Social Services office. I felt if I
was open with her and truly expressed the barriers that I had,
more bad things would happen to me.
And so I think with people who have bigger barriers, with
programs being a little bit longer, being able to have time to
get to know the person and really dig down and find out what
those barriers are, and when the program is going it is
designed to be 6 months, if they are seeing progress in the
person but they are not yet where they need to be or their
barriers still haven't been addressed or worked through, then
maybe expanding the program a little longer.
Chairman REICHERT. Additional help.
Ms. COLLINS. Yes.
Chairman REICHERT. Yeah. Anything else that you can think
of that really played a key role in helping you get your feet
on the ground that you can see, thinking of some of the people
that you work with, anything else that you can see might be
helpful?
Ms. COLLINS. Well, with the people that I work with now, I
remember where I came from and I remember the support that I
had from my case manager. And so I try to work in conjunction
with their case managers by identifying at the worksite any
issues that might be of concern, and I share those with the
case manager. And that usually breaks the ice a little bit,
when I am able to see the person every day at the worksite
versus the case manager once a week.
Chairman REICHERT. It sounds to me like you need somebody
who cares, somebody who will be with you long term, and
somebody that you can learn to trust and open up to and begin
to build your life.
Ms. COLLINS. Yes.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you.
Ms. Dvorak, Erie County in New York has and operates a
program where you place welfare recipients in subsidized jobs
for 6 months, and you report great success in moving people
from welfare to work as a result. And your program differs from
some others, I think, as Mr. Bloom has pointed out. You place
your recipients in private sector jobs and the employer pays
the employee directly versus in some State agencies they
basically provide a free employee, the State pays the paycheck.
Do you feel the structure impacts the success of your
program? And what other features of your program do you believe
contribute to its success in moving people from welfare to
work?
Ms. DVORAK. I think there is a huge difference. I meet with
employers all the time, I work with CEOs, and employers have
been incredibly supportive. But when I sell the program, I sell
it that you are going to hire someone off the street. All I am
asking is that you give my TANF recipients an opportunity to
interview for jobs like anybody else. We are giving you the
carrot. We are giving you 6 months of gross wages because they
may need alonger time in training. We will provide additional
supports. We will provide case management. But when I sell it,
I am selling it as a long-term position, and existing position
in the company.
The position is already there. I am just asking that they
look at my clients and they consider them. But it is an
existing position. I never go in saying this is temporary
employment. If you don't like the person in 6 months, it is
okay, you can let them go. They are hiring them like they would
anybody else, so that it is a permanent position.
I do think it makes a big difference how it is presented to
the employer because they are making an investment in this
person, their staff is training this person to their
specifications, and the client is going to the job thinking
they have a long-term, full-time job. We always try and make
the contract full-time, because how are they going to be self-
sufficient if it is not full-time?
I think you have got to, like you said, break down the
barriers. I think it takes a lot of case management to break
those barriers down, but I truly believe if you can empower
somebody, that once they start to earn a paycheck--which is a
big difference, when they are getting a paycheck from a company
as opposed to getting paid from an agency there is a huge
difference in how they start to feel about themselves. They
want to do better.
Chairman REICHERT. Right.
Ms. DVORAK. I think it has a lot to do with how they feel
about themselves, about their self-esteem. I think it is baby
steps. We have seen the change.
Chairman REICHERT. I think that you just validated the
comments by Ms. Collins, that long-term relationship and that
stability in life and building that trust, I think those things
all sound very key to the success of people that are going
through this. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Dvorak, do you keep data on how many of these folks get
terminated when the subsidy ends or within a short time
thereafter?
Ms. DVORAK. Well, I will be honest with you. If they decide
they don't like the person a day after the 6 months, I call
them and say, you know what, we won't be doing business with
you anymore. Because I know, if they liked the person up to
that point and they don't like them the day after, this is not
a revolving door, and we aren't going to supply your workforce
on a subsidy. So they know that I am not going to do business
with them again.
Mr. DOGGETT. Have you had to do that very much through the
life of the program?
Ms. DVORAK. No, because I make it pretty clear. But when we
do do it, we don't do business with them again.
Mr. DOGGETT. And what type of services do you provide for
the employee to try to ensure that they meet the expectations
of the employer during that period of subsidy?
Ms. DVORAK. Okay. If there are issues that come up, a case
manager goes out to that company and meets with that client and
will say, you are right on the edge, what is going on? Because
they really do not, they don't have conflict resolution skills,
they don't have a lot of coping skills. That is when we need to
intervene and provide a lot of support. Because we can get them
on the right track, but we have to do a lot of hand holding at
the beginning and slowly we can wean them off of the system.
You got to do it individually. Some people have a lot of
issues. You never know when you can be on the other side.
Mr. DOGGETT. Exactly.
Ms. DVORAK. It could just be a crisis, a health crisis in
someone's life, and they have a work history and they can do
well. Other people have a lot of barriers. So those are big
steps to overcome.
Mr. DOGGETT. I salute what you have accomplished and
certainly what Ms. Collins exemplifies.
I am wondering, in looking at the studies that you are
doing, Mr. Bloom, what you think you will be able to tell us
about the services that need to be replicated in order to
increase the chances that these programs will be successful.
Mr. BLOOM. I think an important thing to know about these
two studies that are going on, one with HHS and one with DOL,
is that they were explicitly designed to try to address the
limitations of some of the earlier programs that I was talking
about. So what we are looking at, for example, are programs
that use a staged approach. So they will start off with
somebody working at a Goodwill, for example, and then as people
progress through the program, they may move into a subsidized
position with a private employer.
And so that is a different model than what we tested
before, because in the past we tested a lot of transitional
jobs programs that had difficulty with the transition. So they
were able to give people jobs and they did meaningful work, but
when it came time to transition them into a permanent job that
is where the trouble started.
So some of the programs that we are looking at now build in
a more seamless transition through a series of steps so that
people can try to end up in a permanent position rather than
just a subsidized position.
Mr. DOGGETT. And, Mr. Doar, the experience you describe
with the New York Parks Department was one where, as I
understand it, the people that were in the program didn't do
any better in getting long-term employment than those that
receive no subsidized employment at all.
Mr. DOAR. Yes, that is correct. We had a large program in
New York City where the vast majority of welfare recipients
went into what we call back to work or work first programs that
were intended to get them into employment rapidly, and we had
placement rates in the 25 percent range, measured a certain
way. And then we had others that we would select for these
transitional jobs programs, smaller group, would have this 6-
month employment at some significant cost, plus training, plus
job search, and their placement rate in permanent employment in
the period after that ended was about 20 percent.
So we had done a great deal of effort to get people into
work in that circumstance, but the result was not much better
than if we just said to someone, let me see if we can get you
into unsubsidized, private sector usually, employment right
away, rather than spend this time in this program along the
way.
Mr. DOGGETT. Do either of you have observations about what
standards need to be in place, whether the programs need to be
focused only at certain populations, or how we can maximize the
investment? If every employer had a Ms. Dvorak there saying if
the employee doesn't measure up, that is a good reason to
dismiss them, but don't count on us to keep circulating people
in here every 6 months just to subsidize your endeavors, we are
here to try to help the employee. So she can't be all over the
country. How we can replicate that kind of thing to ensure that
we are helping people get long-term jobs and not just providing
a short-term subsidy.
Mr. DOAR. My view was that we have to recognize that people
who come apply for public assistance come in a variety of
situations.
Mr. DOGGETT. Exactly.
Mr. DOAR. And if we build a program around permanent
subsidized employment or intensive subsidized employment for
everybody, we may be doing much more than we need to do for a
lot of people. So a lot of people can be helped with getting
into employment, job search, get them to employment, take
advantage of the work supports that are available for
everybody, like earned income tax credit, and you are on your
way. Then there are certain populations that might need
specialized attention where transitional jobs or subsidized
jobs might be appropriate. But it has got to be carefully
calibrated for populations that are in particular need.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Bloom, can I ask you to provide your
answer in writing. We have votes about 3, 3:15, so I want to
try to move quickly.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Chairman REICHERT. If you could, we would appreciate it.
Mr. Young, you are recognized.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank all our
panelists for being here today. I really enjoyed the testimony.
Big picture here, we are trying to help people find full-
time jobs, recognizing that it is the best way to reduce
poverty. It also enhances income mobility and really one's
ability to pursue the American dream, go out there and do
exactly what Ms. Collins has exemplified. Over 97 percent of
individuals age 18 to 64 who work full-time have earnings that
place them above the poverty line. It is really powerful.
So when we are considering ways to get welfare recipients
into work and up that income ladder using wage subsidies, we
need to be careful that what we are actually doing is what we
want them to do, is get jobs in the end. As policymakers, that
means putting aside ideological biases, anecdotes we might get
back in the district and using those to form our opinions as to
the optimal public policies, uninformed sentiments, and so
forth. We need to actually look at the available evidence base,
and it is limited but growing, which is encouraging, as Mr.
Bloom alluded to.
Some programs, we know, that have focused on helping
welfare recipients in the past have actually been harmful, and
that can be instructive. One example would be in the 1980s and
1990s the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit Program, which was a
predecessor to the current Work Opportunity Tax Credit Program.
It was intended to encourage employers to hire welfare
recipients.
In 1995, GAO called this program a, quote, ``inefficient
vehicle for increasing employment among the economically
disadvantaged, often rewarding employers who would have hired
disadvantaged workers anyway,'' a concern on both sides of the
aisle. Worse, there were some indications that this program
actually prevented hiring of needy individuals whom employers
perceived as lacking the skills needed to be hired without the
credit, in essence stigmatizing the employees.
I am concerned about the risk of continuing to make this
mistake as we craft future public policies. And we have pointed
in the course of this hearing to the existing of some rigorous
evidence that tells us how to make programs successful,
transitioning from a part-time position, or a temporary
position, rather, into longer-term sustainable jobs. We have
some evidence there.
First question would be to Mr. Bloom, and hopefully he can
answer concisely based on my time limitations, whether we have
evidence as well about avoiding this windfall effect to
employers and/or evidence pertaining to the stigmatization of
potential employees and how we can avoid that.
Mr. BLOOM. I can tell you from experience more than from
hard random assignment evidence, but I think there are two
things you could do to avoid this windfall. One is what we
heard about from Erie County, which is to be very clear with
the employer up front that there is an expectation that they
are going to take this person onto their payroll and make them
a permanent employee.
The other thing, I think, is to be careful with who is
targeted by these programs. You don't want to target an
individual for a subsidized jobs program if they can find a job
without a subsidy. A lot of agencies will have people look for
a job first with basic assistance, and the ones who are
unsuccessful, those are the ones they might target for the
subsidy program. And I think both of those things can help.
Mr. YOUNG. Excellent points. Well taken.
I am encouraged about the Department of Labor and HHS
projects. I think we need to do far more demonstration projects
and then robustly evaluate them in this country, especially in
the social realm, and then scale up what works based on that
evidence.
With that said, oftentimes we are hesitant to reveal all of
our assumptions, our methodology, and results from these pilot
programs in government. We issue press releases when we are
successful. We spin or hide when we are not successful.
So I have a question. Do you feel as though in these cases,
what you pointed to, there is sufficient opportunity to
critique the methodology and learn from the project design and
implementation because of its independent assessment and
because of what is being provided to policy analysts like
yourself?
Mr. BLOOM. Both of these projects are set up in such a way
that they are using the strongest possible research designs,
and that was required by HHS and DOL. I think we have total
confidence that the results are going to come out and be public
regardless of what they are. My organization is well known for
putting out information whether it makes people happy or not,
and I am sure that will happen in this case in both of these
projects.
Mr. YOUNG. And I didn't mean to insinuate otherwise. I
thank you very much for your work.
And I yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Renacci.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for testifying today.
An estimated 1.8 million Ohioans, my home State, are living
below the poverty line, and we know the best way out of poverty
is a job. Poverty in my home State of Ohio has increased by
approximately 58 percent over the last decade, despite a
stagnant population and a whole host of Federal programs
created to end this cycle of poverty. We must find ways to
address our struggling economy, improve our educational system
and workforce training programs, and connect individuals to
temporary resources they really need to success.
Included in the 2012 unemployment insurance reforms, the
Department of Labor was granted waiver authority in the UI
program. These waivers would allow States to operate
demonstration projects to test alternative means of helping the
unemployed return to work, including the concept we are talking
about today, subsidized jobs.
Since this waiver policy was enacted in February 2012, only
Texas has applied for waiver, and its application was swiftly
denied. States have described the application process created
by the Department of Labor as onerous and time-consuming. This
Congress, I worked with the Department of Labor to introduce
H.R. 3864, the Flexibility to Promote Reemployment Act, a bill
that extends the UI waiver authority and provides greater
flexibility to States to use existing UI dollars on programs
that help the unemployed collect paychecks instead of benefit
checks.
Ms. Dvorak and Mr. Doar, your program has been successful
in connecting individuals with limited labor force attachments
to jobs. Would your program be successful in connecting
individuals with greater labor force attachment, like current
UI recipients who were previously employed, to jobs?
Ms. DVORAK. Many of our clients, they have let their
unemployment run out, they got their extensions, they let their
unemployment run out, and then they have come to us. It is very
difficult for them because they are very rigid, they let us
know, ``this is how much I am going to accept per hour, I am
not going to work for less, these are the skills I have'', and
they are very adamant.
Well, one of the big pieces about the PIVOT Program is it
is not a stand-alone program. It is not okay that they are not
in a work activity. They have to go somewhere every day and be
in a work activity, which goes hand in hand with them also
working with the job developer and looking for work.
So it is really the whole piece with PIVOT. It is not just
looking for work. It is doing the work activity, whether they
need a GED, whether they go to the work activity and work in
community projects. We also have a project in our parks, which
are the Olmsted Parks in Buffalo. But it is dealing with the
whole person and providing wrap around services that is tied
into getting them back into the workforce. There is a lot of
resistance there, but having said that, you have got to work
with them and get them back into the workforce. Which is why
they are mandated to do a daily work activity.
Mr. RENACCI. Mr. Doar, do you have any----
Mr. DOAR. Our experience in New York was with welfare
recipients who come to the TANF program or the general
assistance program that existed in New York City, and the One-
Stops that were under the WIA program dealt more with people
who were on UI. And so I can't really speculate on what would
happen if in a unemployment insurance program greater
flexibility was provided to a locality, but the previous folks
is right, it is in some respects a different population and may
need different approaches.
Mr. RENACCI. Both of your programs, in your testimony you
describe your experience connecting individuals with subsidized
transitional jobs in the TANF program. What were really some of
the common reasons that individuals were unsuccessful in
finding employment?
Mr. DOAR. Well, we had a benefit in New York City of having
a very vibrant entry-level employment situation for all of the
time that I was there, including during the recession. The
opportunities were there, and that was a good thing.
I think the principal reason people had trouble is one of
two factors. One is that they were weak on soft skills and the
sort of requirements of the daily rigor of work and they
weren't prepared and ready to step up to that responsibility
and they needed some assistance in getting there.
Mr. RENACCI. Not to interrupt you, but in that case, it is
not that they weren't trained, or was training an issue, too?
Mr. DOAR. Well, again, there are a lot of opportunities in
the entry-level position. And then the second would be there
were language barriers and literacy barriers. If I would say
that was one that was the most significant, that would be it.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you. My time has run out. I yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
the witnesses for being here.
Ms. Collins, let me commend and congratulate you for your
successes, and I think that you are the epitome of what can and
does happen to and with individuals when they are given
opportunities and a chance.
As a matter of fact, in 2010 the State of Illinois put
together a program called Put Illinois to Work, which placed
eligible Illinois residents in subsidized employment positions
lasting up to 6 months. Put Illinois to Work was a
collaborative of the Illinois Department of Human Services,
Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, and
Heartland Human Care Services, using funding from the TANF
Emergency Contingency Fund, which was created by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
Illinois invested $10 million to leverage a Federal
investment of $200 million. The Federal emergency TANF funds
expired on September 30, 2010. The program was supposed to end
November 30, 2010, but Governor Quinn used approximately $50
million in State money to keep the program alive through
January of 2011.
The program was evaluated, and here is what they found. The
program exceeded the goals demanded by employers and workers.
It helped tens of thousands of low-income unemployed and
underemployed Illinoians. It helped small businesses during
economic recession. Generated income and revenue, $13.6 million
in Federal income and $2.7 million in State income. It provided
quality programming that satisfied trainees and employers.
Ninety-two percent of the workers and 88 percent of the
employers said that they would participate in that program or
something like it if they had another opportunity to do so. And
over 52 percent of the employers indicated that they would hire
the workers permanently if they had the resources and the
opportunity do so, although only 13 percent of them indicated
that they did.
Mr. Bloom, I was interested to know, given your experiences
and the work that you do, have you noted anything in particular
about ex-offenders, individuals who have been incarcerated, and
their experiences as they get opportunity for programs like
this?
Mr. BLOOM. I think people who are coming out of prison face
in some ways a double issue. Many of them have characteristics
that would make it difficult for them to hold a job, even if
they hadn't been to prison. So they may not have finished high
school or they may have limited work experience. Add on top of
that the fact that they now have a criminal record, and surveys
have shown that many employers are very reluctant to hire
people with criminal records.
It is doubly difficult for those folks to get employment.
And I think that is why a lot of these transitional jobs
programs have tended to focus on individuals coming home to the
community from prison, because it is so difficult for them to
walk right into the private sector and get hired.
Mr. DAVIS. Ms. Dvorak, could you just off the cuff think of
what it is that we might be able to do to make these programs
or this effort more effective?
Ms. DVORAK. I feel that subsidized employment works. So I
am in the trenches, I work with the clients, I work with the
agencies. So for us it is working. So it is hard for me to say.
You don't always have to reinvent the wheel, but I think we
have to look at it more closely. For us, it is working.
Mr. DAVIS. So more might be better?
Ms. DVORAK. We work with ex-offenders and it is very
difficult. But there are big employers out there, like Home
Depot, who will give these people an opportunity, and they do
promote from within, and they are an amazing employer. But you
have to work one on one with these employers.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. I am familiar with the Home
Depot effort, and they are in fact marvelous and do an
outstanding job.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman REICHERT. Thanks, Mr. Davis. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
Ms. Collins, let me start off with you, because I know so
many folks like you. I am also an employer. I have had the best
experience in the world with having people come into our
business and showing us that they are really wanted and that
they truly do have value, not just value to the dealership, but
value as people in our community.
If you can share that a little bit, because I don't think
there is anything better than to wake up and have the alarm go
off, wake up, throw your feet out over the bed, say, you know
what, I am going to go to work today and I am going to provide
for my kids, I am going to put a roof over their head, clothes
on them, food on the table, and a chance for the future.
So I don't think there is any woman or man out there when
you get up and you have a place to go and a place that you are
wanted is the key to it. Just share that a little bit. Listen,
your testimony was fantastic, but you are the person that we
are talking about. You are the person that wants to get back
into society, wants to contribute, wants to be part of what
makes America great. Just share a little bit more because I
can't imagine that transition.
I have people that have actually; you know what they did
when they got their first paycheck? They came in and talked to
me about it, but then they took a copy of it in our copying
machine so they could keep it in their wallet just to show
these other people that were down on them, you know what, I
actually get paid for what I do, and these people like me, and
they want me back every day. If you could just share a little
more of what you do, because it is an incredible story.
Ms. COLLINS. Sure. So one of the biggest turnarounds for me
was, especially being a victim of domestic violence and being a
meth user for so long, was that I had to self-worth. So the
people that I worked with made every day that I went in, made
me want to go in another day. It was a just a happy, positive
place to be. When I walked in, they were very excited to see
me. Even though I went there and I worked really hard, it made
it worth coming back every day.
So what I do now with the participants that are at my store
is I do the same thing. You have to come with a positive
attitude. With a positive attitude comes a productive employee.
I let them know how good of a job they are doing, and I just
let them know how important they are to be part of our team and
our team isn't complete without them.
It makes them open up to me a lot sooner with any kind of
personal problems or any kind of barriers that they have. And
just being able to, like you said, I spend a third of my day at
my job, I want to go someplace that is going to be positive and
where I feel important. And that is how I want my employees to
feel.
Mr. KELLY. I can't imagine your children, how proud they
are of their mom, every day she gets up and she is goes to work
because of them. So thank you so much.
Ms. Dvorak, I have got to tell you, your program makes
sense to me because you take the curse off the call. You say,
hey, listen I want to come talk to you about employing somebody
and it is going to work for you, too. This is a win-win
situation. That program, what made you pivot to that type? Were
you having a different experience in the workforce trying to
get people to actually listen to you?
When it came time to talk to an employer and say, I have
got a prospective employee. And they say, really, get back with
me. And say, well, here is the point, we can actually work
together on this. You can win, they can win. In the long run
you get a great employee. But early on, through that 90 days,
you are going to get a chance, these people can prove
themselves.
Ms. DVORAK. The greatest part to me is going to employers.
When you change people's lives and you meet with CEOs and they
see that they can be a part of it, it is amazing, you get them
engaged and they buy in. It is great. It is great because it is
a win-win for both the client and the employer.
Mr. KELLY. Well, I think--and maybe, Mr. Doar, you can go
with this--I think part of the problem, and Mr. Young and I
were just talking, we have a criminal justice code that really
takes people who are substance abuse people and makes them
criminals, and they are addicts and they have a very difficult
time. They want to get back into life and they want to be part
of society, but they are constantly put down because of the way
they are identified and the way they are labeled.
I think the other problem, and maybe you suggested, you
talked about people with soft work, if you stay off the field
too long you don't want to get back in the game. If you make it
too easy to stay at home, I think you have to attach that work,
getting work to get the benefit.
Your experience in New York and people walking away from
jobs, that is not good enough for me, but maybe for somebody
else. So the soft issue, what is that exactly, so people
understand that?
Mr. DOAR. Well, one of the things I found most interesting
about Mr. Bloom's testimony was his reference to a program
called CEO in the city that focuses on people coming back from
prison. And they, my experience with them, I knew them, I
worked with them, I funded them in part through city funding, I
found them to go very focused on getting people ready and
understanding the basic requirements of a job, and then getting
them into work in a way that they then felt they were getting
something in return.
So it is both a combination from within and if they get a
real return at the end of the day for work done. So it is
tricky, all this work, but I would look at what CEO was doing
with reentry people because they had a good model.
Mr. KELLY. I am sorry, I have run out of time. But I want
to tell you, I think this investment and the return on this
investment for the American taxpayer is really a positive one.
And you are all doing great work. Please keep it up and let us
know how we can help you. Thanks so much.
And I yield back, sir.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank each of you for testifying today. I appreciate
having this hearing today and particularly focusing on helping
families go to work and escaping poverty.
I have to say, Mr. Chairman, this may be the least
acrimonious subject we have discussed in the entire session.
And in particular, Ms. Collins, I want to congratulate you
on your success and your life. It is outstanding, as was
mentioned earlier by the chairman. And anyone who follows you
does so at their own risk. And I applaud the others for having
followed through and for contributing in a mighty way as well.
I believe that subsidized job programs are one of the key
tools in our arsenal to get families into the workforce and out
of poverty. I support these programs, but I don't support them
at the expense, per se, of cutting other worthwhile programs as
well. It goes hand in hand with programs like SNAP, which, Mr.
Doar, I can't help but notice that you list in your testimony
as an important work subsidy as well. And that is why I am
surprised, not to embarrass any of my colleagues here, but my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle all voted to cut the
SNAP program as part of the Republican budget proposal earlier
this year.
I see Mr. Doar's testimony also mentions that the Child Tax
Credit is another important work subsidy. And I guess that is I
was also surprised to see that my colleagues last week, my
Republican colleagues, voted to reduce or eliminate the Child
Tax Credit for hundreds of thousands of American children and
their families.
I was even more surprised because this came the day after
the big thinker of the Republican Party, my good friend Mr.
Ryan, released his ideas of how to lift Americans out of
poverty. And despite all the evidence from every direction that
SNAP and the Child Tax Credit and other policies are critical
pieces of keeping Americans afloat, the so-called poverty plan
includes cuts to SNAP and other vital social programs.
What it doesn't include is policies that actually help lift
people out of poverty, and Ms. Collins has given her own life
example as an example to us all, like the very subsidized work
programs that we are discussing here today; like investments in
education from early childhood to higher education and in the
job training; like an increase in the minimum wage, which would
not only increase wages to millions of American workers, but it
would also reduce the need to put on programs like nutrition
assistance in the first place.
I won't ask Ms. Collins, but I am sure she would like to
see a raise in the minimum wage, but I won't ask that question.
Instead, this poverty plan is just the House Republican
budget dressed up with a different bow on top. The fact is the
Republican Ryan proposal is their worst idea since their last
idea.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I will just yield back to you.
Chairman REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Crowley.
I warned the panel beforehand that we might have some
comments that might be political in nature, but I think the
bottom line is that what you heard Mr. Crowley say in the
beginning is that everybody on this panel, and I think
everybody in Congress, including the staff, wants to come up
with a way to help people get on their feet, get a job, and
have a future as Ms. Collins has described. And that is the
effort here. And those things that we have disagreements on are
disagreements--if I can say, Mr. Crowley--disagreements on how
we get there. And I think that is where we have the battle. I
think Mr. Doggett alluded to that also.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, will the Chairman yield?
Chairman REICHERT. Yes, I will yield.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, I hope that you would not
interpret the words that I spoke as being political in the
sense that everything that I talked about is in bill form and
in legislation that we Democrats are in support of and would
like to see advanced here in the House of Representatives.
Chairman REICHERT. Reclaiming my time.
Mr. CROWLEY. That is not political, that is a legislative
position.
Chairman REICHERT. Reclaiming my time. Matter of
interpretation of legislation and the wording in the
legislation language is always one party or another has a
different view.
Mr. CROWLEY. Mr. Chairman, would you yield one last time?
Chairman REICHERT. No.
I want to take a moment to thank all of you, and appreciate
your testimony. I think this was a very beneficial hearing in
that you all provided information that we can all use, all of
us together, and move forward. Again, the bottom line here is
that we are all dedicated to trying to find a way to put people
back to work.
And you may not know some of the background of some of the
members of this committee. Mr. Davis has an interesting
background to share. I think we all do. But every now and then
I think it is important for you to know that not all of us are
Princeton, Harvard, Yale graduates.
I was a runaway myself from my home. I was a victim of
domestic violence as the oldest of seven. And I actually lived
in the Kent Valley, where now you are employed in the Kent
Valley. I went to Kent-Meridian High School. It is a place that
I know very well. And maybe I will stop by the Kent Goodwill
and say hello to you. Would that be all right?
Ms. COLLINS. Yes.
Chairman REICHERT. Okay.
Thank you all so much for your testimony and have a great
day.
[Whereupon, at 3:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]
APHSA-NASTA

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
