- DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF THE TAX REFORM ACT OF 2014

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF THE
TAX REFORM ACT OF 2014

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SELECT REVENUE MEASURES

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 30, 2014

__________

Serial 113-SRM03

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-395                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SELECT REVENUE MEASURES

PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio, Chairman

ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               LINDA SANCHEZ, California
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of July 30, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Scott Hodge, President, Tax Foundation, Testimony................    90
John Buckley, Former Chief Tax Counsel, Committee on Ways and
Means, and Former Chief of Staff, Joint Committee on Taxation,
Testimony......................................................   101
J.D. Foster, Deputy Chief Economist, U.S. Chamber of Commerce,
Testimony......................................................   112
John Diamond, Professor, Rice University, Testimony..............    38
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, President, American Action Forum, Testimony.    50
Curtis Dubay, Research Fellow, Heritage Foundation, Testimony....    59

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Advertising Coalition........................................   139

DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF THE TAX REFORM ACT OF 2014

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Pat
Tiberi [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Chairman Tiberi Announces Hearing on Dynamic Analysis of the Tax Reform
Act of 2014

1100 Longworth House Office Building at 10:00 AM
Washington, July 23, 2014

Congressman Pat Tiberi (R-OH), Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Select Revenue Measures, today announced that the Subcommittee will
hold a hearing on dynamic analysis of the discussion draft of the Tax
Reform Act of 2014, as released by Chairman Dave Camp on February 26,
2014. Specifically, the Subcommittee will review dynamic analyses of
the macroeconomic effects of the draft conducted by outside economists,
the role of dynamic analysis in assessing tax reform proposals, how
dynamic analysis can provide recommendations to strengthen the draft,
and recommendations for improving the availability and use of dynamic
analysis. The hearing will take place on Wednesday, July 30, 2014, in
1100 Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

As part of the Committee's pursuit of comprehensive tax reform,
Chairman Camp released on February 26, 2014, a discussion draft of
legislation intended to overhaul the Tax Code. The draft was intended
to achieve a simpler, fairer, and pro-growth Tax Code. In the interests
of transparency and accuracy, the Chairman continues to seek feedback
from a broad range of stakeholders, taxpayers, practitioners,
economists, and members of the general public on how to improve the
discussion draft.

The Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) serves a critical role in the
legislative process by providing expert and impartial analysis of the
potential effect of proposals to change U.S. tax policy. In evaluating
the discussion draft, JCT conducted both a static and a dynamic
estimate. Under the static analysis, the draft is projected to reduce
the deficit by $3 billion over the 10-year budget window. The dynamic
analysis released by JCT demonstrates that the draft will increase
output, consumption, and employment over that same 10-year window.
Outside analyses performed by a wide array of economists found similar
results.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Tiberi said, ``Fixing our
broken Tax Code will strengthen the economy to help employers create
more jobs and increase wages for American families. Chairman Camp has
worked hard to produce a tax reform draft that does just that. This
hearing provides a good opportunity to hear economic analysis on how
the draft achieves this goal and to learn about more actions the
Committee can take to improve the draft and the accuracy of our
measurements.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on macroeconomic analyses of Chairman Camp's
discussion draft and the role of dynamic analysis in evaluating options
for tax reform in general. The hearing will address: (1) dynamic
estimates of the effects of Chairman Camp's discussion draft; (2) how
dynamic analysis can help to assess the impact of tax reform; (3) what
changes could be made to the draft to achieve stronger growth; and (4)
what changes could be made to JCT's models, assumptions, or procedures
to obtain more transparent, accurate, and robust results.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday,
August 13, 2014. Finally, please note that due to the change in House
mail policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package
deliveries to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you
encounter technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-
2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman TIBERI. The hearing will come to order. Good
morning and thank you for joining us with our subcommittee's
hearing on dynamic analysis of Chairman Camp tax reform
discussion draft, the Tax Reform Act of 2014.
Today we examine the discussion draft of the Tax Reform Act
of 2014 released by Chairman David Camp in February. The draft
attempts to overhaul the Tax Code to create one that is
simpler, fairer, and more pro-growth. I applaud Chairman Camp
for his work on the draft and for working to fix our broken Tax
Code to strengthen the economy, help employers create more
jobs, and increase wages for American families.
An important goal for any tax reform plan is economic
growth, and the Joint Committee on Taxation for the first time
provided a dynamic analysis of the tax legislation where it
found the draft will increase GDP by as much as $3.4 trillion
and would create nearly 2 million private sector jobs.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Chairman Camp requested feedback on the
draft on the JCT analysis on economic modeling generally and
how to treat dynamic revenue that results from a macroeconomic
analysis of the discussion draft. I am pleased that so many
stakeholders and economists have offered feedback thus far, and
during the hearing this morning we intend to examine some of
the feedback relating to dynamic analysis.
The Tax Reform Act is a huge, important step forward in
creating a better Tax Code for both individuals and businesses,
but that is not to say it can't be improved upon. And that is
why Chairman Camp released this as a discussion draft, to
gather feedback from stakeholders and experts in a public and
transparent manner.
I am looking forward to our great bipartisan discussion
today. I thank our witnesses for being here and taking the
time. I now yield to Ranking Member Neal for his opening
statement.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for calling this
important hearing on dynamic scoring. As many of us know, this
is an issue that has been around for a considerable period of
time. And I would note that, as the chairman described, the
response to Mr. Camp's proposal on the Republican side, I think
it is fair to say, was more dynamic than the response on the
Democratic side.
What it does allow is the opportunity to have an open and
honest dialogue about dynamic scoring today. The witnesses that
the committee has put before us are all distinguished. I have
known many of them in different capacities and have great
regard for the suggestions that they have made time and again.
It is one of the best things about serving on the Ways and
Means Committee, you really do hear from good witnesses, and
the people that you associate with on this committee I think
are superb in their talent.
So with the panel that is assembled today we can finally, I
hope, put to bed a few widespread and seemingly widely held
myths. One of the most dangerous is the notion that tax cuts
pay for themselves. As congressional observers can verify, the
notion that tax cuts pay for themselves was a rallying cry for
the deficit finance tax cuts from the previous decade--and,
frankly, the issue has been hanging around a lot longer than
that--tax cuts that failed to produce the job gains and the
economic growth that we were promised in the runup to their
passage.
From my perspective, to date this conversation surrounding
dynamic scoring has been a bit intellectually short. During the
last two decades, dynamic scoring has been a way to push tax
cuts, whether deficit financed or not.
Do some tax cuts generate income growth? Yes. But to apply
the assessment that all tax cuts pay for themselves, reduce the
deficit, or grow the economy really doesn't make sense
economically.
You should know, I am not categorically opposed to the
discussion or the approach to dynamic scoring that will be
outlined today. I believe that Congress and the Joint Committee
on Taxation and the Congressional Budget Office should all have
the best ideas and the opportunity to put those policies
forward that will influence the overall economic discussion,
but not to miss the point that for the last two decades dynamic
scoring has been a euphemism for enacting large tax cuts.
The point that is often overlooked with dynamic scoring
comes up when there are two sides of the ledger. If we are to
consider the positive effects that tax cuts may or may not have
on the economy, equally we should consider the positive effects
that government spending and investment policies and
initiatives would have on the economy as well.
Might I suggest that the dust-up that we are about to have
in the next 48 hours over a big infrastructure program, I
perhaps would be all in favor of applying dynamic scoring to
the idea of what greater efficiencies would be caused by a
large infrastructure bill based on the notion that we might not
be able to predict everything that would happen tomorrow, but
certainly over years to come it may well inure to the benefit
of American people.
So any time that we are to consider changing how CBO and
JCT keeps score, we also should also be mindful that these
changes have lasting consequences, and in doing so we may be
undermining one of the few remaining nonpartisan and well
informed commentators of the Nation's economic health. I
understand the short-term political gains for pushing tax cuts,
but again I caution against pursuing this track singularly.
Let me conclude by thanking the chairman. It has been a joy
to work with him over the years that we have both served on
this Select Revenue Subcommittee. And I yield back my time.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. Before I introduce today's witnesses, I
ask unanimous consent that all members' written statements be
included in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman TIBERI. We now turn to our panel of distinguished
witnesses, and I would like to welcome all of them.
First, Mr. John Diamond, a professor at Rice University in
Houston, Texas.
Thank you for being here.
Second, Mr. Doug Holtz-Eakin, president of the American
Action Forum here in Washington, D.C.
Thank you, Doug.
Third, Mr. Curtis Dubay, research fellow at The Heritage
Foundation here in Washington, D.C.
Thank you for being here.
Fourth, Mr. Scott Hodge, president of the Tax Foundation,
also here in Washington, D.C.
Thank you for being here, Scott.
Fifth, Mr. John Buckley, former chief tax counsel,
Committee on Ways and Means, and former chief of staff for the
Joint Committee on Taxation here in Washington, D.C.
Thank you, John, for being here.
And last but not least, Mr. J.D. Foster, deputy chief
economist at the Chamber of Commerce, also here in Washington,
D.C.
Thank you all for being here and sharing with us your
testimony.
First we are going to have Mr. Diamond.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN DIAMOND, PROFESSOR, RICE UNIVERSITY (HOUSTON,
TX)

Mr. DIAMOND. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Neal, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, it is a pleasure to
present my views on the importance of dynamic analysis.
So why is dynamic analysis important? A popular management
adage is, if you can't measure it, you can't manage it. Dynamic
analysis provides valuable information about the effects of
policy proposals on economic growth, and it is important that
we use this information to better manage U.S. fiscal policy.
Routinely disregarding information on the macroeconomic effects
of alternative proposals leads to a budget process that
undervalues proposals that increase the size of the economy and
overvalues proposals that shrink the size of the economy. We
can no longer afford a budget process that fails to maximize
economic growth.
We can learn several lessons from three dynamic analyses of
the Tax Reform Act of 2014, one using the model I developed
with my colleague George Zodrow at Rice University, one by the
JCT, and one by the Tax Foundation.
We find that the Tax Reform Act would increase GDP by 1.2
percent after 5 years, by 2.2 percent after 10 years, and by
3.1 percent in the long run.
The analysis using the OLG model by JCT found significantly
different results, and there are several explanations for that.
One, JCT assumes that the initial level of corporate income tax
revenues lost due to income shifting is 20 percent of the
corporate income tax base, whereas Dr. Zodrow and I use 24
percent. Also, JCT assumes that excess revenues go to
increasing government transfers, rather than further corporate
income tax rate reductions, as in our analysis.
Further rate reductions enhance growth effects because the
associated decline in income shifting allows for further rate
reduction that is obtained without the negative effects of base
broadening. An additional difference is that we account for the
negative impact of base broadening on real wage rates and thus
labor supply in the model.
The Tax Foundation found much smaller results, with only a
0.2 percent increase in GDP in the long run, as the cost of
capital increased under TRA, but the Tax Foundation analysis
discusses, but then ignores the benefits of reduced income
shifting, the benefits of the reallocation of firm-specific
capital to the United States, and the benefits of moving to a
territorial system. We included these important factors.
The results indicate that a base-broadening, rate-reducing
corporate income tax reform is more likely to result in
positive macroeconomic effects if the initial amount of income
shifting is large and is reduced significantly when the
statutory corporate income tax rate in the U.S. declines; if
the accelerated depreciation is retained, instead of being used
as a base-broadening provision; and if the base-broadening,
rate-reducing reform includes a move to a territorial system,
including anti-base-erosion proposals.
In addition, base-broadening, rate-reducing individual
income tax reform can also increase GDP, depending on the size
of the rate reductions, the base broadeners chosen, and the
extent to which individual income tax reductions are financed
by base broadening in the corporate sector. However, more
analysis is needed, and several principles should guide that
analysis.
First, dynamic analysis should be used to compare the
macroeconomic effects of various programs. Second, dynamic
analysis should examine and present results of the effects of
groups of provisions separately from the entire proposal. For
the Tax Reform Act, it would be interesting to see the effects
of the individual provisions, the effects of the rate-reduction
and base-broadening provisions in the corporate sector, and the
effects of the territorial provisions separately. This would
both increase information and increase the reliability of the
analysis. Third, the analysis should be timely and transparent,
with enough information released so that others can replicate
the results.
Let me end by noting that JCT has created a great deal of
institutional knowledge on microdynamic scoring, and it leads
to an immense ability of credibility in those results. I am
confident they can do the same for dynamic analysis.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Diamond.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Diamond follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN ACTION
FORUM (WASHINGTON, DC)

Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Neal,
Members of the Committee, it is a great privilege to be here
today and to again discuss the important issue of dynamic
scoring, which I had first discussed with this committee over a
decade ago. It will come as no surprise that I really want to
make three points in my remarks. First, to endorse the
principle of dynamic scoring and to stress that it can be done
in a disciplined fashion to rank all proposals in a fair way.
Second is to emphasize that it is perhaps most important in the
area of comprehensive tax reform, to look at all the impacts.
And then third, to comment briefly on the committee draft
proposal itself.
So on the principle of dynamic scoring, as the members well
know, the idea is to look at the conventional scoring that the
CBO and Joint Committee would do, which is to look at all of
the revenue and expenditure effects in the Federal budget from
enacting legislation, but to then take the further step of
looking at the impact of those proposals on macroeconomic
performance, the rate of economic growth, the rate of
inflation, the rate of unemployment, and the like, and the
feedbacks that that economic performance would have on the
Federal budget in both the tax and the expenditure sides, so
that you incorporate all of the impacts of moving from current
law, to the proposal, into the analysis.
And as a matter of disciplined budgeting and good economic
policy, it is important to recognize all those effects so that
two proposals that are the same budgetarily but have very
different growth effects are identified as not the same, but in
fact one is inferior and the one that produces more growth is
superior. And it is important for the committee to have that
information, as Mr. Diamond mentioned.
There are lots of important issues which I lay out in my
written testimony about how you might want to institutionalize
this. It is important to have rules, for example, on what
monetary policy will be doing during the fiscal policy
simulations. It is important to understand how to balance the
long-run budget in the process of analyzing these proposals.
But all of these are in fact just rules by which scoring
would be done. There are a large set of rules by which
conventional scoring is done at the moment. You can develop
rules to do dynamic scoring. And I would encourage the
committee to move ahead with that so that we have a way to rank
all proposals in a fair fashion and to bring the economic
policy impacts into the discussion.
It is especially important in tax reform. Tax reform, by
definition, is lowering marginal rates, broadening the base.
And when you do that, two important things can happen. Number
one, because tax rates are lower and the base is broader, fewer
economic decisions are made on the basis of tax influences and
more on fundamental business conditions or fundamental
preferences of households and you get rid of a lot of
misallocations. You get people working the amount that they
want and not hiding out of the labor force, you get capital
coming back to the United States from overseas, which is parked
there now because of Tax Code reasons, and you in general use
the labor, the capital, and the technologies in the economy
better. That makes the economy bigger, and you want to
recognize that in doing the analysis.
The second thing is that you can in fact remove some of the
double taxation of saving and investment, and provide better
incentives for innovation, for accumulation of human capital
and skills, physical capital investment, and that will make the
economy grow better. And you want to recognize that in the
analysis as well.
If you do what you think is a tax reform and those two
things aren't happening, you don't have a good tax reform. It
is important for the committee to know that the policy can be
improved. And so I think, in this setting especially, doing a
dynamic score should be part of the process.
And lastly, if you look at the committee draft, it has
those characteristics. There is a large literature which has
looked at the potential benefits of tax reforms, which either
push us toward a more comprehensive income tax, or in some
cases push us to a more growth-oriented consumption tax base.
The committee proposal is at neither of those extremes, but it
is close enough to comprehensive reform that it would in fact
generate beneficial growth impacts. Our reading of the
literature suggests they could be as much as half a percentage
point over the next 10 years. The estimate you have heard
before, a little more modest than that. But those are important
numbers in an economy that is growing too slowly, generating
too few jobs, and generating too little income growth for the
American public.
So I appreciate the chance to be here today and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holtz-Eakin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Dubay, recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CURTIS DUBAY, RESEARCH FELLOW, HERITAGE FOUNDATION
(WASHINGTON, DC)

Mr. DUBAY. Good morning, Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member
Neal, and distinguished Members of the Committee. The views I
express in this testimony are my own and should not be
construed as representing any official position of The Heritage
Foundation.
Thank you for having me here today to discuss the important
issue of dynamic scoring and tax reform. I have been working on
tax reform for a decade now, first at the Tax Foundation, then
at PricewaterhouseCoopers, and for the last 6 years at
Heritage. In that time, I have learned the primary reason we
badly need tax reform is to improve the economy's potential and
increase incomes and opportunities for all American families.
Chairman Camp's recently released tax reform proposal was a
big step in the right direction for finally achieving tax
reform, in large part because it included a dynamic estimate of
the plan's income on the economy from the Joint Committee on
Taxation. The chairman and staff should be applauded for
securing that estimate.
Dynamic analysis is the right way to evaluate tax reform
because we know that tax reform improves the economy. It does
so by increasing incentives for families, businesses,
investors, and entrepreneurs to engage in economically
productive activities like working, investing, and taking
risks, which are the catalyst for economic growth. And we know
that they all respond to incentives.
Traditional static scoring hampers task reform's progress
because it does not measure how it strengthens the economy. It
is incomplete. A tax reform plan with only a static score is
like a business plan without an estimate of profitability.
Now, there is certainly a reasonable disagreement over how
responsive families and businesses are when tax rates fall.
Those are reasons to present a range of estimates, using
various models and an array of elasticities that fall within
the mainstream estimates from empirical academic literature,
not for shunning dynamic analysis altogether.
As my colleagues in The Heritage Foundation's Center for
Data Analysis, or CDA, wrote recently, it is better for
estimates of tax reform to be approximately right than
precisely wrong. Static scoring is precisely wrong.
CDA conducted a dynamic estimate of the Camp plan. They
found it would increase economic output by $92 billion per year
during the 10-year budget window and it would increase
employment by 548,000 jobs per year. CDA found these positive
impacts because of the lower rates on families and businesses
the plan institutes in its first few years and the move to a
territorial system.
According to CDA's estimates, the growth effects of the
Camp plan taper off the longer it is in place, as policies that
increase tax on investment, and therefore increase the cost of
capital, have time to go fully into effect. Those include
longer depreciation lives for capital and amortization of
research and development and advertising expenses.
To reverse that downward trend and increase the Camp plan's
positive impact on growth, current depreciation schedules at
minimum would need to be restored and advertising and R&D
returned to fully deductible expenses. Lower rates would also
help make the Camp plan more pro-growth. The top rate under the
plan is 38.3 percent. That is only 5 percentage points below
where it is today.
Chairman Camp understandably chose to adhere to the flawed
revenue baseline constructed by the Congressional Budget Office
when making his plan revenue neutral. The revenue target that
baseline sets is too high, because it assumes that Congress
intends for expiring tax policies to expire permanently.
Under the reasonable assumption that Congress does not
intend to raise taxes by default, Chairman Camp's plan could
raise nearly $1 trillion less and still remain revenue neutral.
That money could be used to reverse the policies that raise the
cost of capital and reduce the plans top rate significantly.
Chairman Camp's proposal has given renewed energy to the
tax reform debate. A key to maintaining that momentum is to
make sure JCT continues offering dynamic estimates of tax
reform and other major pieces of tax legislation. The more JCT
does dynamic estimates, the better it will become at doing them
and the more opportunities outside experts will have to help
JCT refine its methodology to improve it analyses even more.
Thank you again for having me here today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dubay follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Hodge, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT HODGE, PRESIDENT, TAX FOUNDATION
(WASHINGTON, DC)

Mr. HODGE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Neal,
Members of the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to be
here today.
There are many very good reasons to overhaul the Tax Code,
simplicity and equity, but really economic growth ought to be
the primary objective. And while we all may want a simpler,
more equitable Tax Code, if that kind of a tax system actually
leads to less economic growth, we ought to think twice about
some of those policies.
And this is why dynamic analysis must be an essential tool
of any effort to reform the Tax Code. There are many base
broadeners that may seem like a reasonable tradeoff for a lower
rate when measured on a conventional basis, but what we find
actually turn out to be antigrowth when measured on a dynamic
basis.
And let me echo Mr. Diamond that in order to do tax reform
right, members should be provided a dynamic analysis of each
component of the plan as it is being put together, not just at
the end of the process after it is all done. And only then will
members know which components maximize growth and which don't.
However, economic growth should not be an accidental
outcome of tax reform or the process. Before even beginning to
think about the process of tax reform, lawmakers ought to set
out a goal, an objective for how much economic growth they hope
to achieve as a result of their tax reform plan. Any policy
that subtracts from that goal ought to be rejected. Any policy
that adds to it should be accepted.
And let me echo my colleagues that Chairman Camp's plan has
many positive features that by themselves would promote
economic growth and competitiveness. And chief among those are
the lower rates on corporate and individual tax rates and
eliminating the AMT. And when we modeled these policies in
isolation with no offsets, we found that they would boost GDP
growth by nearly 5 percent and create more than 5 million new
jobs.
And we also found that on a dynamic basis these rate cuts
were much less costly than they appear on a static basis, as
much as 60 percent less costly for the corporate rate cut and
20 percent less costly for the individual rate cut. Actually,
the corporate rate cut pays for itself beyond the budget
window.
However, what we found is that many of the offsets that
were required to keep the chairman's plan revenue neutral on a
static basis had the effect of dampening the growth potential
of the plan over the long term. And when we modeled the
chairman's plan, we found that the plan would increase GDP by
0.22 percent over the long run.
However, we also found that because the plan raised the
cost of capital in a number of ways it would reduce the capital
stock modestly, which would slightly decrease pretax wages. But
because the plan reduces marginal tax rates on labor income, it
would raise after-tax wages slightly, and that in turn would
encourage more labor force participation and create as many as
486,000 full-time jobs. But what these results mean, though, is
that people would be working longer, but producing less total
output with less capital.
However, what we found was that by modifying just a few of
the plan's provisions that raise the cost of capital, we can
generate even more economic growth. For instance, if we just
maintain the current MACRS depreciation system, as opposed to
the ADS system that is in the current plan, we could boost GDP
growth by 1.3 percent and create as many as 685,000 jobs.
In a similar way, we modeled the original Camp plan with 50
percent bonus expensing on a permanent basis, and found that
such a plan would increase GDP by nearly 2 percent and create
as many at 780,000 new jobs.
Well, before I conclude, I do want to say that the Joint
Committee on Taxation does deserve credit for doing a dynamic
analysis to the chairman's plan. However, the JCT does invite
some criticism of its work because of the rather opaque way in
which it presents its results, and the lack of transparency in
documenting how it produces the results that it does. As my
seventh grade math teacher said, show me your work. And that is
what we would like to see, because the Joint Committee has made
substantial changes to their models over the last decade or so,
and it is time they subjected those changes and their core
models to review by experts in the field. And if members are
going to have any confidence that JCT's estimates are accurate
and it is using state-of-the-art tools, then it must allow
outside experts to review those on a peer-reviewed basis.
Well, despite all the criticism, dynamic scoring is really
about accuracy, credibility, and having the tools to guide us
toward tax policies that promote economic growth and steer us
away from policies that reduce living standards. And by
contrast, the conventional static analysis leaves lawmakers in
the dark about the economic consequences of their tax choices,
and to me that is economic malpractice.
Relying on static scoring turns tax reform into an exercise
in arithmetic, rather than an exercise in promoting policies
that raise people's living standards and the overall health of
the American economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate any comments you may
have.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Hodge.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hodge follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. And thank you for endorsing my bonus
depreciation bill. Maybe you can work on my colleague from New
England.
Mr. HODGE. Anything we can do to help.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Buckley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BUCKLEY, FORMER CHIEF TAX COUNSEL, COMMITTEE
ON WAYS AND MEANS, AND FORMER CHIEF OF STAFF, JOINT COMMITTEE
ON TAXATION (WASHINGTON, DC)

Mr. BUCKLEY. Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member Neal, thank
you and the rest of the committee members for the opportunity
to speak before you today.
I think it is important to understand that all of the
models being discussed today are models that are based on what
I call supply-side principles, the notion that increasing the
number and supply of people willing to work will automatically
translate into greater economic growth. I think that theory is
no longer relevant when we have a world economy where there are
virtually unlimited supplies of labor overseas and U.S.
multinationals responding to market outcomes--this is not due
to any distortion--responding to market outcomes are
increasingly accessing those unlimited labor supplies to
produce goods and services.
I think the question is quite simple when you look at these
models: Is the basic economic challenge facing this country a
lack of jobs or too few people looking for work? I think we all
know what the answer to that question is. Yet, the models that
we use today, that are being discussed today, assume that
increases in labor supply will automatically translate into
increased economic growth. They handle the problem of
unemployment in most models by simply assuming it does not
exist.
I think it is important for the members to realize that the
models have been totally erroneous in their projections in the
past. They have predicted severe economic issues from the 1993
tax increases that did not occur. Indeed, the period following
the 1993 tax increase was one of fairly robust economic growth.
They projected large benefits from the 2001 and 2003 tax
reductions. Again, that did not occur.
I think one reason why those projections have been wrong is
that the models in large respect are divorced from reality. And
here I want to use Professor Diamond's model as an example. He
does not analyze the proposal against today's economy. He
assumes we have an economy with no unemployment and an economy
where people always act in their best interest, guided by the
ability, with perfect foresight, to foresee the future.
He does not analyze the actual Camp proposal. He assumes
that the Camp proposal will be accompanied by massive
reductions in entitlement programs to bring our budget to a
sustainable level. The amount of entitlement programs assumed
in his model would be at least $2 trillion over the next 10
years, with a lot more to follow.
He assumes that the Camp bill will further reduce the
corporate rate to 20 percent, which does have the effect of
reducing the increase in the cost of capital that the prior
witnesses have talked about that would occur under the actual
Camp proposal.
Mr. Chairman, I think this committee is wise to examine
dynamic scoring. I don't think it is wise to get involved in
the argument of which model is best and which assumptions are
appropriate. I think they should look at the underlying
principles that underlie these models and examine why they may
no longer be relevant.
In the 20-year period preceding 2008, virtually all
employment growth in this country occurred only in the sector
of our economy not subject to cross-border competition, and
most of that employment growth occurred in health care,
government, and retail. Many believe that we cannot rely on
those sectors any longer for increased employment
opportunities.
Those responses were all due to market forces. A tax reform
plan based on the primacy of economic neutrality does nothing
to reverse the market forces that have caused a loss of
domestic manufacturing employment. Indeed, for reasons that
have been expressed before, the Camp bill, because it increases
the cost of domestic capital, will reduce incentives to invest
in the United States and therefore could be a long-term drag on
economic growth.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Buckley.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Buckley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Foster, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF J.D. FOSTER, DEPUTY CHIEF ECONOMIST, U.S. CHAMBER
OF COMMERCE (WASHINGTON, DC)

Mr. FOSTER. Good morning, Chairman Tiberi, Ranking Member
Neal, Members of the Committee. My name is J.D. Foster. I am
the deputy chief economist at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning on
dynamic analysis of the Tax Reform Act of 2014.
I always enjoy when an esteemed tax lawyer pretends he is
an economist. I would love to have the opportunity to give a
brief before the U.S. Supreme Court. That would be great fun as
an economist. I probably wouldn't do very well, but I would
enjoy it.
Mr. Buckley notes, quite correctly, that the models we tend
to use are supply side in nature, and indeed they are, and they
do, in fact, assume a certain level of full employment. That is
the same assumption, I should point out, that the Congressional
Budget Office makes, that despite the poor performance of our
economy in recent years, the economy will, in fact, get to full
employment. It is, in fact, the forecast of the administration,
which forecasts that we will, in fact, get back to full
employment.
So one can, of course, question whether or not that will
ever be the case under current policies, but at least that is
the forecast in the basis of the modeling.
Returning to Chairman Camp's proposal, many lessons have
been drawn from this, and I will summarize them, the five key
lessons regarding dynamic analysis, as follows.
First, the Joint Tax Committee proved dynamic analysis of
tax policy can be done credibly, refuting longstanding
assertions to the contrary by some.
Second, dynamic analysis remains roughly equal parts art
and science.
Three, it remains important to consider a variety of models
under a variety of assumptions. As they gain experience,
analysts should be able to settle on a single primary model and
assumption set. But the tools are not there yet. Consequently,
it remains important at this stage to give heed to each model's
results under a variety of assumptions.
And with respect to the tax reform process itself, the most
important lesson of all by far, the amount of additional growth
required from tax reform should be made explicit and specific
at the outset. Comprehensive tax reform offers a unique
opportunity to strengthen the U.S. economy substantially
compared to what it otherwise would be, but there is a lot of
work, as evidenced by the tremendous effort that went into the
Camp plan, and it would ultimately engage the whole Nation. The
expected results should justify the effort.
Proponents of pro-growth tax reform long been handicapped
at the outset, but in a manner only now apparent. Tax reform is
typically required to meet a variety of ex ante, identified,
and precisely quantified design criteria. One such criteria is
revenue neutrality. A second is distributional neutrality. Each
of these can be justified as necessary to reform, but each is
likely to limit the ability of tax reform to improve the
economy.
In addition, many tax provisions of little or no overall
economic consequence hover over tax reform. It is likely some
would be preserved, further reducing the extent of other
changes that would be expected to benefit the overall economy.
In contrast, the most important criterion of all, a
stronger economy, has been left generic and loose, and thus
repeatedly suffered at the expense of the other criteria.
Tax reform's chief objective is a stronger economy. Yet,
according to the body of analysis available to date, an honest
appraisal must conclude the Camp proposal shows a fairly modest
improvement in economic performance, likely much less than
intended.
How did this come about? What constrained the effort so
that it was unable to produce the kind of game-changing
economic gain intended and what should be expected? Perhaps the
models used for data economic analysis are yet too rudimentary
to capture properly the full magnitude of growth effects from
tax reform. Perhaps.
Much of the answer is certainly that while a significantly
stronger economy was the goal, the size of required gain was
not specified. As has been common in the past, whatever
additional growth was anticipated, the result was accepted as
the best one could do, even if it meant the best was not very
much.
In contrast, major design criteria such as revenue and
distributional neutrality were met with fair precision. Put
simply, in a contest of competing requirements, this was not a
fair fight. Substantially stronger growth never had a chance.
Fortunately, the problem being clear, the solution is equally
clear. Tax reform should proceed with a definite, specific,
realistic, and quantified goal for a stronger economy.
Deciding tax reform's goal for economic improvement is a
debate unto itself. To advance the debate one could contemplate
an economic growth budget. How much economic growth is lost to
current policy and how much economic growth are we willing to
spend through the Tax Code? The analogy to tax expenditure
analysis is obvious. Here we are not talking about the revenue
effects of individual provisions, but rather the aggregate
economic effects of tax policy overall.
Among competing goals, economic growth should be treated as
first among equals in the formulation of comprehensive tax
reform. As we have learned, this requires the goal to be
explicit, not merely a stronger economy, but how much. Such an
explicit goal also means we will have a clearer understanding
of the economy budget, how much economic growth we are willing
to give up through the Tax Code to achieve noneconomic goals.
Such a goal and such a debate is only possible because of
the progress to date in dynamic analysis. This progress must
continue for the analysis to be credible, and reliable, thus
for the projected economic improvement to be credible, and thus
for the comprehensive tax reform to be surely successful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Foster.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Foster follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman TIBERI. Before I ask a question, Mr. Buckley, you
took issue with a portion of Mr. Diamond's written testimony. I
would like to comment on a data point in your testimony--in
your written testimony--that I believe is incorrect, in your
main thesis about the effects of the Camp draft on business
investments. You rest this claim that the Camp proposal, and I
am going to quote from your written testimony, ``would result
in a net $590 billion tax increase on corporate income and
business income of individuals,'' end of quote.
So you cite the JCT macroeconomic analysis for this quote,
but I think you forget a huge caveat that JCT included in their
analysis. In fact, the $590 billion claim includes revenue
raisers on pass-through businesses, but ignores the benefits of
actual cuts in the individual rate on those same businesses and
completely ignores the AMT repeal on those same pass-through
businesses. And while we don't have exact numbers, the business
tax cuts amount to hundreds of billions of dollars, wiping out
a large portion of those tax increases that you cite. So I just
wanted to make that point.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Mr. Chairman, may I respond----
Chairman TIBERI. At the end of my questions, you may.
So going to my question, and I would like to ask Mr. Hodge
this first, a number of you, including you, Mr. Hodge,
recommended changes to the discussion draft and argued that the
tradeoff between tax reduction and cost recovery is
particularly difficult.
There are several temporary tax policies, as you know, that
are designed to speed up cost recovery, but which Congress only
extends on a temporary basis, many times retroactively. We have
had this debate. I have introduced, as you know, a couple of
those that have both passed the House. One, bonus depreciation,
which you mentioned. Another, Section 179 small business
expensing. Permanent on both without offsetting them with
raising taxes elsewhere.
So, first, do you think that we should assume these
policies are permanent for purposes of defining tax revenue
neutrality and distribution neutrality? That would be one
question.
And second, how do you believe including permanent versions
of both of these policies as part of the Tax Reform Act of
2014, without the need to offset them with higher taxes
elsewhere, would increase economic growth through tax reform--
--
Mr. HODGE. As I mentioned, Mr. Chairman, we modeled the
Camp proposal with 50 percent bonus expensing on a permanent
basis and found that it significantly increased the growth
potential of the plan. And we have actually modeled your
proposal on its own and found that it would achieve quite
considerable economic growth, create jobs, and more
importantly, lower the cost of capital, which would be a great
benefit to workers, it would provide them with better tools.
And we found that generally when it comes to expensing
provisions or provisions that allow full cost recovery, that in
the long run cost recovery or full expensing ends up paying for
itself. In fact, our model shows that it has greater economic
benefits than simply lowering the corporate tax rate. We think
both should be done, and they should be done at the same time,
and then you will get even greater economic growth.
But certainly I think those are the kind of provisions
that, unfortunately, because of the static requirements that
Chairman Camp was working under, required this tradeoff. And we
really don't think it was necessary. You could have done both.
You could have lowered the rate and moved toward expensing, and
that would have boosted tremendously the growth potential of
the plan.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Holtz-Eakin, your thoughts on that----
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. The issue of the baseline is an important
one. And right now the baseline has this tremendous asymmetry
where if a spending program exceeds $50 million it is extended
indefinitely regardless of whether it has been reauthorized by
Congress or not, but a comparable provision on the tax side is
assumed to expire, and it leads to an imbalance, in my view, in
the way policies are evaluated.
The top criteria should be to treat proposals in a fair
fashion, and that is a fundamental asymmetry that is built into
it. I would treat them both the same, thus the bonus
depreciation would be extended. That has been the practice of
the Congress, that would be the baseline if we had symmetry
between the tax and the expenditure side. And so, I think you
should do that, and you would get better information about the
real budget outlook, and if you do the dynamic analysis you get
better information about the economic policy.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Diamond.
Mr. DIAMOND. I agree with their analysis. I think it would
be interesting. I think the JCT has actually looked at this in
a dynamic analysis and I think that was very useful. I do take
and actually used a version of an OLG model, and I take issue
with four of the five points that Mr. Buckley raised.
Chairman TIBERI. I thought you would.
Mr. DIAMOND. He was correct on one. But he said it is only
supply-side effects, but the 2003 act used my model and we
found negative effects in the out years, so that is directly
contrary to your testimony.
You dis the idea of perfect foresight, but two very
prominent economists in 1987, in a book called ``Dynamic Fiscal
Policy,'' on page 10, give this reasoning for perfect
foresight: Perfect foresight may seem extreme, but it is
actually very useful. Actual deviations in individual behavior
are both likely to understate and overstate. So one household
may overstate wages and one household may understate wages.
So perfect foresight is kind of the perfect average. But he
argues for using a myopic model. A myopic model systematically
gets the wrong answer, so you assume everybody makes the same
mistake every period. How can we possibly want that type of
model over an OLG model, which has a much more reasonable side.
So again, that is Auerbach, Kotlikoff page 10.
Supply and demand analysis, it is only supply side. That is
false. My model includes both a labor supply and a labor
demand. Firms have a derived labor demand. So we have both
demand and supply effects. If only supply were to increase,
what you would get is you would get an increase in labor
supply, but you would also get a reduction in the wage rate.
And I would expect any of my Econ 201 students to be able to
point that out on a test question.
Finally, this issue of, what do you do with these huge
projected budget deficits? And his response is that the model
is totally unrealistic because we don't deal with it. We don't
actually assume there is a massive reduction in transfer
payments. I just assume not to look at it, because I can't tell
you how you all are going to solve that problem.
But I can tell you this: If I assumed that the problem was
solved by tax increases, then that implies that tax rates would
be higher and economic distortions would be larger, and thus
the positive effects of tax reform would be bigger, not
smaller. So if I am wrong anywhere, I am wrong for
underestimating the size of the effects.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Buckley.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to respond. First of all, my numbers come out of the Joint
Committee analysis. What is indisputable from the Joint
Committee analysis, and from some of the prior witnesses, is
that the Camp draft will increase the cost of domestic capital,
leading to projected reductions in business investment. That is
the result of the Joint Committee analysis using their own
derived model.
The point I am trying to make about the economic
assumptions is that they are quite unrealistic. It is not
ultimate full employment that is assumed in some of these
models, it is that we have a full employment economy today and
at all times.
Increases in labor supply can automatically translate into
increased economic growth only an economy of full employment,
otherwise they just add to the current surplus of unused labor
supply. These are I think important issues.
Now let me apologize if Professor's Diamond's model got it
right in 2003. Then Representative John Kasich stood on the
floor of the House of Representatives and said every economic
model in this country projects that this bill is a job killer.
And they were wrong.
These models I think are very imperfect guides to policy.
We have a world with unlimited labor supply overseas. If we do
not enact policies to increase the competitiveness of U.S.
businesses in the world economy, the increased labor supply
will not be utilized.
Chairman TIBERI. Okay, thank you. We could have a good
debate here. I am going to ask Mr. Foster to comment on my
question.
Mr. FOSTER. Thank you, sir.
I think this might be time to refer to something I wrote in
my testimony regarding the process with which one would use
dynamic analysis in practice. And it starts with how CBO does
its beginning forecast. First, we get some sense of where the
economy is today. That in itself is difficult. Then CBO has a
projection for potential output. That shows we are at full
employment whenever we get there, where we would be, and how
that trajectory goes over time. And then the forecaster has to
figure out some way to draw the line so that we go from where
we are to the potential.
What dynamic analysis really does, done properly, is to
shift that potential, hopefully up. And then we figure out how
does that change the trajectory from where we are to the new
potential in going forward. It doesn't assume in practice that
we are instantly at full employment. We use that for modeling
exercises now because we are still learning how the models
work, but in practice one would never do that, any more than
CBO today in doing an economic forecast, or the administration,
would say, okay, we think instantly we are at full employment.
Now, if we are at full employment, that is fine, today we
are not there. So, one would not use that sort of methodology.
We are still learning the models, and so we go to the
abstraction of assuming we are at potential output today. That
is not how dynamic analysis would ever be used in practice.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Dubay, do you want to add anything to that?
Mr. DUBAY. That is exactly what I was going to say, that
tax reform is about increasing the economy's potential. So when
you go back to, say, the 1993 tax hikes, it would be more
accurate to say that the economy won't be as strong because of
them. We probably would have had stronger job growth had we not
raised taxes in the early 1990s, during that decade. Same thing
goes for the tax cuts in the early 2000's, the economy wouldn't
have grown as strongly as it did had we not cut taxes at that
point.
On the issue of the extenders, I think it does hinder tax
reform, because think about it, according to Chairman Camp they
had to replace a trillion dollars of revenue they wouldn't
otherwise had to had you had an equal treatment between tax
policy and spending policy under the CBO baseline. So that
means that Chairman Camp was forced into even more difficult
choices, which included having to extend depreciation lives,
which cut down on the growth potential. So I think it is
important to equalize the treatment so that we can get better
tax policy going forward.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to submit for the record a series of posts from Bruce Bartlett,
who served in the Reagan and Bush senior administrations, as
well as working on the staff of Representative Kemp and Ron
Paul.
Chairman TIBERI. Without objection.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you.
I don't think as we pursue this discussion that the
argument should come to one side favoring tax increases. We are
trying to figure out the manifestation of sound policy that
will promote economic growth. I think we can all agree upon
that.
And at the same time, I must tell you, as you practice
economics, you can see how that doesn't always translate into
the certainty of the speeches on the House floor or the
meetings in the Oval Office, as I heard Vice President Cheney
when I was invited, it was just a handful of us, to the Oval
Office within days of Bush junior becoming President, and we
went back and forth on tax policy as the President laid out his
proposal.
And the President asked me what I thought, and I thought it
was a very honest opportunity for the conversation. And I
suggested, Mr. President, why don't we do some modest tax cuts
for middle-income Americans and continue to pay down the debt?
The rejection didn't come from the President, it came from Vice
President Cheney, who had served with me in the House in a
prior life.
And I call that to your attention, because even though you
give us speculation, which I think is very important as to what
outcomes might occur based on what policies, that is not the
way it is translated in the course of a campaign. And that is
part of the difficulty with the soundness of what has been
offered here today in terms of discussion.
Now, Mr. Buckley also referenced a key point. I remember
that discussion as we closed the debate on Clinton's budget in
1993. And the principal architect in the House at the time of
dynamic scoring was the majority leader, Dick Armey. He argued,
juxtaposed with the position of now Governor Kasich, two
points.
One, if we embraced that budget that Clinton offered in
1993--and by the way, credit to Bush senior for the courage
that he demonstrated--but if we embraced that Clinton budget in
1993, one of them said, it will take us to fiscal Armageddon.
The other said as the debate closed with the lights
dimming, and I recall it vividly, we would head toward the
greatest depression since the depression of the 1930s by
endorsing and embracing that budget.
Instead, two budgets from Clinton and one from Bush senior
took us to the greatest spurt of economic growth in the history
of the company.
Mr. Eakin, appreciating the honesty that you frequently
bring to these discussions, could you see a path of using
dynamic scoring to bring about a sound infrastructure
investment proposal for the country, trying to measure those
outcomes----
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I think there is no reason to restrict
insights into economic policy to just the tax side of the
budget, there is no question about that. I think, if I could--I
don't want to take too much time----
Mr. NEAL. No, please.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN [continuing]. It is important to recognize
that this is a scoring issue and that most of scoring is about
ranking alternative proposals. There are a lot of claims about
accuracy. There will always be inaccuracies in this process,
static, dynamic, whatever you want to liable it. The future is
a very difficult thing to predict, period.
But you should do your very best, as CBO does now and the
Joint Committee does now, to sort of put yourself in the middle
of the range of outcomes, it could be higher, it could be
lower, try to get it right in the middle, and systematically
rank things in the right order. And that is the most important
thing that you would do if you brought dynamic scoring into the
process, is get the rankings right, reflecting the best of our
ability to model the economics.
The second thing I would say is, these are models. There is
a lot of criticism about how they are not reality. They are not
supposed to be reality. The whole point of a model is to
extract from reality key features you care about. What are the
key features for economic growth, put those in a model, see the
growth impacts. And for that reason you shouldn't say, this is
what is going to happen. You should say, this is what is going
to be improved by this proposal, although the future may happen
however it may be.
And so I don't think it does any good to say, well, there
was a claim about a model and then we end up having rapid
growth or a claim about a model and we had bad growth. Those
are two different thanks.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you.
Mr. Buckley, one of challenges that is facing us is this
notion of the worker participation rate. Today's announcement
that the economy grew by 4 percent--and we still note there are
too many people working part time and who are underemployed--
and would you finish the position that you were offering
earlier with Mr. Tiberi----
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, my view is that what you need for long-
term economic growth is for the United States to be competitive
in the world economy. And that requires incentives for domestic
investment, whether it is bonus depreciation or current law,
you need investments in human capital so our workers are more
productive in the world economy.
We have a world economy now. Our companies are very good at
accessing this vast supply of labor overseas. And again, let me
repeat, all because of market outcomes. This is not a
distortion in economic. They are going overseas because the
market tells them to do it.
We need to have policies to encourage them to stay here
with investments in physical capital and human resources that
will make our economy more productive in the long term. You
should note some of these projections of economic growth assume
that people work longer at lower wages because of the decline
in capital investment. That is not my vision of how to improve
our long-term economic situation.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Neal. Having worked for
John Kasich for 8 years, he certainly doesn't need to be
defended here. But what I think he would say, which I have
heard him say a whole lot of times, is that maybe the
trajectory changed because of the 1994 election, where the
House was taken by Republicans and the Senate was taken by
Republicans and the trajectory of spending and the regulatory
environment changed. That is what he would say. Again, he
doesn't need defending, but since he is not here, he would take
issue with a couple of those statements.
I recognize Mr. Paulsen for 5 minutes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we appreciate all
the testimony from the witnesses.
I am going to start out more specifically, then expand a
little bit more broadly, and I am going to reference a specific
tax that was included actually in--repealing a specific tax
that was included in the Camp draft. It has had a very negative
impact on companies in Minnesota, in my State and around the
country. It is the medical device excise tax. And studies have
shown that this excise tax has led to job reductions, hiring
freezes, reduced investments in research and development and
capital infrastructure in the medtech industry.
Mr. Holtz-Eakin, I will just start with you. Can you please
describe maybe how repealing this tax and potentially reversing
some of these trends could generate economic activity that
could be incorporated into a dynamic analysis, and what would
the overall effect be of repealing the medical device tax under
a dynamic analysis look like----
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, as you know, the American Action
Forum has actually done some work on the medical device tax and
found that it does have negative impacts on employment in that
sector, on investment and innovation in that sector. Those are
analyses that one can capture under conventional scoring and
should, but the conventional scoring would then have to take
those employees and put them somewhere else in the economy,
take the income that is lost there and have it generated
somewhere else in the economy. Putting that into the dynamic
analysis, along with the other features, gives you a better
trajectory of long-run investment, innovation, and growth.
I would say that as a matter of practice you don't want to
have to do full-blown dynamic analysis on every proposal. Only
large ones merit that kind of treatment.
Mr. PAULSEN. And then I will just expand a little more
broadly then. One of the most important parts of developing tax
reform legislation is analyzing the tradeoffs between lower
rates and then those provisions that narrow the tax base. And,
Mr. Hodge, you mentioned earlier that dynamic scoring is really
about accuracy, credibility, having the tools that guide us
toward tax policies that promote growth.
Now, some of the provisions are of little economic benefit
that are in the code right now and clearly should be eliminated
to help lower rates, but other provisions have significant
economic effects that must be weighed very carefully against
the benefit of lower rates. In the various models that all of
you have looked at or used to estimate the economic effects of
the discussion draft, which revenue raisers, other than general
depreciation rules, have a material impact on the economy----
I can just start with Mr. Diamond, and we can just kind of
go down.
Mr. DIAMOND. Well, any of the revenue raisers that affect
the cost of capital would have had the largest impact on the
growth effects. So accelerated appreciation, the research and
investment credit, other things like that. In addition, revenue
raisers on the individual side, you would want to get the
revenue raisers that promote the most efficiency in the
economy. So maybe reforming the mortgage interest deduction
would have increased growth because it would have reduced the
difference in the tax treatment of business capital and housing
capital. And so some reform on that front, which I have written
on previously, would also help to alter the proposal to get
bigger growth effects.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Dubay maybe.
Mr. DUBAY. Yeah, I agree. I agree. Anything that increases
the cost of capital has depressing growth effects. One thing, I
look at the 10 percent surtax as a pay-for, so that raises that
top rate up to 38.3 percent, so I look at that as an
opportunity to increase growth by getting that further down.
Mr. PAULSEN. Good point.
Mr. Hodge.
Mr. HODGE. Yeah, I would echo all of those, and I would
also throw into the mix the capital gains treatment. And while
the chairman's proposal doesn't really increase the effective
capital gains rate that much, we think it would have some
material effect. And I think, if anything, we should be
reducing the capital gains rate back to where it was prior to 2
years ago when it was raised to 20 percent, or now it is 23.8
percent.
So all of those things can materially affect the growth
potential of these plans, and really, it is the cost of
capital, I will just echo everyone else's sentiment on this,
that is the driving force here.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Foster, just from the chamber perspective,
just the cost of capital. Any other observation?
Mr. FOSTER. Well, the general rule is that the Tax Code
inherently distorts economic activity, and so any movement in
tax reform towards reducing those distortions, any at all, is
beneficial. What we are not always very good at in economics is
determining which ones are most harmful to economic growth and
which are not. But the cost of capital, I think we all agree on
this panel, is certainly very, very important.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Chairman, I see my time is almost expired.
I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Larson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me reiterate
what my distinguished colleague, Richie Neal, had to say before
about the importance of these hearings and our distinguished
panelists and commend the chairman for providing us the
opportunity to learn from sources, exceptional sources, and
people that have a great deal to say and have a vast amount of
knowledge as well.
And this comes at a critical time in our economy and a
critical time when people are thinking through going through a
decision-making process. It also comes at a time when Congress,
I believe, is at a 7 percent approval rating with the American
people. And part of the reason that Congress is at that
juncture is because people have a hard time seeing any action
or believing what they are saying.
So what I always like to do is to try to apply what I call
the Augie & Ray's test to this. Now, I am not an economist, nor
am I an attorney, and so these are not pure, econometrics are
not going to be applied here. But what you do get at Augie &
Ray's is an unfiltered view of the world.
So, for example, listening here today, I am impressed with
the varying ways that you can look at the impact of the GDP.
But at Augie & Ray's, they would say, don't talk to me about
the GDP, talk to me about the JOB. And it is the JOB that the
American people are concerned about.
So it is great that we have this discussion, but how would
you--and I am going to start with Mr. Buckley--how would you
translate this? Because I think it is the responsibility of
Congress to demystify these things for the American people so
we can build the trust amongst them that policy and decisions
like this are important. But how is it that this is going to
impact my local manufacturers and those guys that stop by Augie
& Ray's, how is a family household impacted by this? What kind
of metrics? Or, I forget who used a term, I thought it was very
good, what kind of measurements do we have with respect to that
impact on those individuals that we can translate into
meaningful policy----
And I will start with Mr. Buckley.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, I think the first thing you want is a
positive business environment in the United States and positive
incentives for investment in the United States. I think one
agreement, if you are looking for a bipartisan agreement on
this panel, is that the Camp bill increases the cost of
domestic business, capital, and in the long run it is a
negative for investment in the United States.
Now, it has a particularly large impact on capital-
intensive industries, largely manufacturing. When people on
this panel say it increases the cost of capital, they are
talking about the average cost of capital. It doesn't increase
the cost of capital much for financial services businesses
because they do not utilize research and development expensing
or accelerated depreciation.
It will have a particularly adverse impact on those
segments of our economy that utilize those incentives. They
will see the biggest increase after cost of capital. And it is
those types of jobs that I believe are necessary for middle-
class growth and income. And it is those types of investments,
and I would say investments in human capital as well, that are
necessary for the United States to be productive or competitive
in an economy that has worldwide flows of capital.
Mr. LARSON. Isn't this the same problem that we are faced
with and other cognizance that the full committee has with
trade over this same issue? It is a global economy, and yet
this distrust at home amongst individuals over the fact that it
is easier for jobs to go overseas, and we get left out in the
process. And manufacturing seems to be depart and goes where
the lowest common denominator, in this case labor is, so for
reasons of profitability. You suggested earlier that we need to
have incentives to be here. Do the rest of the panelists agree
with that, do you think?
Mr. DIAMOND. I agree that we need to have incentives. I
agree with most of what Mr. Buckley just said. On the topic of
dynamic analysis, I think there are measures in the models that
would be useful, and we need to look beyond strictly looking at
GDP. And Mr. Hodge referenced this earlier, is you can have a
positive GDP response when capital is declining, and so the GDP
response is purely showing that people are working harder. But
people like to consume both goods and leisure, so if increases
in GDP come only from increased hours at work and possibly
lower wages as demand and supply in the models equilibrate,
that would be a bad thing.
In my model, I mean, you can look at employment, at wages,
you can actually look at welfare, so you could see, and welfare
would be a measure that is based on how much consumption do you
have both in terms of consumption goods and in leisure time,
and then we can measure this theoretical version of welfare.
And going back to Dr. Holtz-Eakin's point, this isn't a
projection that is meant to say this is exactly the right
number. These are meant to compare alternative proposals so
that we can reach and manage the U.S. economy to the highest
potential growth path.
Chairman TIBERI. The gentleman's time has expired, but
anyone else want to comment? Mr. Hodge, you want to comment?
Mr. HODGE. Just very quickly. I think getting to your point
on how tax reform can benefit the average person, you can see
that in dynamic analysis. For instance, when we analyzed on a
dynamic basis bonus expensing, if you look at that, the
distributional effects on a static basis, it shows that average
people don't benefit at all. But when you look at it on a
dynamic basis, after those economic effects have flowed through
to pretax incomes, you see that the incomes of everybody have
grown by about 2 percent.
That is the real benefit of a dynamic analysis, especially
on a distributional basis. You get to see the effects on real
people after the economic consequences have flowed through to
their wages.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Holtz-Eakin.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I think if you are talking to your
constituents, you can say, look, we have three problems that we
know about. We have too few people working. The people who have
jobs are not getting raises, income is not going up. And we are
at a disadvantage in the global economy, our competition is not
fair.
So you could fix some of that with trade, but if you are
just talking on tax policy, you can say, look, here is a
proposal that the dynamic analysis says improves GDP growth.
What does that mean? That means initially more people are
working. You can produce more because more people work. That is
a jobs problem. Eventually, everyone who wants to work is back
at work, and GDP can only go up by making them more productive
and generating more income. That means they are getting raises.
That is good.
And some of these proposals would actually level the
playing field between U.S. and international global
competitors. That would be great for purposes of the location
of activity in the United States. So this is about getting
jobs, getting raises, and keeping our companies here, and that
is what it is about.
Chairman TIBERI. Very good. Thank you. The gentleman's time
has expired.
Mr. Marchant is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Several of you have recommended changes to the discussion
draft, and in each case you have argued that the tradeoff
between rate reduction and cost recovery is difficult. There
are several temporary tax policies that are designed to speed
up cost recovery, but which Congress only extends for short
periods of times and often retroactively. The House has
recently voted to make two of these, bonus depreciation and
Section 179 small business expensing, permanent without
offsetting them with higher taxes elsewhere.
First, do you think we should assume these policies are
permanent for purposes of defining revenue neutral and
distributionality neutral tax reform? Mr. Diamond.
Mr. DIAMOND. I actually find that a hard question to
answer, so I will speak specifically to bonus depreciation. The
effects of bonus depreciation are much different whether it is
passed on a permanent basis or a temporary basis. If people
think bonus depreciation is going to be temporary, it could
cause firms to invest in the window and then would lead to
decreased investment outside of the window; whereas, if bonus
depreciation is permanent, you would have a more constant
rising up of investment. And so over a time path, we get very
different effects.
So I am not sure how we should make that assumption. I
think it is going to be proposal by proposal we would have to
think about that differently. But for bonus depreciation, I
think it is a pretty complex proposal to look at.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. I will just repeat what I said earlier,
which is for constructing baselines I think you should have
equal treatment, and the current treatment is unequal. You
could fix that by having the tax law sunset and the spending
program sunset, or you could fix that by having current policy
extended on both sides. It is my judgment that again and again
we have done Section 179, we have done bonus depreciation, it
is a sensible assumption to treat those as permanent in the
baseline until the Congress behaves differently.
Mr. DUBAY. I agree with Mr. Holtz-Eakin. I think we should
be looking at these as permanent policy. There is a question at
some point. At some point, all these policies were put into
place with an expiration, so they were temporary at one time or
another, but once Congress extends them one or two times, it is
subjective as to what criteria you use, but once you have
extended them a couple of times, at that point you should
assume that they are permanent. It has a great benefit to
having a consistent baseline everyone can agree on.
So one of the silver linings from the fiscal cliff tax
hikes from last year, we have a much closer current law and
current policy baseline. And I think we should be looking at
the current policy baseline for revenue to continue that
process of getting all on the same page.
Mr. MARCHANT. Let me ask a follow-up question on this
before I hear from the rest of you. How would including these
permanent versions of these policies as part of the Tax Reform
Act of 2014, without the need to offset them with higher taxes
elsewhere, increase the magnitude of economic growth inside of
that reform----
Mr. DIAMOND. So for bonus depreciation, JCT actually
provided a dynamic analysis in a committee hearing, and so they
found that bonus depreciation would increase GDP by two-tenths
of a percent. So that would be double the----
Mr. HODGE. I think they also found that it raised revenue.
Mr. DIAMOND. It raised revenue. Yeah, it increased the
capital stock by 0.6 to 1 percent.
Mr. HODGE. Paid for itself.
Mr. DIAMOND. So, I mean, it would be substantial,
especially considering the size of the policy, when you are
talking a 0.2 percent increase in GDP for a policy that has a
relatively small revenue impact.
Mr. MARCHANT. Mr. Chairman, one last question.
In countries such as Canada that over the years have
lowered their corporate tax rate, and other countries that
have, have they used a dynamic score, have they used a static
score, or have they used projected surpluses in revenue to use
up to pay for those----
Mr. HODGE. Every country has done it a little differently,
Congressman. Canada has been just cutting their corporate tax
rate with hardly any offsets against those rate cuts. In fact,
they have seen corporate tax revenue stay very steady
throughout the entire period of time, even during some of the
recessionary period, and largely because of income shifting.
They are benefitting from income shifting in propping up their
corporate tax collections.
A country like Slovakia is a very interesting case. When
they passed a flat tax more than a decade ago, they sought
analysis, dynamic analysis, from about seven several different
parties, including like the IMF, World Bank, local
universities, and then their own treasury. And then they found
one that they felt was probably more realistic, somewhere in
the middle.
I think that is a pretty good model. Let's look at outside,
have Mr. Diamond, have Tax Foundation, have others do an
analysis and then compare them. I think that is a fairly
reasonable way of looking at what the economics profession is
doing.
The British Treasury just did a dynamic analysis of their
corporate tax rate cuts and found that it produced substantial
benefits and increased revenues as a result. So I think this is
where the economics profession is moving, and I think it is
time that we did the same.
Chairman TIBERI. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Sanchez is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of our witnesses for joining us today.
Before I get into my questions, I have to say that I am a
bit disappointed by the fact that JCT, who are the people who
did the official nonpartisan dynamic scoring for the Republican
tax draft, were not invited to be here on the panel today to
discuss their work.
And I also hope that this is not the last of our
discussions about the desperate need for tax reform at the
Federal level, because every day that the Congress waits to do
tax reform is another day that we are falling further and
further behind other jurisdictions who understand the need to
reform.
I certainly don't purport to agree with all of the
provisions in the Republican tax reform draft, and that is a
draft that has not gotten a lot of warm embrace from its own
caucus, but I do believe that that discussion draft deserves
some discussion, and very thoughtful and deliberative
discussion, about the substance of the bill itself because we
have really not had that in this committee. Today we are here
to talk about economic modeling.
So because we are here today to talk about the economic
modeling, Mr. Buckley, I am hoping that you can explore some of
the assumptions that go into this model. For example, some of
the models that have been discussed assume that the permanent
debt-to-GDP ratio is flat or that consumers make the perfect
economic decision they ever will encounter in their lives, or
that every person who wants a job can have a job. And what do
you think the possible effects of making those assumptions that
exist in these modelings, what do you think the effects of that
are ultimately?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, I think the effects are that the model
results are not necessarily very predictive of what would occur
in the real world, but I think it is important to understand on
the assumption of GDP, stability of debt to GDP, these models,
most of the models simply will not project a result unless you
fix the long-term budget situation in the United States. There
is no positive impact from these policies unless you do that.
And the modelers' choice of assumption makes a very big
difference in the models' results, assuming reductions in
entitlement benefits give you the biggest long-term growth.
Ms. SANCHEZ. It was stated earlier that the models are not
supposed to reflect reality, but why can we not inject a little
bit of reality into some of these models?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, let me take this opportunity to praise
what the Joint Committee staff did in its model, because it did
model reality. It modeled the existing economy with temporary
substantial unemployment. It did model the current unstable
long-term budget situation. It didn't assume that we did it. It
modeled a situation where it has been criticized that people
are myopic. I think it is fairly reflective of our ability to
predict the future.
So it did make a very good faith effort to model. I may
disagree with the underlying theory of it, but it did, and it
showed very modest increases in growth. And the modest
increases in growth all come because of the individual tax
reductions. The net effect of the business changes is negative.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you.
I am sure that all our panelists today, the tax analysis
departments of all your organizations probably did dynamic
analysis of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts. Is that correct? And a
simple yes-or-no answer will suffice. No? Mr. Holtz, no.
Mr. DIAMOND. I was at the Joint Committee on Taxation at
the time.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Okay.
Mr. DIAMOND. Yes, we did.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. My experience with that was at the CBO. We
did a macroeconomic analysis of the President's budget, which
included the 2003 tax provisions.
Mr. DUBAY. I was not at the organization then.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Okay.
Mr. HODGE. No, the Tax Foundation didn't do that at that
time.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Mr. Foster----
Mr. FOSTER. I was not with the chamber at the time.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Okay.
Mr. Buckley, do you think that dynamic growth projections
that were done for the 2001 tax cuts would have likely shown a
tremendous amount of growth potential like the analysis that we
see today----
Mr. BUCKLEY. I think if you used the conventional supply-
side models, you would have seen a much larger growth response
because they were net reductions in tax. The Camp bill is
revenue neutral, so these models can't show a big increase in
long-term growth because you are just moving liability around.
In 2001, those were substantial tax cuts, and the way these
models work, it would show big economic growth.
Ms. SANCHEZ. It would show big economic growth, but how
does that compare to the actual economic state of the U.S. in
the 2000s, which, I might add, were a result of two unfunded
wars, an economic crisis in our financial sector, a tanking
housing sector, trillions more in debt from an unpaid Medicare
Part D program, and of course, over a trillion in un-offset tax
cuts----
Chairman TIBERI. The gentlelady's time has expired. You may
answer quickly. We could have a debate.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Her question answered itself. The results were
not positive.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Buckley.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Young is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. I think this has been quite instructive. I think it is
very important. I would like to recognize my colleague, Dr.
Price, who has introduced some legislation in support of
dynamic scoring and his leadership in this area. I cosponsored
that legislation as well.
All of you have done dynamic analysis of the Camp draft. I
certainly appreciate that and your efforts here.
I actually think this should be a bipartisan effort. I
mean, this is about evidence-based policymaking. And I have
actually discovered, outside of the klieg lights and C-SPAN
coverage and so forth, that it is a bipartisan initiative to
dynamically score a range of different policies, from
immigration reform bills to transportation bills to tax bills.
I am a member of the No Labels Group, a group of
conservatives, liberals, and everything in between where we
periodically convene and talk about issues of the day and try
and find some common ground. In our last meeting, over coffee,
roughly a dozen Republican and Democrat Members came together,
and I think on that day there were eight Democrats, four
Republicans, there was nearly universal agreement in the need
to dynamically score all our legislation moving forward.
Now, we can quibble over the details, but as I see dynamic
scoring, let me sort of recharacterize this issue very similar
to the way Mr. Dubay did. We can either be wrong all of the
time by adopting this artificial static model, and it indeed is
a model as well, or we can be right some of the time through
dynamic analysis, and through an iterative process learn from
our suboptimal models and make all of our assumptions very
clear to the public and to the best minds in the country and
the policymakers alike and improve upon those models.
I would add that we could do static analysis along with
dynamic analysis and use the static analysis as a baseline and
then compare which models perform better over a period of
years, and ultimately perhaps transition into what I suspect
would be a strictly dynamic analysis environment. I think that
is the way to go.
With respect to tax reform specifically, if we consider the
baseline under a dynamic analysis, fewer offsets would be
needed to reach budget neutrality. And I think we therefore can
work in a bipartisan fashion to do things under a dynamically
analyzed tax reform model. We can extend the R&D credit,
Section 179, the Earned Income Tax Credit, LIFO, accelerated
depreciation. We can eliminate regressive taxes like the
medical device tax.
Now, do you agree--I will ask Mr. Dubay--if the committee
were to consider dynamic growth as part of its budget-neutral
analysis, that the risks of a dynamic score being wrong are
outweighed, perhaps significantly outweighed, by having extra
revenue to use on keeping provisions intact, like Section 179
at the $500,000 level, that inarguably encourage growth? Yes or
no, if possible.
Mr. DUBAY. Yes. I look at dynamic scoring as a more
accurate answer than static scoring. It is not that it is right
or wrong. It is certainly more accurate. Because as I said in
my testimony, we know that tax reform will improve economic
growth. Static scoring doesn't take into account those impacts.
So we know that it is wrong and we know it is wrong in which
direction. So we know that dynamic scoring gets us closer to
the right answer.
Mr. YOUNG. Right.
So progress occurs in all realms, science, any area of
academia, in our economy, in policymaking, through an iterative
process, or it out to occur through an iterative process,
through trial and error and improving upon suboptimal results.
Same thing should apply with respect to tax policymaking.
Same thing should apply with respect to our analysis. I so
was encouraged to hear of this notion of microdynamic analysis.
We need to look at specific provisions of our Tax Code and
other areas of policy, major ones, as Mr. Holtz-Eakin
emphasized, in a dynamic way as well. Now, if that requires
additional staffing at Joint Tax, this is an area where I am
willing to invest in a few more staffers to ensure that we have
more optimal growth-oriented policy that will increase the
number of jobs, increase personal income, and so forth.
The last thing I would add is just emphasize that this
doesn't have to, at least initially, be an either/or sort of
question. We could have both and then transition into the one
that is proven to work best over a period of years. I would
start with dynamic analysis for PAYGO purposes.
But thank you so much for being here. I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Ms. Schwartz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
time and the conversation this morning. Just a couple of points
and then a couple of questions, if I may.
One is that in this whole discussion about the use of
dynamic scoring and economic growth, it does seem that--two
particular points--suggesting that cutting taxes is always good
for economic growth is kind of the suggestion here a bit. I
think many of us who do actually think that there is an
opportunity for us, Republicans and Democrats, to work together
to lower rates, broaden the base, to really look at tax
deductions in the way as to what works and what doesn't and
what stimulates the economy and what doesn't is very real.
But the notion that tax cuts alone lead to economic growth
is one that has been disproven time and time again, obviously
tax cuts for the wealthiest and tax cuts for the wealthiest
people and the wealthiest corporations. We have been promised
that. If it worked, we would maybe not be in some of the
situations we have been in, in the past. So it makes many of us
very skeptical that that itself is not enough for us to build a
basis for tax reform. It just isn't.
The second point is that economic growth really may mean
different things to different people, and we sort of use that
terminology as though it is the same thing. Does economic
growth only mean growth in the GDP, which of course it has to
be accounted for, but is it just an increase, the wealthy get
much wealthier, which is kind of where we have been in the last
decade, or does it also mean that the middle class gets
wealthier?
And does that matter to anybody on the panel, is kind of
the question. Should it matter to us? It is actually what has
made this country great, by the way, is not just entrepreneurs
and great corporations, but it is also people with the skills
and the ability to take these jobs and be paid a fair wage and
buy products.
So I think that what we have to look at is to understand
that we should take into account, and I think Mr. Young said
this, take into account some of the dynamic scoring you are
talking about, but it is not the only rationale for what we do.
We have to look at our ability to meet our obligations in this
Nation. We have to look at our ability to have the revenues we
need to educate our people, to be able to compete economically
in this world, to be able to grow that middle class. And then
we have to be able to make some of that infrastructure
transportation investment so in fact we can also compete in the
global marketplace.
If we can't do those things, then just creating more wealth
in this Nation will change who we are in this country, and that
is one of the questions we need to actually say, are we
comfortable with that and really a great disparity between the
very rich and everybody else?
So here is my question really. As we look at the use of
dynamic scoring, if we look at economic growth, I was going to
ask Mr. Buckley, you touched on this, could you speak to how
that incorporates in any way, if it does, the income inequality
that has been happening in this country for the last decade, in
particular, the issue you raised of wages and the competition
from overseas? If we are really going to be a low-wage country
with high wealth and low-wage workers, what does that mean to
our competition overseas? Could you speak to what in some ways,
I might understand, the narrow definition of economic growth
without looking at that?
And my second question, if you would speak to what would be
the impact on the economy if we actually do not have the
dollars to make the investments in education, in workforce
training, and in infrastructure that has been so key to making
our country such a great economic powerhouse that it might be
and helps businesses to grow and to locate and to stay here.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, first thing, when you look at the
models, labor elasticity is higher at upper-income levels, so
that upper-income individuals have the luxury of working or not
working, and therefore these models have supported rate
reductions that are disproportionately at the top. I think that
is unwise for many reasons.
Now, the other thing, and here I may differ a little bit,
or differ a lot, with my other people here. Dynamic scoring is,
what you are essentially saying, we want to take into account
the positive impacts of our policy decisions today. That is a
luxury that we do not permit our corporations to make. They
make investments, and they make investments with the
expectation that the return in the future is going to be far in
excess of the cost of the investment. But they cannot say, our
investment we are making today is less costly because we
anticipate income.
I believe you have to have kind of objective rules for
budgeting. If the policy choices are wise, the positive impacts
of those policy choices will flow right into future budget
projections.
Chairman TIBERI. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. Thank you.
Chairman TIBERI. Mr. Reed is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hodge, you said something in your testimony, and
believe it or not, we do listen to the testimony, and I was
listening to your verbal testimony.
Mr. HODGE. Well, thank you.
Mr. REED. And I found it very intriguing. You said
something about peer review, transparency, making the scoring
process much more open to review by the public as well as
people in positions that could comment on that process. I
wholeheartedly agree. This is a conversation, coming to
Congress in 2010, I have had repeatedly with different
individuals in the position that do the scoring.
And one of the things that was brought back to me and that
we had a conversation with in response to my request to get the
black box, to get the magic assumptions, to get the
calculations was, well, if we give you that information and we
tell you how we do this, people may manipulate, work around,
abuse, whatever term you want to use, their proposals, their
legislation, to get the score that they want. And I was
actually kind of amazed by that because I am a firm believer in
transparency and I am a firm believer, if people are going to
do that, that will stick out as you go through the process.
Have you ever heard that response from any of the folks, be
it at the CBO or JCT, in regards to the pushback on disclosing
these assumptions?
Mr. HODGE. Well, I will say somewhat cynically that I guess
it shows that the Joint Committee really does believe tax
policy changes behavior, that people will work around these
things. And they are doing it now. I mean, the 10-year budget
window used to be 5 years, and if you made it 15 years, then
people would work around that.
No, transparency is the key here because it is the only way
of understanding whether or not the tools that the committee is
using are meeting current standards within the economic
community. There has to be transparency. I would volunteer to
come in and demonstrate our model to any one of you. It sits on
a laptop. We can come in. I will show you what is behind the
curtain. I will show you all the assumptions. I will show you
the data that is behind it. I will show you the equations. You
can pick them apart.
Mr. REED. The algorithms and everything else.
Mr. HODGE. We are happy to come in and demonstrate it for
you. In fact, the committee ought to have that in front of you
so that during a hearing you can do macroeconomic analysis,
dynamic analysis during a markup.
Mr. REED. Now, just so we are clear, Mr. Hodge, I mean, the
bulk of my conversation generally was not with JCT. It was with
CBO and CBO representatives on the budget side. And they have
got the same type of process of assumptions and algorithms and
things over there.
Doug, have you ever dealt with that issue? And I think we
have talked about this before.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. Well, I am handicapped by having actually
done the job.
Mr. REED. Yeah.
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. And it is important to recognize that
scoring is not a model. Scoring is a judgment exercise. I
scored the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, first time it was
passed. There is no model for that. I had to score a death
benefit for people killed prior to the invasion of Iraq. There
is no model for that.
And so while it is useful to have models that incorporate
the impact of beneficial and bad policy so that you know what
is going on, in the end this will always be at the CBO and at
the Joint Committee an act of judgment.
Now, CBO has in its cost estimates something called basis
of estimate. It has an obligation to be transparent about how
it came to its conclusions and to lay out the judgments it
made. But I think it is a fool's errand to pretend that somehow
this is a machine and that you can change parameters or inspect
parameters and know exactly what is going on. You should get
good staff, respect their judgment.
It is important to the integrity of the Joint Committee
that you not micromanage it. And there is a big difference
between transparency, saying this is the conclusion to which I
have come, and scientific replicability, and you will never get
the latter and should not get the latter.
At CBO, I used proprietary data from large pharmaceutical
companies to do the Medicare Modernization Act. There is no way
that should be disclosed to anybody. So that estimate could not
be replicated. And so it is important to think about this not
as if it is scientific replicability of an experiment, but
instead building an institutional culture for good judgments
informed by all the information that is relevant. Those are two
very different things.
Mr. REED. But would you not agree that if the institution
assumed the wrong assumption or exercised the wrong judgment,
that would be a problem, that we would not be able to see
whether or not that was erroneously achieved----
Mr. HOLTZ-EAKIN. It has to explain how it came to its
conclusions. I think that is an obligation of both the CBO and
the Joint Committee. It is in the statute now. They may or may
not be meeting that obligation successfully. I think that is a
fair complaint.
At that point, if you look at how they did it and say, no,
wait, there is a lot of evidence that the judgment you drew
here is just incorrect, we have tons of data, they should be
updating constantly their ability to do that estimate well. I
have no quibble with that. And I believe that the CBO, while
not perfect, has tried to do that. If you go to the CBO with
additional data, if you go to them with additional research,
they will incorporate that into their view of the scoring
process.
Mr. REED. I appreciate it. Thank you for the input.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Neal, would you like to be recognized----
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought this was very
helpful. I thought the panel was very informed. And I hope that
you might consider down the road scheduling Joint Tax to come
in and talk about the proposal as well.
Chairman TIBERI. Certainly will consider it.
Speaking of Joint Tax, sitting behind Mr. Gerlach the
entire hearing has been the head of Joint Tax, professionally,
Tom Barthold.
Thank you so much for being here. And I particularly want
to thank you and your macroeconomic team and staff for the
analysis and all the hard work that you put into the Camp
draft. We do very much appreciate it.
And Mr. Neal and I were talking about the witnesses today,
and I think we both agree, topnotch panel, excellent testimony
from all of you. It has been a real educational, informative
discussion. Important to understand the importance of dynamic
scoring, the limitations of dynamic scoring, and modeling in
general. I think it always is helpful to help committee members
as we continue to try to develop tax reform legislation that
will help increase wages, help create jobs, and help grow our
economy.
So it has been a real pleasure to have you all here. We do
appreciate the time that you took today. And that concludes
today's panel.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]
The Advertising Coalition

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
