- TAX REFORM AND TAX PROVISIONS AFFECTING STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAX REFORM AND TAX PROVISIONS AFFECTING STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 19, 2013

__________

SERIAL NO. 113-FC03

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-127                       WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of March 19, 2013 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. John Buckley, Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law
School Graduate Tax Program, Washington, DC....................    36
Mr. Scott Hodge, President, the Tax Foundation, Washington, DC...     6
Mr. David Parkhurst, Director of Economic Development and
Commerce Committee, Office of Federal Relations, National
Governors Association, Washington, DC..........................    17
Mr. Christopher Taylor, Former Executive Director, Municipal
Securities Rulemaking Board, Washington, DC....................    30

PUBLIC SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Hospital Association....................................    75
American Public Power Association, Large Public Power Council,
and Transmission Access Policy Study Group.....................    79
Bond Dealers of America..........................................    89
Breckinridge Capital Advisors, Inc...............................    98
Center for Fiscal Equity.........................................   100
City of Boerne...................................................   104
City of Coconut Creek............................................   105
City of Dallas...................................................   106
City of Lincoln Nebraska, Lincoln Public Schools, Lincoln
Electric System................................................   110
City of Manteca..................................................   112
City of Rancho Cucamonga.........................................   114
City of Seattle Municipal Bonds..................................   115
City of St. Petersburg...........................................   120
Clean Water Services.............................................   121
County of Newaygo Board of Commissioners.........................   122
CTIA The Wireless Association....................................   125
Eastern Municipal Water District.................................   126
Education Finance Council........................................   128
Government Finance Officers Association..........................   130
The Honorable Stephen K. Benjamin, Mayor of Columbia, South
Carolina.......................................................   143
Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy........................   151
Laura Morgan.....................................................   161
Lofgren Franks...................................................   163
Louis Jambois....................................................   165
Marco Lowe.......................................................   167
Missouri River Energy Services...................................   172
Moran and Company................................................   174
National Association of Bond Lawyers.............................   185
National Association of Health and Educational Facilities Finance
Authorities....................................................   194
National Conference of State Legislatures........................   200
National Governors Association...................................   203
National Organization of Social Security Claimants'
Representatives................................................   215
Public Utility District No. 1 of Chelan County, Washington.......   221
Sheila Tucker....................................................   223
Statement of the National Association of Realtors................   225
Sustainable Water Infrastructure Coalition.......................   231
Tacoma Public Utilities..........................................   238
The Associated General Contractors of America....................   241
The Minnesota Service Cooperatives...............................   248
Washington Public Utility Districts Association..................   250

TAX REFORM AND TAX PROVISIONS AFFECTING STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 19, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave Camp
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Good morning. The committee will come to
order. Good morning, and thank you all for joining us today.
As part of the committee's efforts to strengthen the
economy, create more jobs, and increase wages for American
families by making the Tax Code simpler and fairer, today's
hearing allows stakeholders and members of the public the
opportunity to share their perspectives on tax reform and tax
provisions affecting State and local governments.
Several items in the Tax Code directly affect State and
local governments. The most significant and widely known
provisions include the exclusion of State and local government
income from Federal income tax; the itemized deduction for
State and local income, property, and sales taxes; and various
benefits for State and local bonds; and special rules for State
and local government employee pensions and benefits. Other
provisions indirectly affect State and local governments as
well, such as the exclusion for contributions to corporate
capital.
Over the last several years, we have heard much about how
the Tax Code might be changed in ways that could affect State
and local government activity. Some such as President Obama
argue that exclusions, such as those for State and local bonds,
and deductions, such as those for State and local taxes,
inappropriately provide larger subsidies for high-income
taxpayers and have advocated limiting the value of deductions
and exclusions or replacing them with credits. Other tax reform
proposals have also proposed significant reform of Federal tax
provisions that affect State and local governments. Generally
those proposals reduce the tax expenditures associated with
these provisions and use the money to finance either rate
reduction or higher spending. Both Democrats and Republicans,
including Bowles-Simpson, Domenici-Rivlin, and tax reform
panels appointed by President Obama and then-President George
W. Bush, have offered these proposals.
Because such a wide range of policymakers have concluded
that reform of tax provisions affecting State and local
governments should be part of the discussion, it is critical to
understand why they have come to such a conclusion, and it is
equally critical to make sure the committee hears all sides of
the story. Thus, in the interest of fairness, it will be
important for the committee to examine how these Federal tax
subsidies impact individual States.
For example, with regard to the deduction for State and
local taxes, consider the following: In terms of the total
value of deductions claimed, taxpayers in just three States--
California, New York, and New Jersey--claim over 36 percent,
more than one-third in 2010. These same States have some of the
highest combined State and local income tax rates. California's
State income tax rate is 13.3 percent, New Jersey's is 9
percent, and New York's highest combined income tax rate, which
is in New York City, is 12.7 percent. Those findings and many
more that have been uncovered over the years raise significant
concerns about the current Tax Code is being used to pick
winners and losers.
But we are not writing a tax reform bill in some ivory
tower. Changes to the Tax Code will have a real impact on State
and local economies, and the committee needs to hear directly
from these stakeholders before considering any proposals as
part of comprehensive tax reform. In addition to this hearing,
the committee's 11 separate working groups also serve as a way
to gather information from these stakeholders about how current
tax laws affect them. These reports will be important to have
as we begin to explore what changes, if any, should be
considered, and I am hopeful they will take the opportunity to
share their thoughts.
I would like to thank all of you for being here today. We
have assembled a panel of four witnesses, each of whom has a
broad set of experiences in this area, and I am sure they will
provide a unique perspective to the discussion, and we look
forward to your testimony.
Chairman CAMP. And I will now recognize the ranking member
for the purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much, and welcome.
In the 11 tax reform working groups that we set up on a
bipartisan basis, based on reports to date and my own
participation, we are making progress toward understanding
present laws and their pluses and minuses, and their possible
implications for the policy challenges we face. In an important
sense, the hearing today illustrates that challenge as we
address tax reform.
Republicans in the budget to be voted on this week have
once again reaffirmed their goal of collapsing the current rate
structure to two brackets with a top rate of 25 percent. An
analysis by the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center has indicated
that the rate reduction and other specific tax policies in that
budget would cost $5.7 trillion over 10 years, yet the budget
gives no indication or any illustration as to how to address
this huge gap, most of which would involve Ways and Means
jurisdiction.
We are familiar with the President's proposal to cap
deductions at 28 percent. Various proposals to limit deductions
and tax preferences have been put forth in the past. I believe
there is value in considering thoughtful proposals as we seek a
balanced approach to deficit reduction. However, the
differences of opinion in the testimony before us today on one
set of tax policies, those relating to State and local
government, illustrate the need to distinguish between rhetoric
and reality in addressing the important issue of tax reform.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Now it is my pleasure to welcome our panel of experts, all
of whom bring a wealth of experience from a variety of
perspectives. Their experience and insights will be very
helpful as our committee considers the impact of Federal tax
reform on State and local governments.
First I would like to welcome Scott Hodge, president of the
Tax Foundation here in Washington, D.C. Mr. Hodge has spent
over two decades working in tax policy, and his organization
has provided this committee with a host of valuable data and
insight through the years.
Second we will hear from David Parkhurst, who joined the
National Governors Association in 2007 and currently serves as
its director of its economic development and commerce
committee.
Third we will hear from Christopher Taylor, an independent
consultant who spent nearly 30 years as executive director of
the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board and now works in
Alexandria, Virginia, as a financial consultant.
And finally we welcome back to the committee and we will
hear from John Buckley, the former chief of staff for the Joint
Committee on Taxation and the former Democratic chief tax
counsel here at the Ways and Means Committee, who is currently
a professor of tax law at Georgetown University Law Center. And
again, welcome back, Professor Buckley.
Thank you all for being with us today. The committee has
received each of your written statements, and they will be made
part of the formal record. Each of you will be recognized for 5
minutes for your oral testimony, and, Mr. Hodge, we will begin
with you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT HODGE, PRESIDENT, THE TAX FOUNDATION,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. HODGE. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Levin, Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to contribute to this really important discussion
of fundamental tax reform. And I think, as all of you
recognize, one of the obvious goals of tax reform is to
eliminate those parts of the Tax Code that have unintended side
effects that outweigh whatever sort of policy reasons motivated
their original creation. At the top of this list, actually,
should be the various tax provisions benefiting State and local
governments.
In the same way that a mortgage interest deduction may
encourage some families to purchase a more expensive home than
they would otherwise afford, the taxes-paid deduction and
municipal bond exemptions encourage many States to tax more,
spend more, and borrow more than they otherwise would. Academic
research indicates that the taxes-paid deduction leads to
greater reliance on tax-deductible taxes, such as progressive
income taxes and property taxes, and ultimately leads to
increases in State and local spending of own-source revenues.
The States with the largest amounts of taxes-paid
deductions currently spend $2,800 more per capita on average
than States with lower amounts of those deductions. The taxes-
paid deduction not only benefits higher-income individuals, but
it also tends to benefit the wealthiest States. The wealthiest
States, such as New York, New Jersey, Connecticut,
Massachusetts, and Virginia, all have among the highest
percentages of filers claiming the State tax deduction.
Meanwhile the poorest States, such as Arkansas, Mississippi,
New Mexico, West Virginia, all have among the lowest and fewest
percentage of filers claiming the deduction. Is it fair to have
a tax deduction that gives the biggest benefit to the
wealthiest States?
As far as individuals, I think we all know that those
claiming the taxes-paid deduction, 88 percent of the benefits
of that deduction go to taxpayers earning over $100,000 a year.
Does that seem fair?
Now let's turn to the debt question. In recent years local
governments have taken on an enormous amount of new debt, which
now does not seem to be financing a lot of new investment. In
fact, since year 2000, State and local debt has increased by
152 percent, increasing from roughly $1.2 trillion to nearly $3
trillion, and meanwhile State and local investment has grown
hardly at all after adjusting for inflation.
So we have to ask ourselves, where has all of that borrowed
money gone? The municipal bond exemption may not be the sole
cause of all that new borrowing, but the availability of this
cheap source of financing does create a moral hazard that can
only be cured by eliminating the exemption.
Now the question is what would be the economic effects of
eliminating the taxes-paid deduction and the municipal bond
exemption? We used the Tax Foundation's tax simulation and
macroeconomic model to answer this question in two different
ways. We ran two scenarios. In the first scenario we eliminated
the taxes-paid deduction and used all of the increased revenues
for deficit reduction. The model showed that this sort of
revenue-raising plan would reduce the long-term level of GDP by
0.23 percent, it would reduce private business stocks by 0.45
percent, and it would reduce wages slightly.
Now, these are not major economic effects, I understand,
but this sort of policy would reduce GDP by $1 for every $1 of
tax revenues it would raise, and we have to question whether
that is worth the trade-off.
Now, in the second scenario we modeled a revenue-neutral
plan that eliminated the taxes-paid and the municipal bond
exemption going forward, while lowering tax rates across the
board, and we found that it had a very positive impact on the
economy. It would boost future level of GDP by .26 percent, or
about $41 billion, not a huge effect admittedly, but it would
boost private business investment and wages as well, and enough
to create about 240,000 new jobs.
While, in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I applaud the committee
for taking on this very challenging effort of reforming the Tax
Code, I think we all know that the defenders of these kinds of
provisions will put enormous pressure on Members of Congress to
save them from reform, as was done successfully in 1986.
However, the economic evidence is very clear that these
provisions produce more harmful effects than benefits. They
encourage higher taxes, higher spending, and more debt at the
State and local level. And our simulation showed that
eliminating these provisions while lowering tax rates across
the board would lead to higher GDP, higher private investment,
higher wages, and better living standards for all Americans.
I appreciate this opportunity, and I welcome any questions
you might have.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Hodge.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hodge follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF DAVID PARKHURST, DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND COMMERCE COMMITTEE, OFFICE OF FEDERAL RELATIONS, NATIONAL
GOVERNORS ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Parkhurst, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. PARKHURST. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting testimony from
the National Governors Association, which is the only
bipartisan organization of the Nation's Governors. My name is
David Parkhurst, and I direct NGA's economic development and
commerce committee, led by Pennsylvania Governor Tom Corbett
and Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear.
Governors last year appointed a five-member tax reform task
force, cochaired by Governors Corbett and Beshear, to explore
the possible effects of Federal tax reforms on the States.
Other members of the task force included Connecticut Governor
Malloy, Michigan Governor Snyder, and U.S. Virgin Islands
Governor de Jongh.
Let me begin with a few main points. Number one, Federal
and State tax policies are intertwined and linked; two, the
preservation of public financing, notably tax-exempt bonds, is
necessary because it is the primary method for States and local
governments to raise capital for a wide range of infrastructure
projects; three, Federal laws and regulations should not
increase costs States and local governments incur to issue
municipal debt or decrease investor appetite to purchase those
products; and number four, no Federal law or regulation should
preempt, limit, or interfere with the constitutional or
statutory rights of States and local governments to develop and
operate their revenue and tax streams.
Tax reform is a complex and multipronged issue. Changes to
deductions, credits, exclusions, and exemptions in the Federal
code will have corresponding revenue and economic implications
for the States because of the variations in each State's
linkages to the Federal code.
In anticipation of comprehensive Federal reform, the
Nation's Governors recently released guiding principles. They
focus on Federal deductibility of State and local taxes and the
interest exclusion on municipal bonds, because these topics are
top priorities for all States. In addition, the principles
address the broader issues of ensuring that Federal reform does
not limit or preempt State authority over budget and revenue
systems.
I want to highlight one point I think captures an important
reminder. Federal tax policies and tax expenditures serve
public policy purposes that aren't necessarily captured in
revenue and spending numbers. To help avoid unintended
consequences from Federal reform, Federal and State partners
should work together to determine whether the policy benefits
of a particular Federal tax expenditure exceeds its budgetary
costs before making final decisions.
For nearly 200 years municipal bonds have assisted States,
cities, and counties finance their infrastructure projects.
Since its inception at the beginning of the 20th century, the
Federal code included the exclusion from income for municipal
bond interest. This was intentional and not a special-interest
add-on.
Ending or capping this Federal exclusion would increase the
cost of financing infrastructure. Investors would demand higher
yields as compensation. Higher borrowing costs would chill
infrastructure investments, lead to higher taxes on citizens to
cover those increased costs, or some combination. Given
constraints on direct Federal spending, and with the tremendous
overhang of unmet infrastructure needs throughout the country,
policymakers should encourage, not limit, State and local
financing for those projects that create jobs and boost
economic growth.
Finally, every State and local government has some
combination of mandatory income, sales or property tax. Each of
those combinations benefits directly or indirectly from the
Federal deductibility that has long been in place. Ending this
Federal tax deduction for State and local income and property
taxes changes the rules. It would effectively mean marginal tax
rates increase for taxpayers, and, absent an offset for equity
purposes, it could create an economic drag and increase
uncertainty and risk for bondholders.
The message to Congress from the Nation's Governors is
clear: We are all in this together. States and local
governments, as the principal owners and operators of our
Nation's infrastructure and issuers of municipal bonds, will
remain strong advocates for safeguarding municipal markets and
supporting investment in infrastructure.
As Congress moves forward on comprehensive tax reform, NGA
looks forward to working in partnership with this committee.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much, Mr. Parkhurst.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parkhurst follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER TAYLOR, FORMER EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
MUNICIPAL SECURITIES RULEMAKING BOARD, WASHINGTON, DC

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Taylor, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. TAYLOR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Levin.
I am here to share my observations on the municipal debt market
as an economist and as a regulator of the municipal dealer
community from 1978 to 2007. In particular I want to focus my
remarks both in my statement and in my opening remarks on the
Tax Reform Act of 1986, which fundamentally changed the
municipal securities market and did so overnight.
That act basically changed the groups that invested in
municipal debt, and it did so in a way that destroyed the
business models of many of the members of the municipal dealer
community. It changed the structure of the market, and it
changed the way in which those participants in the market
adapted to the new tax law. It moved the dealer community away
from a model of risk taking to one that was focused on
obtaining fees for services. That led to a series of scandals
and problems that the municipal market has wrestled with for
nearly 20 years.
Up to date, in the early 1990s, the municipal market paid
more than $250 million--the dealer community paid more than
$250 million in fines for yield burning that dealt with the
reinvestment of bond proceeds for municipal bonds. For Members
of the Committee, if you make a bond tax exempt for income tax
purposes, the rate at which State and local governments borrow
is less than what corporations borrow because of the tax
exemption. This gives State and local governments and those
that serve them, the dealer community and others, the chance to
invest those monies at a higher taxable rate. IRS rules
regulate that, and IRS rules were changed as a result and
tightened supposedly as a result of the tax reform effort of
1986.
Despite that, and because of the changes in the market, we
ended up with two sets of scandals and major rule changes that
had to be enacted by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board
to address problems in the market. The two scandals involved
the reinvestment of bond proceeds, yield burning, as I
mentioned; fines of about $250 million; and, ongoing today, an
SEC, IRS, and Justice Department investigation which has led to
the 13 individuals either pleading guilty or being found guilty
of violating Federal tax and securities laws. Moreover, in the
most recent one to date, the fines have reached the point of
$650 billion on the part of the dealer community.
It raises the question about tax law changes; because tax
law changes change markets, participants change their behavior.
So whatever you do, please keep in mind how it is going to
affect the markets and those that are participants in the
market, be it State and local governments, the dealer community
or investors. Those changes can have a dark side. So I would
urge all of you to think very carefully about how you go about
doing that so that these markets are not fatally damaged.
We do have one of the greatest sets of infrastructure in
this country. In my role as the regulator of the municipal
securities market, I had individuals come to my office on a
regular basis from foreign countries, and their constant
question is, how did you build all these roads, schools,
buildings, and everything else? And most of it came out of the
municipal securities market. So please look at that market from
a point of view of maintaining its integrity and taking steps
to maintain its integrity if at all possible.
With that, I will conclude my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much, Mr. Taylor.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF JOHN BUCKLEY, PROFESSOR OF LAW, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL GRADUATE TAX PROGRAM, WASHINGTON, DC

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Buckley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Levin, for the opportunity to participate in your hearing
today.
After completion of your hearings and working group
process, this committee faces a fundamental choice as to the
structure of the tax reform that it will pursue. Mr. Chairman,
you, the work you and your staff have done outlining areas of
the code that need structural reform and proposing options for
changes in those areas, does offer one way forward. If you put
your committee staff and the joint committee staff back to
work, you could identify several other similar-type areas.
Those areas plus the ones you have already done could be the
basis for a fundamental tax reform, a reform that could pass
this committee, in my opinion, with bipartisan support, and a
reform that would compare favorably to the 1986 tax reform. So
that is one way forward.
The other way is to pursue a plan with dramatic rate
reductions and equally dramatic repeals or curtailments of
existing tax benefits. That will be a very challenging task for
this committee for several reasons. First, you, unlike
everybody else in this tax reform debate, have to provide the
details, something that almost everybody has avoided up to this
point.
Second, in 1986, the Congress had the luxury of being able
to eliminate rampant, abusive tax sheltering to finance the
rate reductions. That does not appear to be present in today's
situation. So to finance rate reductions today, you will have
to go where the Congress was totally unwilling to go in 1986,
and that is repeal or curtailment of long-standing tax benefits
that are embedded in our society and in our economy. There are
no tax benefits more long-standing than the exemption for
interest on State and local bonds and the deduction for State
and local taxes.
I think the best way to explain the benefits of State and
local bonds is to simply look at how they have been used. Most
tax-exempt bonds are borrowing for public infrastructure.
Private activity bonds, where there is a private business use,
are a relatively small part of the market. In the past decade
tax-exempt bonds have financed $1.65 trillion of new
infrastructure investment with very small cost to the Federal
Government. A third of that infrastructure investment was
primary and secondary school construction.
Repealing the exclusion will simply increase the cost of
capital for State and local governments, reducing investments
in infrastructure. It is that simple. To pretend that there are
benefits from reduction in infrastructure spending, I think, is
just demonstrably wrong. We have underinvested in our public
infrastructure, and there are observable economic costs on
account of that underinvestment. Tax reform should not make
that problem worse.
You also should recognize the impact of tax reform on State
and local governments. Repealing the deduction for State and
local taxes will increase the burden of those taxes and make it
more difficult for State and local governments to finance basic
governmental services.
In the case of the deduction for real property taxes, I
think the committee also has to be concerned about the impact
of collateral consequences. Most people believe that the value
of the mortgage interest deduction and the value of the
deduction for State and local real property taxes is embedded
in the price of our homes. Repealing those benefits could put
further pressure on home values. Studies have indicated it will
lead to further real declines in home values, threatening our
already too-slow economic recovery.
Mr. Chairman, these issues were debated at great length in
the process of formulating the 1986 Tax Reform Act. Substantial
changes to these benefits were rejected in 1986, and I believe
the reasons for that rejection remain valid today.
Thank you very much.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much, Mr. Buckley.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Buckley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. And now we will go to questions.
Mr. Hodge, you stated that eliminating the Federal tax
breaks for State and local taxes and bonds, and using that
revenue to reduce rates across the board, would actually create
nearly a quarter of a million jobs in America. Given the
stubbornly high levels of unemployment that we have seen and we
continue to face several years after the financial crisis,
could you explain for the committee the economics behind why
that trade-off would result in significant job gains?
Mr. HODGE. Sure. Well, what this sort of reform would do--
and this is revenue-neutral reform in which the proceeds from
eliminating those deductions would go directly toward across-
the-board rate reductions, and in our model it would allow all
rates to be reduced by about 5 percent--not 5 percent points,
but 5 percent. But that is enough to spur a lot of new economic
activity either through direct spending on the part of
taxpayers or through new investment, and by lowering the cost
of capital, we would see a considerable amount of new
investment in the economy, which ultimately leads to increased
wages and increased jobs. These sorts of effects don't happen
overnight, but they do happen over time, and I think that is
the critical point is to look at the long-term horizon of what
the economy will look like once the reform is fully in place
and fully working its way through the economy.
Chairman CAMP. Also, I mentioned in my opening statement
that three States are responsible for more than a third, almost
40 percent, of the total Federal deduction for State and local
taxes, and they coincidentally happen to be the three States
that also have the highest combined State and local income tax
rates in the country. Does the State and local tax deduction,
as some economists have claimed, does that really encourage
bigger government at the State level, in your opinion?
Mr. HODGE. The research is pretty clear that there is a
direct linkage between the State and local tax deduction and
higher taxes, certain types of taxes at the State level,
particularly those that are deductible, those being progressive
income taxes and property taxes, and a number of States have,
as you indicate, have dramatically increased those particular
types of taxes. California has the highest State income tax,
personal income tax. New York has some of the highest property
taxes in the Nation.
And so those are the kind of taxes that are not only
deductible, but then are more easily increased by State and
local officials because they know that Washington is going to
pick up as much as one-third of the tab through the State and
local deduction.
Chairman CAMP. All right. I have a question for everyone on
the panel, if you could answer briefly. Do you believe--and I
will start with you, Mr. Hodge. Do you believe there is a
policy difference between the Federal subsidies for government
bonds, which obviously are used for a public purpose, and
private activity bonds, which benefit private parties?
Mr. HODGE. I would eliminate both, Mr. Chairman. I don't
think it is the proper role of the Federal Government to
subsidize either one of those. Essentially what those policies
are doing is saying that it is more important to build a sports
stadium or some other public infrastructure than to build a
private R&D facility, and I think that the Tax Code should be
neutral to those kinds of decisions.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Parkhurst.
Mr. PARKHURST. Mr. Chairman, the vast majority of tax-
exempt bonds, whether they are, in this case, private activity
bonds where you have a public wrap, or it is a clear tax-exempt
bond issued by State and local is usually used for financing
traditional purposes, it is helping with government, schools,
roads, sewer systems, public power, airports, and other
infrastructure.
It is interesting. I would say that some of the examples we
have seen recently in the media, were addressing projects
financed under special temporary authorities that were granted
by Congress following natural disasters and other events like
Hurricane Katrina or 9/11, and the authority for those bonds
has largely expired. And I think that private activity bonds
really do help focus in some areas around low-income housing
and do help in certain particular areas.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. I believe that----
Chairman CAMP. Your microphone.
Mr. TAYLOR. I certainly believe that if you are going to
give a benefit--and that is a decision the committee has to
make--if you are going to give a benefit to the State and local
government sector, limit it to true public purposes. I do not
see a reason to--for the same reasons that I have heard to my
right--see any reason to give any kind of public benefit to
private corporations or private decisionmakers. I would
probably go very strongly in favor of very sharply limiting
even the public purposes that are out there.
Mr. Parkhurst mentioned airports and public power. I am not
sure, quite frankly, that you could have a good reason for
doing either of those as a true public purpose. Limit it to
roads, sewers, and those things that local governments and
State governments do, not stuff that can be substituted by a
private corporation.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. Buckley.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, first of all, I would say that most tax-
exempt bonds are general obligation, traditional government
financing of infrastructure. The term ``private activity bond''
picks up a whole wide range of activities, some of which I
think have big public benefit: docks, wharves, airports. These
are transportation facilities that are necessary for our
economy, there are public purposes involved, and therefore I
think it is appropriate to have private activity bond financing
for that type of thing.
But if this committee is going to look at anything in this
area, I would suggest they would look at the private activity
bond rules. But let me firmly agree with the prior statement:
The abuses that were outlined in that New York Times article
are largely because of one-time disaster-related relief, and I
would hope the Congress would not repeat that in the future.
Chairman CAMP. Well, the New York Times article talked
about the winery in North Carolina, the golf resort in Puerto
Rico, the Corvette museum in Kentucky, obviously the Barclay
Center in Brooklyn, as well as the Goldman Sachs and Bank of
America towers or buildings in New York City. But my question
is if those aren't appropriate for federally subsidized
borrowing, are there any rules that we might change to help
prevent those activities? You sort of touched on that, Mr.
Buckley.
Just quickly if you each want to respond if you think there
is any--I mean, obviously some have said prevent that activity
altogether, and narrowly focus. Any other comments, Mr.
Parkhurst or Mr. Taylor?
Mr. PARKHURST. I would associate my remarks with Mr.
Buckley. I think that that is an opportunity to obviously
correct anomalies, to look very carefully at how private
activity bonds are used, and make certain that the private
portion is a de minimis amount, and that indeed private
activity bonds are used for a public purpose.
I think we have had this discussion over the years around
the use of eminent domain, and the Court had been very clear in
how that issue was resolved. While State and locals may have
won in the court, the court of public opinion, I think, led to
some further discussion on the issue. I think we will have a
similar discussion going forward with private activity bonds.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. Mr. Chairman, if you are going to confer a
subsidy or a benefit or something to a State and local
government, they should be actively involved and the only ones
involved in that activity in terms of either using their taxing
power, general obligations, raising sewer fees, whatever it is.
But the minute you allow a melding of those things, then I
think you open the door to potential abuses both in terms of
the amount of issuance that is out there and also about how the
funds are subsequently used and invested.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Levin is recognized.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
You know, I agree we should look at private activity bonds,
remembering they are a small portion of the bonding that is
going on, and I would hope, though it isn't clear within the
jurisdiction of which of the working groups, Mr. Chairman. I
would hope that the working groups----
Chairman CAMP. This working group.
Mr. LEVIN. Well, but also I think we need--I think the
testimony today shows the need for much further inquiry into
this issue, because, Mr. Hodge, I very much agree at least with
what you say at the beginning. I don't agree with other parts
of it perhaps. But when you say, contrary to conventional
wisdom, not every tax expenditure is a loophole, that is really
correct. And I think in this discussion of tax reform we need
to press people when they say, let's resolve these huge gaps by
looking at loopholes, we need to press them what they mean by
that, because I think the issues before us today are not
loopholes. There are loopholes, but these are policies that
have been embedded in our Tax Code for a long time.
By the way, Mr. Hodge, the Tax Foundation is a nonpartisan
entity. How is it financed?
Mr. HODGE. We are entirely privately financed. We are a
nonprofit. We are a loophole for people who want to avoid
taxation by giving us a charitable contribution, and if I----
Mr. LEVIN. But the funders aren't public, right?
Mr. HODGE. I am sorry?
Mr. LEVIN. The funders to your foundation aren't public?
Mr. HODGE. They are private individuals. We accept no
government funds.
Mr. LEVIN. And it comes from individuals, corporations?
Mr. HODGE. Private foundations.
Mr. LEVIN. Private foundations. Okay.
Mr. Parkhurst, your testimony was approved by the
association?
Mr. PARKHURST. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. LEVIN. So you are speaking on behalf of all the
Governors, Republicans, Democrats?
Mr. PARKHURST. NGA is a bipartisan organization of the
Nation's Governors, correct.
Mr. LEVIN. And when you testify, there is some clearance
process, so when you speak on behalf of Governors, it is
something that is appropriately said?
Mr. PARKHURST. Yes, there is.
Mr. LEVIN. Because I think that is important. There is a
pointing here to three States that receive a substantial
portion of the impact of the deduction for State and local
taxes. I think when we look at that, we should look at the rest
of the States. I think also we should look at what those three
States do in terms of the use of their monies, and to simply
say they are higher-tax States, I think we also need to look at
their educational processes, their role in health care in this
country as well as their State.
And, Mr. Buckley, I also think we need to take into account
what is outlined in your testimony about the impact of long-
term bonds. By the way, we tried to keep the other bonding
program alive, and it now isn't in existence. The pages aren't
numbered, but you indicate $340 billion of annual issuance. It
goes this way according to estimates: $1.65 trillion in new
infrastructure investments over the last 10 years in terms of
school construction accounted for almost a third of the
infrastructure investments. The other major categories were
$288 billion in tax-exempt financing for acute care hospitals,
$258 billion for water and sewer improvements, and $178 billion
for roads, and $100 billion for mass transit.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Yes, Mr. Levin, and let me go back to the
discussion of the three big States, because I think the
discussion is somewhat unfair to the three big States. They are
large States; they are urban States. Urban areas have higher
costs than rural areas. So it is unclear in my mind whether
they have high tax rates because of the Federal deduction, or
because it is much more expensive to have government in the
area of an urban area.
They are also high-income States, so clearly the tax rates
have--the State and local taxes are being invested for reasons
that have created wealth in those States. I think--and they are
among the largest populated States.
So there are whole reasons of factors why some States have
higher tax burdens that have nothing to do with Federal
deductibility. They have to do with some of the choices they
have made about their educational system that have proved to be
valuable to their citizens and because of the urban nature of
the States.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hodge, last week the Dallas City Council came in to see
me, and in that meeting they expressed strong opposition to
doing away with the tax exemption for municipal bonds, which
you referred to. According to the city's position paper, and I
quote, Removing the tax exemption from municipal bonds could
raise the city's borrowing costs substantially. The increased
borrowing costs would disproportionately impact moderate- and
low-income residents since higher borrowing costs for the city
would mean either doing less or raising property tax or water
and sewer fees to cover higher borrowing costs.
In your testimony you make the case for doing away with the
tax exemption, and I am going to ask you about four questions
if you would talk to them. In the interest of ensuring a full
and fair debate, how would you respond to the council's
concerns, one? And, two, is the council crying wolf? Three,
would borrowing costs actually increase substantially? And,
four, would property taxes have to go up?
Mr. HODGE. Well, and not necessarily in that order, to some
degree, yes, they are crying wolf. They are enjoying a benefit,
that is absolutely clear.
To the extent of how much interest rates would go up, well,
that is up to the marketplace and how creditworthy that
particular government is. But I think there should be parity
between what that government borrows at and what a private-
sector company in the same community would have to borrow at.
Whether.
Or not it would lead to a direct increase in property taxes
and other taxes to pay for it, it depends. It actually might
encourage the city to reduce its overall amount of borrowing
and be a little bit more prudent in what it goes about trying
to build.
I think, more importantly, if you look at the overall
issue, this is a very inefficient way of funding municipal
projects because about a third of the benefit will go to
bondholders, many of them who are upper income, and then a
third of the benefit, yes, does go to the community. But when
you are a Federal official looking at this, you are going,
wait, we are paying a third extra essentially to finance this
particular local project. So it is a very inefficient way to do
it.
Actually, I wouldn't recommend this, it would be cheaper in
a way to just give the cash to a State community or to a local
community to build a project rather than giving a third to the
bondholder and a third to the community.
Mr. JOHNSON. In that case New York would probably want
more.
Mr. HODGE. It would certainly want more, yes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much.
Very interesting, Mr. Hodge, your response to Mr. Levin in
terms of your organization receiving tax exemption. I
understand that from your testimony you believe that if we
eliminate the subsidies given to local and State governments,
we can take that money and lower the rates for taxpayers. And I
assume that the contributors to your firm are wealthy
taxpayers. I mean, it is not poor people that are doing it,
right?
Mr. HODGE. I don't know the net wealth of my----
Mr. RANGEL. No, you know your constituency.
Mr. HODGE. We have everything from little old ladies--we
have contributors who are little old ladies and wealthy people.
Mr. RANGEL. Well, let me ask you, do you engage in
fundraising?
Mr. HODGE. We do indeed.
Mr. RANGEL. And you have no clue as to who makes the
contribution to your----
Mr. HODGE. We do, yes, certainly.
Mr. RANGEL. Are they wealthy people?
Mr. HODGE. There are some, and then there are some who
aren't.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. But the whole idea is that you really
want to lower tax rates as opposed to assisting States,
especially the three that you mentioned, you think that is a
give-away.
I ask you this: Do you have any idea as to the amount of
Federal taxes that are paid to the Federal Government from
these three States and how it relates to States that are less--
have less income? Do you ever take a look at it?
Mr. HODGE. We do. We annually rank the States in terms----
Mr. RANGEL. And it is the highest in the country, isn't it?
Mr. HODGE. It is because of the progressive nature----
Mr. RANGEL. It is the highest amount of revenue in the
country.
Mr. HODGE. Right.
Mr. RANGEL. Now, if an argument was made that because God
has blessed these States with resources, and that they want to
improve their education and their infrastructure and to be a
place that is a symbol for American capitalism in this country
and the world, just say like New York as an example, if we have
to pay heavily for that in order to increase the revenue to
turn back over to our Federal Government that makes it
possible, don't you really believe that we should get a break
for the contribution that we make to society and to your tax-
exempt foundation?
Mr. HODGE. I think that people like Donald Trump and others
on Wall Street can well afford----
Mr. RANGEL. I wish you wouldn't have mentioned Trump's
name. He is not relevant, he really isn't, to this discussion.
Mr. HODGE. He doesn't----
Mr. RANGEL. Please don't do that.
Mr. HODGE. Wealthy people don't need that kind of subsidy.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. Well, I really would want you to think
about whether you would want the lowest States that have the
lowest educational areas, the lowest-paid people, the less
productive thing, if you are comparing this as an example for
fairness, do you think that makes any sense at all that you
should compare the lowest States? Now, true, they need
revenues, but that you compare them with a higher-paying tax
State that has higher expenses than the rest? You don't believe
in equality of the 50 States across the board between those
that contribute to the Federal Government and those that are
the beneficiaries of the Federal Government. Isn't there a
difference that has to be considered?
Mr. HODGE. The economic research shows that all of those
citizens would be better off with lower rates.
Mr. RANGEL. But isn't it true that we contribute----
Mr. HODGE. Lower tax rates.
Mr. RANGEL. A large amount of States that you mention in
your testimony, they are not givers, they are receivers, and a
lot of the part of that money comes from California and New
York; isn't that true?
Mr. HODGE. There is a considerable amount of
redistribution.
Mr. RANGEL. A lot of money comes from the high-tax States,
and it goes to the lower-income States, and that is a fact. So
when we ask you to consider that, then you should include that
in your testimony that we are big givers, and we don't complain
about it. They complain to me, but they don't complain to the
Federal Government. We are so pleased that our State is able to
do it with the support of our partners.
That is what Sandy Hurricane was all about. When one of the
States get into trouble, we don't see who is a poor State and
who is a rich State, we come in. So for you to single out these
three States because we tried to be partners with them in
rebuilding, when they rebuild for the city, when they rebuild
for the State, I would like to believe that they are rebuilding
for our great country as well.
Thank you, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I want to focus on Washington State now. Mr. Hodge, you
talked about a couple of study models that you looked at in
your testimony, and that those studies that you did suggested
that by eliminating the itemized deductions for State and local
taxes, that would result in a lowering of tax rates; is that
correct?
Mr. HODGE. That is correct.
Mr. REICHERT. In your study models did you look at those
States--and there are just a handful, Texas is one of those
from Mr. Johnson's neck of the woods----
Mr. HODGE. Sure.
Mr. REICHERT [continuing]. Did you look at the sales tax
States? We don't have an income tax in the State of Washington.
We have approximately a 9 percent sales tax. What would happen
there?
Mr. HODGE. Well, we didn't look at every State specifically
in terms of how it would change the mix of their tax base or
their economy overall. We were looking at the national results.
But generally speaking, the citizens of Washington State
probably have far fewer State and local tax deductions than
would be the citizens of other States because of the mix of
your taxes. While you do have, certainly by some counts, some
higher property taxes, you don't have a personal income tax nor
a corporate income tax. You have the B&O tax, and some of that
I don't think is deductible.
So to some extent the citizens, the taxpayers in your State
would be far better off by giving up the deduction and taking
lower Federal income tax rates, and they would be far better
off as a result, I think.
Mr. REICHERT. You don't have an opinion as to whether or
not the sales tax might be reduced, the State might move that
direction or----
Mr. HODGE. Well, since it is not--well, it is deductible to
some degree, but not like the personal income tax. I don't
think that the State would necessarily reduce it. We would
have--I would have to give that some more thought.
Mr. REICHERT. And this is for the panel, last question, Mr.
Chairman. Do any of you see a policy reason for doing tax
reform and not providing parity for State sales and income
taxes, whether it be providing continued permanent deduction
for both or eliminating both?
Mr. BUCKLEY. I believe there should be neutrality among the
States--regardless of their choice of revenue sources, and that
has been the underlying principle of the State and local tax
deduction. It was violated somewhat in 1986 when they repealed
the deduction for State and local retail sales taxes, but it
was replaced, restored, and so I think the principle of
neutrality among States is one that should be followed in this
area.
Mr. REICHERT. Appreciate that, Mr. Buckley.
Any other response?
Mr. PARKHURST. I would agree with the principle of
neutrality, Congressman. Also one of the principles that the
Governors have laid out is one of sovereignty. I think the
discussion I have heard so far is a question that really rests
at State capitols and between the executive and legislative
branches of the States to make those decisions on the balance,
if you will, of their respective State strategies on taxes, to
create a competitive environment.
Mr. REICHERT. Okay, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think I provide a unique perspective, because I think Mr.
Pascrell and I might be the only two on this side who were
formerly mayors of major municipalities, and I can tell you
that tax-exempt municipal bonds are the most important tool in
the United States for financing investments in schools, roads,
bridges, water, and sewer systems. The reality is that these
initiatives just wouldn't happen without muni bonds.
Bowles-Simpson in its 2010 deficit reduction
recommendations proposed full taxation for State and local
interests for all newly issued bonds. A recent report shows
that if this proposal had been in place during the 2003 to 2012
period, it is estimated that $1.65 trillion of State and local
infrastructure would have cost governments an additional $495
billion of interest expense. For Boston, the tax exemption loss
over that period would have resulted in a $55 million cost
increase. These numbers are staggering, and the reality is that
State and local governments can't withstand those additional
costs.
John, in our zeal to do tax reform here, which we all agree
upon, there apparently are many options that we could consider
to raise revenue. You and I have worked over the years on a
number of proposals to close tax loopholes, and what do you
think of eliminating or capping tax-exempt financing as it
relates to good policy?
Mr. BUCKLEY. I think you can pretend that there are
economic benefits from capping or repealing the exclusion only
if you believe this country will benefit by lower investment in
public infrastructure. The exemption goes directly to the cost
of funds for State and local governments, which you have
experienced.
The answer to Mr. Johnson is governments will pay higher
interest rates. I don't think there is anybody in this room
will disagree with the proposition that repeal of the exclusion
will increase interest rates to State and local issuers,
increasing their cost of investment, reducing public
infrastructure.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Parkhurst.
Mr. PARKHURST. Congressman, the question is a very
interesting one. I would argue that capping this benefit, to
your point, would indeed, I think, raise the cost by simply a
percentage. I think we have seen estimates anywhere between 60
to upwards of 200 basis points. But interestingly, if the
purpose of cap is to, you know, address revenue issues, it may
be a challenge, given that, based on IRS data for 2010,
itemizing taxpayers seem to fall primarily, who claim interest
on muni bonds, are making less than $250,000, and I think going
forward, if the cap is applied in particular to all taxpayers,
you going to be effectively taxed twice.
As Professor Buckley says, obviously, going to taxed on the
increased cost to infrastructure and we will see the direct tax
here that you are referencing.
Mr. NEAL. Let me turn for a moment to Build America Bonds.
John Buckley and I, along with Alan Krueger, worked very hard
on Build America Bonds. They were part of the 2009 stimulus
legislation. BABs are taxable bonds for which the U.S. Treasury
Department pays a 35 percent subsidy to the issuer to offset
borrowing cost. They were a huge success around the country.
Virtually everybody who had an airport expansion, they were
done with Build America Bonds during that period of time. And I
must tell you that the Accelerated Bridge Program was very
successful, and across Massachusetts the Build America Bonds
were a smash.
Now, I want to ask you, John, do you think that this would
have happened without Build America Bonds?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Build America Bonds were enacted at a time
when the municipal bond market was in freefall. There was no
market for tax-exempt bonds because of the economic downturn,
so clearly it responded to a tremendous need at that time.
I also think it is the response to the argument that the
exclusion is inefficient. You can dramatically lower the rate
of the subsidy that was provided in Build America Bonds and
still dramatically increase the efficiency of the market for
tax-exempt bonds. So I think it is something that has to be
looked at in the long run because State and local issuers are
facing a shrinking market for tax-exempt bonds.
Mr. NEAL. And New Markets Tax Credits were designed to
stimulate investment in low-income communities. It has been
overlooked by conventional capital markets, and it has
generated more than $45 billion in capital for projects in low-
income communities. In North Hampton, the Holyoke Public
Library, the Colonial Theater in Pittsfield, cities across the
country have used New Markets Tax Credits to incent certain
behaviors. I have been a real champion from day one of New
Markets Tax Credits. Again, very, very successful. And how
might cities attract private investment into communities with
high employment and deteriorated property without the use of
these incentives?
Could we do that quickly, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman CAMP. Very quickly, because time has expired.
Mr. BUCKLEY. I believe that the New Markets Tax Credit and
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit are important parts of
encouraging redevelopment in low-income areas. The market does
not allocate resources to those areas, so if you repeal those,
you are relying on market allocations and you will see less
development, less low-income housing as a result.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank the
panelists for their presentation.
Mr. Hodge, you make the case that the Federal Government
ought to be agnostic as it relates to deduction for State and
local taxes, municipal bonds and the like. Can you help me
understand why, what the rationale was at the beginning for the
providing for tax exemption for State and local taxes?
Mr. HODGE. Sure. Well, according to the principles of sound
tax policy, we shouldn't pay taxes on income that has already
been taxed by another level of government. The same way we have
foreign tax credits where companies don't have to pay tax on--
or they get to deduct taxes paid abroad, a similar rationale
applies here. And I think that that is true. As a tax purist, I
would say we generally shouldn't have to pay taxes on taxes or
income that has already been taxed at the local level. However,
we ought to look also at the economic effects of that kind of
policy, and in this case, the policy, the unintended
consequences of this policy are more harmful, I think, in the
long run and outweigh whatever benefit comes from that.
Mr. PRICE. Is that because of a difference in rates between
States, so different citizens are paying different rates and
therefore they are treated differently? Is that part of your
rationale?
Mr. HODGE. Well, generally speaking, and this goes back to
1913 when the code was originally written, all State taxes were
deductible, and then over time it has been whittled away in
various fashion. Today it is further eroded because of the AMT
and the Pease provisions, which already reduce the value of
these deductions. So the Congress has already made this policy
decision to limit these deductions in some fashion. The
question is, do we take it to the next level and just eliminate
it for all taxpayers? We already do it for high-income
taxpayers, and the question is, do we do it for everyone?
Mr. PRICE. Yeah. Mr. Buckley makes the case, I think, that
if this exemption were to go away for municipal bonds and the
like, that it would drive up costs for infrastructure projects
and the bonds that would then be let and that, therefore, I
think is the argument, that then taxes would go up for the
individuals in that municipality to pay for the increased cost
for the project. That makes some sense to me. Tell me why that
isn't the case.
Mr. HODGE. Well, no, it probably is the case because, you
know, these projects are getting a federal subsidy. So more of
the costs would fall on local taxpayers, which means that local
officials would have to be entirely up front with local
taxpayers about the cost and they couldn't shift part of the
cost to the Federal Government.
Mr. PRICE. So the argument is that doing away with the
exemption then becomes a much more transparent, much more
honest way of governance.
Mr. HODGE. Absolutely, and brings more responsibility to
local officials to maintain those costs and reduce those costs
and ultimately reduce the long-term borrowing cost to future
taxpayers, because you got to remember, this is an obligation
on future taxpayers to pay off those bonds. So by essentially
subsidizing it at the federal level, you are encouraging more
and more of that activity at the local level, putting a greater
burden on future taxpayers, and that is what we have seen in
the recent data.
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Parkhurst, why doesn't that make any sense?
Mr. PARKHURST. I just want to highlight one key point here,
Congressman. When we are talking about investments in
infrastructure, we are talking about long-term capital assets
that have a long lifecycle, so it makes eminent sense to be
issuing long-term debt for infrastructure that is going to
benefit----
Mr. PRICE. I think Mr. Hodge's argument was that the
process gets more transparent, more accountable, and the
elected officials become more then responsive to their
constituents. Why isn't that true?
Mr. PARKHURST. I would argue that given that for many
States and municipalities that are issuing debt, many are doing
it either through a public referendum where they have got to go
to the voters to explain why they are going to be issuing
bonds. There are caps that are held. Transparency is well
addressed, I think, at the municipal level through that at this
point right now. I am not certain what the delta would be on
additional transparency from Mr. Hodge's point.
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Hodge.
Mr. HODGE. I think that the more we can make this process
transparent, the better. And if we look at the increase in debt
over the last, say, 12 years relative to the amount of that
debt that has gone to new infrastructure, there is a lot of
money missing. There has been very little new investment in
infrastructure relative to the tremendous amount of new debt
that has been taken on.
Mr. PRICE. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Doggett is recognized. After Mr. Doggett concludes, we
will go two to one on this side.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There is probably no perfect way to ensure public input,
public participation for a truly public interest revision of
our complex tax laws, but I think what the chairman has done in
terms of laying out proposals for public comment, last year on
the international tax, recently on derivatives, is a step in
the right direction, as is this hearing. I am less confident
about how productive in assuring the public interest is
represented in this revision, how the working groups are
operating. In fact, one of them is meeting as we convene here
now with groups that are interested in what is happening in the
energy code, and many of these working groups are overlapping.
All of them are done in private. And they do provide some
insight, but they do not really provide an opportunity for all
Members of the Committee to participate in all of these really
important groups. And so I think that process is not quite as
productive, and the more hearings like this we can have to
explore all the implications of Tax Code revision, I think the
better product we will get.
You have covered a lot of territory about how we finance
infrastructure. I would like to return to a topic that the
chairman asked you about, and that is on private activity
bonds. While I realize that is a small portion of the overall
municipal or bond market, the suggestion in the recent Times
critique of the private activity bond market referred to a
Bipartisan Policy Center study suggesting that the private
activity bond market amounts to a cost to the Treasury of $50
billion over 10 years. Is that a fair analysis of what the cost
of that program is?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Let me say that their estimate makes the point
that I was trying to make in my testimony, that it is an
extremely small piece of the overall cost of tax-exempt bonds.
Mr. DOGGETT. Indeed, and I agree, but $50 billion is $50
billion.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Right. Now, also, the term private activity
bond picks up a whole wide range of activities. Bonds issued on
behalf of private colleges are private activity bonds. Bonds
issued for transportation infrastructure, wharves, docks,
airports, where there is a mixed public-private are private
activity bonds. So there is a wide range here.
Now, I do believe it is an area where the committee should
look at.
Mr. DOGGETT. There were some standards set in the 1986
reform that have gradually been eroded or excepted so that
while at that time you couldn't finance golf courses, now some
of the subsequent disaster relief proposals have----
Mr. BUCKLEY. What you absolutely should not do is not
enact, you know, kind of scattershot disaster relief provisions
that just simply waive all the limitations on private activity
bonds.
Mr. DOGGETT. In our eagerness to respond to disasters,
whether Texas, New York, Louisiana or anywhere else----
Mr. BUCKLEY. The midwest, that is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT [continuing]. Sometimes those standards are
forgotten, but isn't that the best way to ensure that doesn't
happen to have strong clear, standards in the law about when
private activity bonds can be used or to eliminate them
entirely?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, I think there are standards in the law.
I would caution against eliminating them entirely because I
think that will affect some types of infrastructure that are
valuable and that you will desire. This is an area where I
think the committee should look at.
Mr. DOGGETT. Why can't those other forms of infrastructure
be, to the extent that they deserve any preference or Federal
subsidy, be financed through general obligation bonds?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Just because there is a mixed public-private
use is the only reason.
Mr. DOGGETT. The Times article suggested that the largest
beneficiary of private activity bonds had been Chevron.
Mr. BUCKLEY. That was a disaster-related provision.
Mr. DOGGETT. And would be the kind of provision that while
Chevron might get a benefit, Joe's Chevron station that is a
small business in the same area is not accorded any benefit.
Mr. BUCKLEY. They could have probably accessed it as well,
but they did not.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Taylor, Mr. Hodge, Mr. Parkhurst, I know
you have raised questions pro and con on bonds generally, but
specifically on private activity bonds, should they be limited?
Are new standards necessary?
Chairman CAMP. Just answer very briefly because time has
expired.
Mr. TAYLOR. My answer is, yes, they should be eliminated.
If you are going to give a benefit, give it to the State and
local government directly. If they don't want to finance it, I
don't see a reason that the private sector should benefit in
any way.
Mr. PARKHURST. At this point, I think the Governors would
want to examine all the options on the table before making any
final decisions.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Buchanan is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing today, and I would like to thank all our
witnesses for taking their time out to be here. As a member
from Florida, I am the only member on Ways and Means, but my
district, we have 200,000 retirees, and I know that they count
on municipal bonds as a stable investment.
Mr. Parkhurst, or any of you, I have got a sense of it
myself, you know, as an investor over the years, but how safe
are municipal bonds in terms of a sound investment for
retirees?
Mr. PARKHURST. Municipal bonds are probably one of the, if
not the safest investment that my parents, who are retirees,
could invest in. I think, and I will defer to Dr. Buckley on
the specific numbers, but I think it is well below 1 percent
default rate.
Interesting point on retirees. Again, citing back to the
2010 tax date I referenced earlier, it is in my testimony, of
those taxpayers that identify on their tax forms an exclusion
for interest for muni bonds, 5 out of 10 of those taxpayers are
65 years or older. So seniors do comprise a large section of
investors in muni bonds, either directly or through their
mutual funds that invest in these products.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. Buckley, do you have actually a number, a
percentage or something? I mean, I assume 1 percent. I just
wanted to kind of hear it.
Mr. BUCKLEY. I do not have a specific number. The default
rate has been low in this area.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Okay. The other thing was just in terms of
this, do you have any sense of what percentage are owned by
retirees in terms of these pension funds? Do you have any
sense, 65 and older individuals?
Mr. PARKHURST. I don't have a specific answer for you,
Congressman, I can look into that. I would say, though, just to
give you a little more macro perspective, the market is made up
of both retail and institutional investors, and the retail
investors are who you are referring to at this point,
individuals who are purchasing. They also include the
individual investors who have been discussed here as well.
On the institutional side, the primary investors in
municipal bonds are P&C, property and casualty insurance
companies, as well as banks, not necessarily the large banks,
but more regional and community banks that are reinvesting in
infrastructure investments within their communities.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. Buckley, the National Federation of
Independent Businesses, NFIB, and I have seen that from our
local chambers as well, they surveyed their members who make up
the small business community across the country, and 85 percent
of their members think that Congress should do tax reform,
change the Federal Tax Code. However, they favor retaining the
deduction for State and local taxes even in exchange for lower
tax rates. They want tax reform, but they would like to retain
the exemptions for State and Federal Governments. Why do you
think that is, or do you have any sense of that?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, first of all, as was mentioned
previously, repealing the deduction effectively increases their
marginal rate. So if you repealed the deduction for State
income taxes and replace it with a lower rate, you really
haven't done much. You have substituted one form of marginal
rate increase for a marginal rate decrease.
Also, my guess is the small business community has to be
very concerned about the question of whether corporations would
have their deduction for State and local taxes repealed. It is
hard, in my mind, to justify taking the deduction away from
unincorporated businesses and continuing it for corporate
businesses.
Now, in the corporate context, the rationale for the
deduction is as strong as it is on the individual side, so my
guess is they are worried about discrimination here.
Mr. BUCHANAN. One other thing. Bowles-Simpson and other
groups, advisory panel for the President, want to eliminate the
deduction, and why is that, do you think? Because at the end of
the day you would think it would create more jobs, more
opportunities, put more dollars into the Treasury in terms of
people being employed, but why did they come up with that
analysis?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Revenue. Just revenue to finance rate
reductions. That is all.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Buckley. I do appreciate your
comment that actually reducing the rate would have all
taxpayers being treated more similarly as opposed to those
taxpayers in those States that have high incomes and use the
deduction more. But if you do eliminate that and lower the
rate, there is not a marginal rate increase.
Mr. BUCKLEY. There is a marginal rate increase depending--
--
Chairman CAMP. Not if you lower the rate. Not if you lower
the rate.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Depending on the State in which you reside.
Chairman CAMP. Yes, but you could lower the rate and there
may not be a marginal rate increase and then you wouldn't have
tax policy favoring certain States and certain constituencies
in a way that they don't now.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Mr. Chairman, I disagree with favoring notion
here. You know, there are States that are urban in nature and
therefore they have higher incomes and higher tax deductions.
There are cities, Seattle in the State of Washington, where the
tax burdens are higher than they are in the rest of the State.
Using averages here, it doesn't really, I don't think,
accurately reflects what is going on.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Smith is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses today.
Mr. Buckley, you briefly touched on your assertion that
higher taxes in various States are perhaps because of a higher
cost of living. Shouldn't higher wages generate higher taxes
per capita?
Mr. BUCKLEY. That is correct. I mean, the reason some
States have higher taxes than others is a combination both of
higher incomes and of higher cost of government, I would argue,
largely due to the urban nature of the State.
Now, those States also, as Congressman Rangel pointed out,
are typically the donor States. They pay a far greater share of
Federal income tax liability than other States for exactly the
same reason, they are high-income States.
Mr. SMITH. But that should also reflect on what their tax
burden is at the State level and/or local level, correct?
Mr. BUCKLEY. That is correct.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. We have heard briefly about the public
power and taxes on public power and perhaps different treatment
than private power. Mr. Taylor, coming from a public power
State, I am curious because I almost feel like there is more
transparency in terms of, okay, there is tax free municipal
bond advantages there, but then we know that in other States
there are power generators in the private sector that enjoy a
number, in fact, perhaps a smorgasbord of tax benefits. Is that
accurate?
Mr. TAYLOR. I am not in a position to compare the States
and the public power and private power in different States. I
think my concern was that the Federal Government is providing a
benefit or a subsidy or whatever, tax expenditure, for State
and local governments, and I think it then behooves the
committee to determine where that benefit is going.
I think Mr. Hodge said earlier, listen, you could
essentially eliminate tax exemption on municipal bonds and then
decide where you want the money to be spent. It might be a more
efficient way to do that. It is not for me to sit here and say,
okay, it should always go to A or B. That is really your
decision.
That being said, if you are going to talk about State and
local governments and those governmental bodies that are making
decisions, they should be the ones getting a tax exemption, and
it should be very clear.
In the case of Nebraska or other places where public power
is a big issue, then you have to sit there and say, to what
extent is the State controlling that, is it substituting for
private power, at what point should you stop substituting for
private power and let the private power companies come in?
Those are governmental decisions that should be taken very
carefully because you run the risk, with tax exemption, of it
substituting for the private sector and it remaining that way
even though the economy changes.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Anyone else wish to comment? No? Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Blumenauer is recognized.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
continuing this process of trying to dive into the Tax Code and
the implications, and I appreciate the balanced presentation
here. It gives us a range of concerns.
I want to go back to the infrastructure piece. I appreciate
what my colleague Mr. Neal talked about. Mr. Buckley, you are
providing some balance here. I find it----
Mr. BUCKLEY. There are two of us, I think.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. I find it interesting that we are having
this hearing today when the American Society for Civil
Engineers is putting out its update of its scorecard, which it
has been doing over the years. We are still D's, F's, I think a
C minus may be in there, and the cumulative deficit, by their
estimate, is $3.6 trillion necessary for the standard between
now and 2020.
It is interesting to me that the era of highest economic
growth and productivity increase, and, by the way, dramatic
reduction in Federal debt after World War II, occurred when we
made the investments in our returning veterans for their
education and enabled them to buy a home. The Interstate
Highway System is an obvious example, but we had other
infrastructure investments, in higher education, in aviation,
in water, in sewer, in areas that now communities are looking
at skyrocketing rates--by the way, rates that are not tax
deductible at the local level for utilities--at a time when we
are scaling back the Federal infrastructure investment.
And looking at the bill that we just passed that expires
this Congress for transportation, we are really kind of stuck
here. It strikes me that looking at adjusting the interest
exemption in these tax deductible bonds is one of the few areas
where the Federal Government is actually stepping up and
providing support for infrastructure investment.
Do you want to----
Mr. BUCKLEY. I would agree entirely and also state that it
is the only stable source of Federal support for local
infrastructure spending. It is there. It is not subject to an
extension of the highway bill. It is something that State and
local governments can plan on. And also it is a form of Federal
support that has the least amount of Federal involvement in.
All of the decisions about what infrastructure to invest in,
how to structure the debt are questions that are left to the
prerogatives of State and local government with no Federal
interference. It is a fairly conservative way of delivering
support here.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. And I know time is short, Mr. Chairman, so
I will just prepared to yield back my time, but I think this is
a very important concept that the committee should consider as
we move forward.
I hope that we are spending a little more time looking at
infrastructure, but the consequences of this investment in
areas that have tended to be more productive, that have created
more wealth, that have challenges and opportunities, that
people have the choice, it is the amount of benefit to the
communities is commensurate with decisions they have made
locally. But I think the multiple effects that the entire
country benefits from in terms of increased economic activity,
and frankly, reduced pressure for other types of Federal
investment bears our being careful with how we move forward
with this.
Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes, I would like to comment on that. While I
actually agree with both of you on this, in terms of the fact
that the decisions are made locally, that the infrastructure is
very much needed, the question is, is this the most efficient
way and are you getting the bang for your buck? And I think as
an economist and someone who has been involved with this area
back to 1975, there is no doubt in the economic literature that
some program like BABs, maybe not at 33 percent or 20, maybe it
is 28, make it is 25, BABs is a much more efficient way to say
where the money goes. And I am all for State and local
governments defining it, but let's make it efficient.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. And I appreciate the opportunity that we
can fine tune the way that some of the programs are
administered. We have had this conversation in the past with
Mr. Buckley when we were factoring other things. But I just
stand by my point that I would be very careful about monkeying
with this.
Mr. TIBERI [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you.
Mr. TIBERI. The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, have heard from every one with of my school
districts, my cities, counties in my district. I have a very
unique district. The center of my district is the Dallas/Fort
Worth Airport, and over the last 50 years that airport has
spurred growth both in industry as well as population. And I
started my political career as a city council member and a
mayor, so I am someone that has sat in meetings and looked at
water projects, road projects, school projects, projects to
bring infrastructure to major industry that wanted to locate in
our town, and made those decisions based on the fact that the
municipal bond rate was a rate that we could take advantage of
and expand our infrastructure.
I don't think there is any mistake that if Congress decides
to do away with the exemption for municipal bonds, for school
district bonds, for county bonds, that every single taxpayer in
my district will have an increase in their taxes. The cities
have to provide infrastructure. They have to provide water,
sewer. They have to provide that because they are trying to
attract the industry, the very industries that are going to
bring the jobs to that town.
Now, it might be, for instance, we have in our local town,
we have Amazon is bringing a 1 million square foot distribution
warehouse because of its proximity to the airport. Could not
have done that without a major road project, could not have
done that without adequate water, without adequate city sewer,
without an adequate workforce who need schools.
Our goal to simplify the Tax Code, I agree with. Our goal
to lower taxes across the board, I agree. But for us to think
that we are going to be lowering tax rates for our citizens in
this case, all we are going to be doing is passing that tax
down to a different level. Municipal bonds provided the major
catalyst for us making those decisions in school districts, in
cities, in counties across the nation. In every council
meeting, every school board meeting, every county supervisor
meeting, almost every week they are making those decisions to
create jobs, create the infrastructure for that.
And so my point today is that maybe we need to look at
private activity bonds, maybe we should take a very close look
at the entire spectrum, but the core deductibility of municipal
bonds, of tax-exempt bonds, all it will do is create a pure tax
shift. And I would like to have each of yours opinion on that
comment.
Mr. Hodge.
Mr. HODGE. Congressman, I know that property tax issue is a
very hot issue in Texas these days, and there has been a lot of
attempts to try to control the growth of property taxes. But I
would suggest that it is possible that it is the availability
of municipal bonds and the ability to borrow that has in some
way contributed to those higher property taxes because of the
communities and school districts that are over-borrowing and
thus taxing their local taxpayers. So it is a circular thing.
And so, you know, it is a chicken-and-egg situation.
But I would suggest that the evidence shows that if you
were to eliminate these bonds, it would actually end up
lowering property taxes overall because communities would not
borrow as much and spend as much. And so over time I think that
those property taxes and local taxes would come back down. That
is what the economic evidence shows.
Mr. MARCHANT. Mr. Parkhurst.
Mr. PARKHURST. Congressman, I think your comments are in
accord with the Nation's Governors. I appreciate those
thoughts.
I would like to leave you with an interesting data point
that I think will help you the next time you have visitors from
back home. There are proposed next year of $43 billion in lost
revenue to the Federal Government from the interest exclusion.
There is also a projected increase, a sale of $400 billion in
new issuances of muni bonds, about a 10:1 ratio. That is a
pretty good leverage ratio for the dollars.
Chairman CAMP [presiding]. All right. Thank you. The
gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think that my colleague from Texas certainly does make a
valid argument related to the investment and infrastructure,
but as we read in the New York Times, they reported recently
that the tax-exempt bonds had been used, as the chairman said,
for things like a winery in North Carolina and a golf course in
Puerto Rico, a Corvette museum. I probably should temper my
comments on that since my husband is a big Corvette person.
But when we look at these, do you think that this is, first
of all, an appropriate use for these kinds of projects, as my
colleague talked about infrastructure, questioning these as
infrastructures, and then in addition to that, what kind of
rules could be changed to prevent these types of activities
from happening in the future?
So why don't we start with you, Mr. Buckley, and work down
the other way?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, first of all, I think it is entirely
appropriate for this committee to examine the rules for private
activity bonds, and they were tightened in 1986. Now, a lot of
the examples in the New York Times articles were in response of
one-time liberalizations of the rules as part of disaster
relief measures, and I would suggest the committee ought not to
do that again in the future. I mean, they should tighten the
rules.
Now, a lot of what was previously talked about are private
activity bonds. When you were talking about the airport
development and all of that, those are private activity bonds.
And so they do serve, I believe, bona fide public purposes of
development, helping, you know, as you say, Amazon would not
have come but for the railroad development.
The highways in that circumstance may well be considered
private activity bonds because of disproportionate use by one
taxpayer. So I believe you should examine those rules. You
should tighten them, if necessary. But don't use those, you
know, anecdotal stories in the New York Times to justify repeal
of a provision that I think has proved to be quite effective.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. In some ways I would agree with Mr. Buckley,
but I would also add that any time you give, and I hate to pick
on DFW again, if you are going to use the tax exemption there,
it benefitted certain airlines over other airlines in terms of
allocation of landing slots and the whole kit and caboodle. You
had a corporate purpose that was involved in this.
I have absolutely no problem with the Congressman's
discussion, the previous Congressman's discussion about water
and sewer and schools and things like that. I think it is
imperative that the committee decide to what activities does
this benefit flow to. Personally, I have a question in my mind
of any kind of benefit flowing down to one particular
corporation or another without it being available to everyone,
and that is what the markets are for.
So if you limit tax exemption to standard governmental
purposes that we all could probably agree on here, fine. But
once it gets into anything that flows to the private sector,
you should be very, very careful.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Taylor, I want to just tag onto that for
just a second because you mentioned Build America Bonds. And I
don't know that much about them. Would they be any different
than, in making these kinds of determinations, than----
Mr. TAYLOR. Well, I will go back to a comment that Mr.
Hodge made earlier on, that the way the tax exemption is
structured right now a certain portion of the dollar that you
are providing goes to the investor. And so is that really what
you want to do? The answer usually is no, and there isn't an
economist, heck, I have read--when I first got involved with
munis, the studies were going back to 1963 saying do it, a la
BABs, do it that way because it is the most efficient way to
give the money, and let the decision making be at the lower
level.
I think the real question is, what is that rate? Is it 28,
which I have heard bandied about, or 25, that is your decision.
But it is a much better way to get the bang for the buck.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. Mr. Parkhurst.
Mr. TAYLOR. Rather than tax exemption
Mr. PARKHURST. Briefly, I would concur with Mr. Buckley's
comments that working to review the rules would make eminent
sense to correct anomalies, and I would offer up an opportunity
for this committee to reach out to States and local governments
that have the direct hands-on experience with many of these
private activity bonds--to work in partnership in that.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Hodge, I am out of time, so if you have any
remarks pertaining to that, if you will submit it, that would
be great. Thank you.
Mr. HODGE. I certainly will.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the panelists.
Good to see you back, Mr. Buckley. I don't see you, but I
am here. You stated that the debate over tax reform cannot be
merely driven by tax policy concerns. This committee has to
take into account the possible collateral consequences of
changes to longstanding tax benefits. Just give me one sentence
of summary in your own mind.
Mr. BUCKLEY. I would use two examples. Home values. I don't
think there is any economist in the country that doesn't think
the price of our homes have embedded in them the value of the
deduction for mortgage interest and real property taxes. I
really think the Congress has to be very careful about removing
those benefits. I think it would be quite destructive to have
further decline in housing prices by reason of what action is
taken by Congress.
Employer-provided health care. Almost all of us get our
health care through our employer. If you repeal the exclusion
for employer-provided health care, you will see a decline in
the level of healthcare coverage provided by the employer. I
think that is a bad thing.
Mr. PASCRELL. So in solving one, we will create another
problem.
Mr. BUCKLEY. You will have to respond with appropriated
funds if people lose their health insurance.
Mr. PASCRELL. We discussed it, as you remember, during the
debate on Obamacare.
Mr. BUCKLEY. That is correct.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Hodge, if we follow, if we pursue your
path, what you are suggesting, we will never ever repair our
infrastructure for water and sewers in this country. We lose 25
percent of our water that is already being treated because of
the antiquated system that we have and will not repair it, and
the municipalities do not have the money, the States do not
have the money to do this. So they might as well just wait till
they have the money. Well, you know what happens in that
circumstance.
That is not acceptable. That is not acceptable. And I agree
with the gentleman from Texas that these things will not get
done unless these bonds exist, unless these private equity
bonds exist. We have had legislation before us for 10 years,
passed in this House 3 times, 3 times, and stalled in the
Senate. Right, Mr. Camp, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman CAMP. Very familiar with it.
Mr. PASCRELL. We need to keep the collateral consequences
that Mr. Buckley refers in mind, as well as the policy goals we
wish to accomplish through our Tax Code. One big collateral
consequence I am concerned about is in the area, and you have
heard about it, the State and local tax provisions, is what
would happen to high-cost States like New Jersey if we
eliminate the deduction for State and local taxes. According to
the National Association of Home Builders, the average New
Jersey property owner has $7,398 in real estate deductions. I
think Texas is close to $5,500 a year. That is more than double
the national average, the New Jersey number. I believe that
eliminating this deduction could have a real devastating impact
on my State and many other States. We need to think long and
hard about the effect it would have. We have a long way to go
to get to the $6 trillion the Tax Policy Center says we need to
find to finance the Ryan-Camp tax reform proposal, and these
are the kinds of issues we need to examine in depth.
Mr. Buckley.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Can you describe how impact of eliminating
the capping of deduction for State and local taxes would be
different for high-cost regions of the country? And the second
question is, isn't repealing this deduction just a covert
marginal rate hike that would double tax individuals' income,
and how is this different how we treat foreign source income,
Mr. Buckley?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, you raise the interesting point. We do
provide a foreign tax credit, a dollar-for-dollar reduction in
U.S. tax liability for the amount of foreign taxes you pay.
Nobody has ever asserted that that is a subsidy for foreign
countries. It is an appropriate measure of reducing the
potential for double taxation
We provide a far less generous accommodation for the State
taxes, an accommodation that I believe is appropriate to
prevent double taxation. Now, it will have particular impact on
States with high incomes, but those States typically are net
donors to the Federal Government.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Buckley.
Oh, my time is up. Mr. Chairman, yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON [presiding]. Thank you.
Mr. Young, you are recognized.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all our
panelists for a very interesting conversation today and for
your appearance here today.
I represent Indiana's 9th Congressional District, and the
communities throughout my 13-county district rely heavily in
various ways on tax-exempt bonds. But the question, I think,
for many of us policymakers here is, of course, the issue of
unintended consequences, which has been brought up a number of
times, sometimes called collateral consequences. I see that
always as a potential consequence of acting in the Federal
sphere. You are going to have unintended consequences. What is
incumbent upon us is to fully weigh all the evidence before us
and try and mitigate those consequences before we act.
We also tend to be risk averse here in Washington. So we
will hear a lot of qualifying language from my colleagues,
perhaps occasionally from myself about this could happen, we
need to weigh things very heavily before acting. But at some
point there is a risk to not changing policies towards a more
optimal public policy approach of tax-exempt bonds here if one
exists
So, you know, I come back to the theme that people really
don't fear change so much as they fear loss, and if we can
prove that adopting a new mechanism of funding these
infrastructure projects and bonding out various projects is
better, then it ought to be adopted. I am not persuaded as yet
entirely, but there are some things that I want to explore
here.
Mr. Hodge, you said for each million dollar in tax-exempt
bonds, the Federal Government foregoes $21,000, so that is a
potential benefit to the Federal coffers at least, could
conceivably have what is called collateral consequences at the
local level.
And you, yourself, Mr. Hodge, have conceded that at least
initially there might be property tax implications on changing
the tax status of these bonds. But you alluded to something
very interesting. You said in the longer term, and you said
absent this deduction, State and local governments would have
lower overall taxes and would have smaller budgets.
I can think of a couple of dynamics that might lead to
this. Greater project scrutiny at the local level, conceivably,
might be one reason. Another reason would be greater
competition for capital between communities and across States.
Is that a potential thing that would drive the lower overall
taxes and smaller budgets?
Mr. HODGE. Yes.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay. So that is the positive side of the
ledger.
The negative side, Mr. Parkhurst, you listed off a number
of concerns, and I would like to go through those. An increase
in direct taxes on citizens. So this is the burden-shifting
concern, right? Do you disagree with the notion, though, that
in the longer term you might actually see lower overall taxes
and smaller budgets as a result of changing the tax-exempt
status, and if so, why do you disagree with that notion?
Mr. PARKHURST. I think given the dynamics of the country's
economics, conditions, regions, it is hard to give you a
definitive answer on a hypothetical at this point right now. I
would argue that what we can see happening or what we could
perceive happening is just that point, is that shift in
projects that either don't get done because the State and local
officials make a rational decision that with limited dollars we
can only do X and not Y, or if the decision is made that we
must pursue a particular infrastructure project either because
it is crisis driven or the public has made a decision, either
through referenda or other by electing individuals who are
making these decisions, to increase their taxes. I think then
that is the response that I am looking at in the short term.
But long term, at this point, I don't think I could give you a
definitive answer to your question.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay. There are various academic studies
supporting this idea that there will be long-term benefits to
changing the tax-exempt status. Doug Holtz-Eakin and Larry
Lindsey, for example, have studies that the National Governors
Association may consult to get further clarity on this.
Mr. Hodge, got about 10 seconds left, I think. You have any
thoughts about this?
Mr. HODGE. No, the economic evidence is very clear, that if
you were to remove these subsidies, then overall spending at
the State and local level would decline and taxes would reduce
overall as well.
Mr. YOUNG. Okay. We will continue to explore this. I yield
back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I was
thinking one of the good things about being near the end is you
get a chance to hear all of those things that have been said
before you. And when the question arose, came up about Build
America Bonds, I just happened to have six pages of projects
that were either done or completed or underway in the State of
Illinois, most of which, I suspect, would not have been on the
table unless these bonds were available.
Also, I thought about the article in the New York Times. I
grew up in rural America, and people often used containers to
take a bath. They didn't all have indoor plumbing. And when
they got ready to throw out the bathwater, there was an old
saying that don't throw out the baby with the bathwater. I
mean, there are some components of some things that may not be
as effective or as good, but that doesn't mean the whole
concept is not worthy.
Like my good friend from Texas, Mr. Bishop, I think many of
us have had some experiences with local government, and I also
think that many of us are firmly convinced that many local
infrastructure projects would never get done if the bonds were
not available, that they would just simply lay flat, nothing
would happen, and the need would continue to exist. So I think
that they have been lifesavers for infrastructure development
in these communities all over America.
But let me ask, there are some proposals--and, Mr. Buckley,
let me ask you--there are proposals to reduce the tax exemption
on municipal bond interest, such as one to cap the exemption
for certain taxpayers at 28 percent, would have severely
detrimental impact on national infrastructure development and
the municipal market, raising costs for State and local
borrowers and creating uncertainty for investors. These
investors' fears translate into investor demands for higher
yield from State and local governments issuing the bonds. If
these entities are unable to satisfy investor yield demands,
then isn't it true that either, one, these much-needed
infrastructure projects would not move forward, or the cost of
these projects would be passed directly to State and local
taxpayers?
Mr. BUCKLEY. You have two problems, I think, when you
legislate in this area. First is the uncertainty that you are
talking about. Just the fact that this hearing is going on is
creating uncertainty in the market about the long-term
viability of the tax exemption, thereby demanding higher
yields.
The question whether it is going to increase cost and
reduce infrastructure that higher yields, I think that is
absolutely correct. You can assert that there are economic
benefits from repealing the exemption only if you believe that
it is in the best interests of this country to have lower
investment in public infrastructure.
You know, when Mr. Hodge talks about lower spending at
State and local levels, it is all infrastructure. So if you
believe we have overinvested in infrastructure, which I don't
think anybody does, then you should entertain proposals to
repeal this benefit. If you believe that infrastructure is very
valuable, then you should not.
The cap has some impact on tax-exempt rates. I have seen a
lot of different estimates and I am really not in a position to
judge which one is right. I mean, some show it as fairly low.
Some show it as fairly high.
Mr. DAVIS. In your written testimony you also indicated a
need to maintain a balance between individual exemptions or
deductions and corporate deductions. Why do you think that is--
--
Mr. BUCKLEY. Well, I think it goes back to my answer about
small businesses. I don't know how you could deny individuals
the deduction for State and local taxes and at the same time
permit corporate taxpayers to deduct those items. I just think
it is not a politically viable solution.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Paulsen, you are recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This actually is a
very, very good hearing, and I heard from a number of folks
back home.
I want to follow up on what Mr. Davis was actually asking,
because when the President came out with his budget proposal, I
think it was last fiscal year's budget proposal, just a year
ago, he actually recommended that cap, you know, at the 28
percent level for that exclusion on municipal bond or, you
know, State and local bond deductions. And I am curious, what
would be the effect--you know, aside from the trade-offs of the
policy issue we have been having about whether you allow it or
don't allow it--what would be the effect if that was--if that
policy went forward as a part of, you know, a budget plan this
year or next year in the near term? What is the average length
of these bonds that are let out right now; is it 20 years, is
it 30 years? What is the effect of these sort of--these
existing contracts that are in the market right now? What would
be the effect versus, you know, phasing it in or not phasing it
in? I am just--in terms of the actual, it is more of a
technical question, but what happens specifically to the
market, Mr. Parkhurst?
Mr. PARKHURST. Some of the estimates that I have seen, I
think they are rather conservative depending upon the
percentage cap you are talking about. Anywhere, as I said
earlier, from six-tenths of a point to, you know, 1\1/2\ points
in a bump-up in your yield.
You are back to the key issue here, which is risk and
certainty, and obviously investors are looking for low risk and
high certainty. When you are talking about any type--just as
Mr. Buckley said, the mere fact that this hearing is being held
today is creating uncertainty in the market about what changes
may happen, and that is going to have an impact on the market
going forward.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes. Let me kindly point out that this focusing
on capping individual interest rates, the deduction for State
and local interest is really looking at the problem the wrong
way. If your concern, and Mr. Davis' concern, Mr. Marchant's
concern is for financing infrastructure, you should be looking
at ways in which to expand the market of potential investors,
and right now because tax exemption exists for the interest on
State and local bonds, you are limiting it to people who are
in, by definition, higher-income tax brackets.
I think everyone who has ever been in the market--and one
of the reasons BABs were somewhat, from my vantage point, very
successful was because it suddenly expanded the number of
potential investors. What that does is eventually lower
interest rates for people. It means the Federal subsidy is a
little lower. That sort of thing is what you should be looking
at, from my vantage point as an economist, and looking at
markets rather than the reverse.
Mr. Buckley is absolutely right. In 1986, when tax reform
was going through, the market froze because of discussions
about how you should tax individuals.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Hodge, maybe you can comment. I mean,
obviously we have got uncertainty in the marketplace on the
healthcare law right now that is not giving predictability to
the business community, but, I mean, just give a perspective of
what the existing market would be like from a bond transition.
Mr. HODGE. Well, I think we have to be very careful about
overdoing the uncertainty element. That would mean that we
would never talk about tax reform----
Mr. PAULSEN. Right.
Mr. HODGE [continuing]. Because somebody might be
uncertain.
Well, let's look at the certainty here, and that is State
and local governments this year are spending $120 billion a
year on the interest on their debt, their accumulated debt.
That is more than they spend on police protection, twice as
much as what they spend on parks and recreation, twice as much
as they spend on sewerage, on fire protection, et cetera. They
have loaded themselves with debt to the detriment of other
elements of their budget. So while they are crying poor and
poverty now, that they can't afford to do certain things, a lot
of is because they are crowding out their own budgets with the
amount of debt they have taken on.
That is not our fault, but it can be attributed to the
municipal bond exemption, which affords them the opportunity to
overborrow and thus crowd out the things that they think are
most important.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. Mr. Parkhurst.
Mr. PARKHURST. Just a quick note on that. I can't speak to
the interest amount, but I can tell you that the current
outstanding bond market is $3.7 trillion. So, again, the
leverage ratio is pretty good.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay, that is good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Dr. McDermott, you are recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Mr. Reed? I believe Mr. Reed is next.
Mr. JOHNSON. I had McDermott, I think.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am listening to this whole thing, and, Mr. Buckley, you
tell me that Seattle has a higher tax rate or pays higher taxes
than other places in the State of Washington, and that is true,
because we do these bonds for housing and all sorts of things
in the city, and we tax ourselves for them, and it seems what--
I am having trouble figuring out what the upside of getting rid
of municipal bonds is, because all I hear is Mr. Hodge, who
says that, well, we will get a smaller government out of this,
and people, they will do it with their own money or something.
I am not--I am trying to figure out, does the Federal
Government have this pot of money which we dole out, and we
bring back earmarks so that we can get certain money, or since
we are not using the tax-exempt status and let the local areas
do their own thing, then I guess we have got to come here and
try to get some earmarks back. Is that--or how are we going to
get the infrastructure built is really what I am having a hard
time. I hear that BABs are good. All three of you.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Right.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Mr. Parkhurst, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Buckley, you
all say they are good, right?
Mr. TAYLOR. It is a better way to do it than to do it as
you currently do it.
Mr. PARKHURST. I want to at least be clear that what the
Governors would support is an all-of-the-above strategy,
building activity bonds together with existing tax exempts need
to be part of the tool kit, not looking to substitute for the
existing market.
Mr. BUCKLEY. Let me also agree. I think Build America Bonds
are a complement to tax exemption. It gives the issuer a
choice, and it does make--even for the issuers that choose to
use traditional tax exemption, it means that they will receive
much more of the Federal revenue cost because it makes the
whole market more efficient.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So taking--getting rid of the tax-exempt
municipal bonds, the only upside is that we would then have
some money we could use to make a revenue-neutral reduction in
rate on corporations to 25 percent; is that correct?
Mr. BUCKLEY. It is essentially the debate that this
committee is having is do you repeal these more targeted tax
benefits to finance rate reductions. And this is where I will
continue to disagree with Mr. Hodge. The only economic benefits
that can come from repealing the exemption are based on the
fact that this country will be better off with less public
infrastructure. And I would argue our problem is inadequate
public infrastructure, and if you don't subsidize
infrastructure this way, which has no earmarks, no Federal
involvement basically, you will be forced to find another way.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. We will be forced back to our old habits of
appropriated earmarks?
Mr. BUCKLEY. Appropriated funds.
Mr. TAYLOR. If I might, you are right in some ways in
saying there is no Federal involvement in the initial decision
of what infrastructure projects go forward and the like, and
while I subscribe and agree with that, the fact of the matter
is by issuing tax-exempt bonds, you create the possibility of
arbitrage on the part of the issuer, and then I tried to lay
out in my prepared statement that has led to a significant
amount of abuse. And so if the committee wants to do what you
have suggested, Mr. Buckley, which is have both, then I think
you have to look at solutions to dealing with the arbitrage,
forcing issuers to invest in State and local government
securities at the Treasury rather than having it done in the
free market, or some other steps to maintain the integrity of
that market.
Mr. BUCKLEY. I don't disagree there have been problems in
the tax-exempt bonds; that is clear. That means that this
committee should take targeted responses, and then perhaps what
you just suggested is the right response to those abuses. You
should not let the abuses nor the New York Times article to be
used as an excuse to eliminate a fairly valuable support for
local and State investment in infrastructure.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. That, I think, is sort of like medicine. You
can find an individual case one place or another of a problem,
but that really doesn't deal with the fact you have to deal
with all the people. And when you are looking--you talk about a
significant amount of abuse. Could you put a number around
that? Are you saying 2 percent, or 25 percent, or 50 percent is
abuse?
Mr. BUCKLEY. I will let--I think it is de minimis, but I
will let----
Mr. TAYLOR. Well, I think it is all in the eye of the
beholder. Personally, where financial firms have paid since
1986 almost a billion dollars in fines and penalties for
abusing the arbitrage restrictions, engaging in collusion, pay-
to-play schemes and the like in order to take advantage of
this, that, to me, is not the right way to promote, you know,
national infrastructure programs that will make this a healthy
market. That is, in fact, why I was very strong in my remarks
about supporting BABs, because it does away with all of those
potentialities.
Mr. JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. Reed, you are recognized.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
McDermott, for the attempt at courtesy, but you were here
first, so I appreciate that.
You know, I found this conversation very interesting as a
former mayor and now a Member of Congress, and I have seen
firsthand the benefits of municipal financing and municipal
investments through local and State capital bonds.
And, Mr. Hodge, I want to give you an opportunity, because
I think you are eager to have that opportunity, in response to
Mr. Buckley's conclusion that what this will lead to by
removing this exclusion is less of an investment in
infrastructure, because I think we have broad support that our
infrastructure needs are significant, they need to be made in
America, our investments there. And so I want to give you an
opportunity to directly respond to Mr. Buckley's conclusion
that you are in error.
Mr. HODGE. Sure.
I think we have to be very careful about being sort of one-
column accountants here, and what we hear a lot of is just the
benefits of these particular programs, and we hear none of the
downside. And I think that equalizing the financing of a public
infrastructure and a private investment will lead to a better
economy in the long run.
I don't think that the person who wants to borrow money in
order to invest in a new factory should have to compete with a
local community that wants to borrow the same amount of money
in order to build a sports stadium. I don't think that that
leads to positive outcomes in the economy; I think it leads to
a negative. And, as the economic research shows very clearly,
it shows it leads to overborrowing, overspending, and
ultimately overtaxing at the local level.
And I think to turn that around, we need to equalize the
treatment, the borrowing costs, for both private borrowers and
the public, and that way you get the best economic
efficiencies, and you get an equal rationalization of these
kinds of investments, an equal trade-off in--or the balance
between public investment and private investment.
Mr. REED. But to follow up on that, though, would that
still provide adequate financing for the necessary
infrastructure? Because you touched on a thing when you
referenced the sports stadium, because one thing I am hearing
in this conversation is--and potentially on abuses and in the
written material that I read--is there an issue of definition
of infrastructure? Because as a mayor, when I was dealing with
issues of water system replacements, sewage replacements, there
was no way I was going to be able to pay for that based on my
tax revenue coming in. I had to have a capital plan 20, 30
years out, and part of that capital plan was not only the year-
to-year tax revenue that was coming in, but it was also the
leveraging of the dollar that I could get from the municipal
financing market to build that capital. And a lot of these
projects, as you know, are not 1-year projects. They are 30-,
20-year projects.
So would your proposal still allow for an adequate funding
stream for local--I am really talking about local, not so much
on the State--local and county level to do the necessary
investments that our infrastructure demands outside of sports
stadiums and all that? Because I do believe there is a question
of what is a definition of a qualifying infrastructure that is
worthwhile to take a look at.
But get beyond that, do you still see that you would have
the revenue streams coming in?
Mr. HODGE. Well, I am not saying that local governments
shouldn't be able to borrow for the long term, absolutely not.
They should just pay the same interest rate as a company that
wants to build a wafer-fabrication plant, or a pharmaceutical
plant, or some other sort of private investment that is also
going to have a huge impact on a local community. Those rates
should be the same. There shouldn't be a subsidy, an interest
rate subsidy, for the public just simply because it is public.
Mr. REED. Mr. Parkhurst, please.
Mr. PARKHURST. Congressman, I am struck by your remarks
because I think you are inviting a subsequent discussion about
questions around public-private partnerships as an innovative
tool to finance.
I think that your conversation lends to a great discussion,
because there is a great model here of outcome-based-value-for-
money analysis where the public sector is looking to get
something built, but they don't have the front-end capital to
do it. The private sector is looking for a stable revenue
stream in the long term, and the way, for instance in the U.K.,
how this has been perceived--and let me be clear, in the U.K.
when you are looking at public-private partnerships, or as they
are calling it Private Finance 2, going forward here, that is
only 10 percent of their finance. And so it is back to the
argument that I have made about everything needs to be in the
tool kit that is available here.
But you are looking at a situation where the public-private
partnership provides for front-end capital for the construction
costs that the private entity is contributing; the public
sector, in your case, your home community, doesn't pay a dime
until that infrastructure is online, and it meets all of the
obligations and outcomes that you as one of the parties
negotiating this deal expect. Then going forward you have a
long-term relationship with the operator, where the local
government or community or State is paying regular operational
costs going forward.
So it is an interesting option that I think would really
benefit discussion going forward.
Mr. REED. I appreciate that.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. JOHNSON. That was a great closing comment. Thank you
all. I know you recognize the problems down at the local level,
and I hope we do, too. This is a difficult program that we are
embarking on, and I thank you for your help. Each and every one
of you made good comments. Thank you for being here.
The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

Public Submissions for the Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
