- INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS AND THE 2014 TAX RETURN FILING SEASON

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS AND
THE 2014 TAX RETURN FILING SEASON

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 7, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-OS8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-426                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of May 7, 2014 announcing the hearing...................     2

WITNESS

The Honorable John Koskinen, Commissioner, Internal Revenue
Service, Testimony.............................................     7

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Richard N. Brown.................................................    45
H&R Block........................................................    49
RAC COALITION....................................................    62

MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Questions for the Record.........................................    67

INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS AND THE 2014 TAX RETURN FILING
SEASON

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 7, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Boustany Announces Hearing on Internal Revenue Service Operations and
the 2014 Tax Return Filing Season

1100 Longworth House Office Building at 10:30 AM
Washington, April 30, 2014

Congressman Charles W. Boustany, Jr., M.D., (R-LA), Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means, today
announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) and the 2014 tax return filing season. The
hearing will take place on Wednesday, May 7, 2014, in Room 1100 of the
Longworth house Office Building, beginning at 10:30 A.M.

The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, the Honorable
John Koskinen, will be the only witness at the hearing. However, any
individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion into the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

In fiscal year 2013, the IRS collected over $2.8 trillion in taxes,
processed 145.9 million individual tax returns, and issued $364.3
billion in refunds. With the 2014 tax return filing season concluded,
the Subcommittee will review IRS performance with a focus on taxpayer
service, taxpayer rights, and refund administration.

In conjunction with the review of the current tax return filing
season, the Subcommittee will review IRS operations in general.
Specifically, the Subcommittee will consider: (1) efforts to prevent
waste, fraud, and abuse, including identity theft, (2) the agency's
implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), (3) fairness in
examinations and tax administration, and (4) whether the agency is
pursuing all necessary reforms to address the Treasury Inspector
General for Tax Administration's (TIGTA) findings that the IRS targeted
certain groups on the basis of name and policy position.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``The IRS has a
long way to go in restoring public trust after the unprecedented
targeting scandal. Beyond that, I am concerned about the agency's
ability to effectively deter waste, fraud, and identity theft, as well
as its new role in the President's troubled health care law, and the
billions of taxpayer dollars it must administer in the Exchanges. The
agency is obligated to spend its nearly $12 billion budget wisely, and
the Subcommittee is committed to ensuring the IRS is putting these
taxpayer dollars to efficient and effective use. The Subcommittee looks
forward to discussing these and other important issues with
Commissioner Koskinen.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the 2014 filing season and other issues
facing the IRS, including efforts to prevent waste, fraud, and abuse,
implementation of the ACA, promoting fairness in examinations and tax
administration, and changes at the agency to address the findings of
targeting by TIGTA and Congressional investigations.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday, May
21, 2014. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. In the interest of time, we are going to
go ahead and get started. We are still waiting on the ranking
member Mr. Lewis. He should be here shortly. The subcommittee
will now come to order, and good morning to everyone. Welcome
to the subcommittee on oversight's hearing on the Internal
Revenue's operation budget and filing season.
This filing season, millions of taxpayers across America
have struggled to meet their tax filing obligations. Doing so
has become harder over time as the Tax Code grows in
complexity, forcing taxpayers to spend over $6 billion and $160
billion every single year to comply with its filing
requirements. At the IRS, hard-working public servants also
bear the weight of America's outdated Tax Code.
Despite these challenges and another late start to the
filing season, the IRS appears to have carried out the 2014
filing season with success. Initial reports suggest the 2014
filing season was free of problems that have marred previous
filing seasons. As of early April, the Service processed over
98 million returns, issued 80 million refunds, responded to
nearly 40 million calls with lower wait times, and all of these
are improvements over last year.
Members of subcommittee and I congratulate Commissioner
Koskinen and the thousands of dedicated career IRS employees on
a successful filing season. We thank them for their hard work
under difficult circumstances. In IRS offices across the
country, public servants work hard to administer the Nation's
tax laws fairly and accurately. This is not an easy task, and
we thank them for their service
However, these successes have occurred against the backdrop
of the ongoing investigation into the agency's targeting of
conservative groups applying for tax-exempt status. As the
agency works to recover from the scandal, these kinds of
successes will help the agency regain the trust of the American
people. It is still a long road, and how the IRS responds to
the ongoing investigation will affect the pace of recovery for
better or worse. But I have to say, we still have serious
concerns with regard to the integrity of the agency based on
three findings so far in this investigation.
First, Lois Lerner defied internal IRS controls to target
certain taxpayers. This is a serious concern. On April 9th, the
committee sent a letter referring former executive--or Exempt
Organization Division Director Lois Lerner to the Attorney
General Holder for potentially engaging in criminal wrongdoing
in her capacity as EO director. One of these actions, in
particular, has serious implications for the IRS as it
rebuilds. The committee uncovered evidence that shows Ms.
Lerner acted in defiance of internal controls developed to
ensure that no single IRS employee could target an organization
for adverse determination or exam. Ms. Lerner was not only
familiar with these internal controls, they were policies she
created and touted publicly as a way of commending her agency's
impartiality.
The evidence shows that Ms. Lerner knowingly bypassed these
controls, reached into her division, and directed that specific
organizations be subjected to audit. And yet, as official IRS
reports declare--an official IRS report declared, quote, ``we
have not found evidence of intentional wrongdoing by IRS
personnel,'' end quote.
Given the evidence the committee has uncovered--given the
evidence the committee has uncovered so far, this is to the
contrary, and I call on the IRS to review the agency's internal
controls to ensure that this type of targeting can never happen
again.
Second, donors whose names were inappropriately requested
by the IRS were audited. Equally troubling is new evidence
uncovered by the committee that shows the IRS' exam function
may have been used for political purposes. It is well known
that the IRS improperly requested donor information from scores
of conservative groups. For months, this committee has asked
the IRS what it did with these improperly obtained lists and
whether those lists were used to target individual donors to
right leaning groups. Recently, the committee uncovered new
information indicating that after groups provided the
information to the IRS, nearly 1 in 10 donors were subject to
audit, and the abuse of discretion in audit selection must be
identified and stopped.
Because of failures in IRS policy exploited by Lois Lerner
and the possible targeting of conservative donors, I have
requested that the Government Accountability Office undertake a
thorough review of the policies and procedures for audit
selection by the IRS' small business and self-employed
division. Last year, I made a similar request that GAO audit
the Exempt Organizations Division. I understand that audit is
already under way.
And Commissioner Koskinen, I call on you to give GAO your
unqualified cooperation to the--with these audits so we can
shed sunshine on this to begin to restore the public confidence
in the IRS.
Third, the IRS has denied some applicants for exempt status
their right to an independent appeal. Through the committee's
investigation, we have also found the IRS was, until recently,
denying certain applicants with tax-exempt status their right
to an independent appeal process as guaranteed by the IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998. Ordinarily, if an
applicant for exempt status is denied, the applicant can appeal
to an independent appeals division. This was mandated by the
1998 IRS Restructuring Act. However, if Washington, D.C.,
selected an applicant for additional review, an adverse
determination was not appealable. The most a disappointed
applicant could actually do was protest to the very same
officials who denied the group in the first place. Noteworthy
is that all of the applicants were subject to extra scrutiny
based on the name ``Tea Party'' or ``policy objective'' to
``Make America a Better Place to Live.'' These groups had their
appeal rights taken away.
This practice would never have come to light but for the
committee's thorough oversight of the agency, and as a
consequence, the IRS has now pledged to change its practice,
and I know, Commissioner, we discussed some of this yesterday.
We are gratified by this change, but I call on the IRS, Mr.
Commissioner, today, to ensure that all applicants who were
denied their right to a fair independent appeal process receive
one. Some of these are left sort of in limbo on this, and we
hope they will be given due consideration with a fair appeals
process.
The IRS cannot be an agency in which one senior executive
can easily circumvent policies designed to safeguard taxpayers'
due process rights. It cannot be an agency in which taxpayers
are denied their right to an appeal based on the location of
their file, and it cannot be an agency that audits taxpayers
based on improperly obtained information.
Commissioner Koskinen, I do appreciate your hard work under
difficult circumstances, but this subcommittee cannot simply
take the IRS' assurances at face value. The IRS' problems must
be addressed through frank and serious conversations, so I look
forward to discussing these matters and more during today's
hearing. And again, I applaud the commissioner and the IRS for
the good work during the 2014 filing season, and I hope the
agency will continue with this success and continue all the
work that it is going to take to rebuild the trust of the
American people.
With that, I now am very pleased to yield to my dear friend
and distinguished ranking member Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I want to apologize to you and other Members
of the Committee for being a little late here.
Chairman BOUSTANY. No need for apologies.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this important
hearing.
Mr. Commissioner, thank you for joining us today and
congratulations to you and the IRS staff on a successful filing
season. Over the past year, the IRS has dealt with many serious
challenges. I commend you for taking the time to get out into
the field to visit and connect directly with IRS staff across
the country. Your thoughtful work and outreach has restored the
morale of thousands of IRS employees, and I speak for many when
I thank you for your efforts to tackle the serious challenges
facing the agency.
As we all know, many issues remain. Chief among them is the
need to increase the IRS budget. Last month, the Government
Accountability office released a report that makes it clear
that reducing the IRS budget has cut thousands of staff and
hurt taxpayers. The agency sorely needs adequate resources in
order to provide our taxpayers with the service they expect and
deserve.
When you can't get an answer on the telephone for 20
minutes, taxpayers hang up. When you don't get an answer to
your letter for 30 or 60 or even 90 days, you get aggravation.
Taxpayers deserve better. There are hard-working Americans who
need a functioning IRS and want to have faith in our
government.
For the very first time, the Affordable Care Act has opened
the doors for millions of Americans to access for healthcare.
This will mean more work for the IRS, and we need to make sure
that the agency has all of the necessary resources to do their
part in a fair and transparent manner. The administration had
requested $12.5 billion for the IRS fiscal year 2015 budget.
Although that may seem like a lot, the IRS is getting less
funding today than they did in 2009, and even if they were
fully funded, which we know is unlikely, the GAO estimates this
would only bring the IRS back up to 2012 staff levels.
It is important to highlight that providing the IRS with
the necessary resources also helps crack down on identity theft
and tax cheats. Last year, the IRS examination on individual
tax returns declined 5 percent and collection activity declined
3.3 percent--rather, 33 percent. That is a great deal. When we
don't fund the IRS enforcement effort, we essentially endorse
an unfair playing field and reduce compliance across the board.
Mr. Chairman, I am hopeful that this committee, with us
working together, we can find a way to work together and with
the commissioner to provide the IRS with adequate resources and
to make the IRS the best Federal agency in our government.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing,
and I look forward to working together, as I stated before, in
a bipartisan manner for the good of our country and the good of
all of our taxpayers. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman for his comments.
Now, it is my pleasure to welcome our one witness for this
hearing today, the Honorable John Koskinen, Commissioner of the
Internal Revenue Service.
Commissioner Koskinen, thank you for your time today. We
welcome the opportunity to discuss a whole host of issues, the
state of the IRS with you today, how you see things going
forward. The committee has certainly received your written
statement, which will be made part of the formal hearing
record, and as is customary, we will give you 5 minutes to make
an opening statement to deliver your oral remarks, and then we
will go forward with questioning.
So, sir, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN KOSKINEN, COMMISSIONER,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. KOSKINEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ranking Member Lewis, members of subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the 2014 filing season and our
actions to reduce improper payments. The IRS, as noted,
delivered another successful filing season this year, rising to
the challenges posed by an incredibly tight budget.
Through April 25th, the IRS received more than 134 million
individual income tax returns, of which 87 percent were file
electronically. We will have processed nearly 150 million
individual returns and sent out well over 100 million refunds
when we close the books on this filing season next fall. This
is a tremendous accomplishment that does not happen
automatically or by accident, but as the chairman noted, as a
result of the efforts of our highly experienced, capable, and
dedicated workforce.
During this filing season, we were able to improve our
phone service somewhat, despite our funding limitations. This
was done in large part to the diligent efforts of our employees
as well as our improved ability to provide information to
taxpayers on our Web site, IRS.gov, and the lack of major tax
legislation in 2013.
Because of the dropoff in call volume, we maintained a
level of phone service during the filing season of about 71
percent, which is better than last year's average of 60.5
percent but still an unacceptable level of service since it
means that about 30 percent of calls did not go through.
Furthermore, now that filing season is over and we no
longer have extra seasonal employees, we will have fewer people
on the phones, and we expect wait times to increase
significantly between now and the end of September. For all of
this fiscal year, we expect our level of phone service to drop
below 70 percent and end up closer to last year's number.
Looking beyond the filing season, we are concerned that
levels of service and enforcement will continue to decline as a
result of budget constraints. Our funding for this year was set
at $11.29 billion, more than $850 million below our fiscal 2010
level, and $500 million below our presequestration level. We
have 10,000 fewer employees today than we did in 2010, even as
our responsibilities have continued to expand.
Turning to improper payments, one of our major areas of
focus, it remains the fight against refund fraud, especially
fraud caused by identity theft. I am pleased to report that
over the last couple of years, the IRS has made important
progress in this area. In 2013, we suspended or rejected 5.7
million suspicious returns worth more than $17.8 billion in
refunds. Through April 18th of this year, more than 3 million
suspicious returns have been stopped.
We have also opened more than 500 new investigations into
identity theft and refund fraud screens thus far in fiscal
2014, bringing the total number of active cases to more than
1,800. We will remain vigilant, given the propensity of
fraudsters to adapt to changing circumstances and to develop
new and more complicated schemes. Even with the progress we
have made thus far, I have recently asked our senior leadership
team to reevaluate everything we are doing in this area and to
consider additional steps we could take to prevent refund
fraud, especially that caused by identity theft.
Another way we are working to reduce improper payments is
by improving compliance with regard to refundable tax credits,
especially the earned income tax credit program. Our programs
that focus on EITC combine to protect approximately $4 billion
annually. Even so, we continue to be concerned that the
improper payment rate for EITC remains unacceptably high. We
now have a working group assessing our past and current efforts
in this area and exploring new possibilities for improving
compliance.
Congress can help us on both refund fraud and EITC by
enacting several proposals in this year's budget for the IRS.
One would accelerate the due dates of third-party information
returns, which would allow us to match up those documents
against income tax returns earlier in the tax filing process
and to more quickly spot errors and potential fraud. Another
proposal would provide the IRS with greater flexibility to
address correctable errors, which would allow us to
automatically fix more errors on returns than we can do now,
thus avoiding costly audits or allowing errors to go
uncorrected.
We also urge Congress to enact our proposal to explicitly
authorize the IRS to regulate paid tax return preparers. Given
that more than half of the returns claiming an EITC refund
credit are done by paid preparers, this proposal would be an
important addition to our efforts to improve compliance in this
area.
Even with these legislative changes, which would be very
helpful, the biggest challenge to our efforts to reduce
improper payments remains our ongoing lack of adequate
resources. Without sufficient funding, our ability to proceed
with any new initiatives in this area will be constrained, and
it will be increasingly difficult even to maintain current
levels of service and enforcement.
This concludes my opening statement. I will be happy to
take your questions.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Commissioner.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Koskinen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. I want to cover some of the information
and concerns we have with regard to the investigation to start
with. I know we had a wide-ranging conversation yesterday, and
I do appreciate talking about all of the issues, but the
committee's investigation of targeting has yielded a number of
insights into operations during that timeframe of the Exempt
Organizations Division, and the committee found that EO has
been run in a manner that was inconsistent with the IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, as mentioned in my
opening.
The act calls for an independent appeals function that
would ensure taxpayers' due process rights. And during the
course of the investigation, we found that some groups whose
applications were sent to IRS headquarters in Washington
automatically lost their right to an independent appeal.
Commissioner, isn't it true that the groups that TIGTA said
were targeted on the basis of their name or policy position
were sent to Washington, D.C., for review? In other words,
bypassed the determinations process in Cincinnati, went
straight up to, I think it was EO Technical for review; is that
true?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes. I am not sure whether all of them went
but certainly a number of--significant number went to
Washington to that Technical review process.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Right. Did any of those groups that were
referred to EO Technical, did they lose their right to an
independent appeal as a result--for an adverse determination?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes. It is my understanding that in lieu of
an appeal, as you noted, they were referred--they did have a
right to appeal, but it was to a set of 3 IRS executives, not
the appeals process.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Right. And so can you give us your
commitment, because part of this oversight activity is to
understand where there were breakdowns. Can you give your
commitment to these groups that were treated unfairly in this
independent appeals process, will they be given an opportunity
to have due process?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes. We have changed the process. Anyone that
comes to Washington--well, retain their appeal rights that they
would have had if they were in Cincinnati, and anyone who would
like to avail themselves of that appeal process will have it
open to them.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay.
Mr. KOSKINEN. And going forward, everyone who is given a
proposed denial will have the right to appeal.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And I appreciate that reform, and that
is going prospectively forward. What about those who are caught
in this problem? Will they be given due process?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes. Anyone who was caught in that process,
would like to come back through and appeal their--the decision.
There were relatively few denials. The biggest problem in the
process was the lengthy, far too lengthy time that people were
stuck in the process, but the handful of those that were
denied, if they did not have their appeal right out of the
Washington, they can come, and we would give them that.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank you for that answer. Now I am
going to give you a sampling of some kinds of statements
Congress has heard from key IRS officials over the past couple
of years. At a hearing before the House Appropriations
Committee Subcommittee on Financial Services and General
Government in March of 2012, former Commissioner Shulman said,
and I quote, ``we have the safeguards built into this process
so that no one person can decide to examine an organization
based on political activities. You can't just get a case, go
off in a corner, and run with your own agenda,'' end quote.
Then, separately, as we embarked on the investigation,
Joseph Grant, the former IRS commissioner for TEGE, Lois
Lerner's former boss, was asked by our staff in a transcribed
interview if it would be appropriate for an IRS manager to
refer a specific taxpayer to Exams, and he said, and I quote,
``I believe it would not be appropriate to intervene on their
own,'' end quote.
So, Commissioner, the IRS has long insisted, and we have
gotten numerous documentation through letters and responses
that our subcommittee has received, IRS has long insisted that
Americans should not worry about political targeting at your
agency because the IRS has layers of internal protections to
guard against it.
But in the course of our investigation, however, we found
that Lois Lerner acted in defiance of these internal
protections to select groups--in order to select groups for
adverse determination or audit. She was doing all of this while
IRS officials were assuring Congress it wasn't happening. But
those assurances ring hollow now, and you have got the
responsibility of restoring the trust.
How will you assure the American people that no one IRS
employee is going to decide whether or not they are audited and
that there are safeguards in place?
Mr. KOSKINEN. I think it is a critical issue. As I said in
the past, every taxpayer deserves the right to assume that they
will be treated fairly, no matter what their political beliefs,
what organization they belong to, who they voted for in the
last election.
As I said, if you hear from us, you are hearing from us
because of something in your application or in your return, and
anybody else with a similar issue would be treated similarly.
So there are--and we have reviewed and we look forward to the
GAO, and we are delighted to cooperate with the GAO reviews of
the entire examination process, the controls that are in place.
They are significant controls. No situation and no system self
executes, so one of the reasons I have been out to all 25 of
the major offices, I have talked to over 10,000 IRS employees
is to encourage employees to understand that we need the
benefit of their advice and their insights, their suggestions
for improvements, but we also need to hear from them when they
think something isn't going the way it ought to go. We need to
have that information flow easily from the bottom up.
I also, as you know, am a great support of inspectors
general. I once chaired the cross-agency Council of Inspectors
General for 3 years, and when I was in the private sector, I
had the same view that internal auditors, as I tell employees,
and inspectors general are management's best friends because
they find problems before they get bigger.
So we have to be open to all flows of information and
concerns. I have said in the past and I truly believe it, that
when we hear from Members of Congress, if we hear from one
Member, it is probably about an anecdotal issue. If we hear
from several Members of the Congress, that means there is an
issue that we should investigate, so I think the process that I
hope will reassure Americans is that not only do we have a
structure in place, but we are trying to build a culture that
will accept and be welcoming to people who say there is a
problem you need to look into. Whether that information comes
from frontline employees, managers in the middle, whether it
comes from Members of Congress and their constituents, whether
it comes from GAO or the IG, we have to be open to that and be
prepared to respond.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And then my final line of questioning. I
want to address this issue that received some media attention
recently with regard to bonuses of IRS employees.
The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration
recently published an audit report on bonuses awarded to IRS
employees who had tax compliance issues themselves. Of course,
every agency, most employers have employers--or have employees
who owe taxes or may be late in paying their taxes or errors
and those kinds of things, but unlike other employers, the IRS
has the ability to look into employee tax compliance. It is a
special ability, so to speak, because you are--you are bringing
in employees who deal with very, very personal tax matters, and
a highest level of integrity is necessary in all of this.
So, in fact, I know it is a condition for employment. It is
something that--reviews are done several times a year, but the
recent TIGTA audit found that in 2011, the IRS awarded 1,100
IRS employees more than $1 million in cash awards, over 10,000
hours of time off, and 69 quality step increases, despite the
fact that these employees all had a substantial record of
noncompliance with the tax laws, and these were not just
employees who paid late or had some issue or they were
disputing an issue. These were actually employees who were
actually disciplined for their tax delinquency, disciplined by
the agency.
I understand that these bonuses were awarded before you
became commissioner. I know we are dealing with something in
the past, but can you explain the steps you are taking to make
sure that IRS employees don't get performance awards if they
are disciplined for nonpayment of taxes? I think the American
people deserve an explanation, and they also deserve to know
what steps are going to be taken to put a halt to this
egregious behavior.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I think it is an important issue. We take tax
compliance, obviously, very seriously. I think it is fair to
say that if we are encouraging others to pay their taxes, we
should ensure that IRS employees are paying theirs. The
compliance rate at the IRS is over 99 percent, so we have less
than a 1 percent noncompliance rate, which is higher than the
rest of the Federal Government and Congress and certainly much
higher than the public, but that is not the standard. We ought
to have the public confident that IRS employees are held to the
highest standard.
As you say, when IRS employees join the agency, they sign
up to that. We monitor all 90,000 employees to make sure that
they are compliant. We have a separate disciplinary proceeding.
You are subject to termination if you have a willful violation
of the Tax Code, and all of that we take seriously.
As the IG noted, there is no policy across the government
or in the IRS that conjoins performance issues with
disciplinary issues. We have a program that says for senior
executives, if you are behind in your taxes, you are not
compliant, you are not eligible for an award. We are now--
timing turns out to be good. We are in the middle of
negotiations, near the end of them with the union about a new
5-year agreement. Under the union agreement, we did not take--
it was not allowed, we are not allowed to take into
consideration tax compliance. We are developing a policy that
we will be sharing with the union this week. They have
indicated they understand the issue and are willing to
negotiate that with us, and I expect we will have that included
in the contract so that going forward, if someone has been
disciplined for failure to comply with the Tax Code, they will
be ineligible for a performance award. I would note again,
these are performance awards, so when the pool is established,
generally 30 to 35 percent of the employees do not get an
award. It is not an automatic bonus. So even if you are in the
pool, it doesn't mean you will get one, but I do think it is
important for the public to be confident that we take this very
seriously.
As I say, we just can quote--conclude by reminding everyone
that we are over 99 percent compliant to begin with, but our
view is that, in fact, as you say, while--people need to be
committed that employees will not be eligible for an award if
they are not compliant with--if they have been disciplined for
not being compliant with the Tax Code.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And I would agree with you. There are a
lot of hard-working people at the IRS. They do their jobs day
in and day out. They pay their taxes. Compliance level is high
overall. But when you have employees who have actually been
disciplined for tax related matters and yet they receive
performance awards, that is problematic. And so I am glad to
see that you are taking steps to address this. And we will
follow up with you and follow it closely, but I appreciate your
answer on this.
And now I am pleased to yield to ranking member, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Commissioner, thank you for your testimony.
Now, Mr. Commissioner, I am deeply concerned about the lack
of adequate funding for the IRS. Your workload is getting
heavier. The issues you are facing are becoming more and more
complex, but your appropriations keep getting smaller. I said
it before and I will say it again this morning, you can only
get out what you put in, and you cannot get blood out of a
turnip.
Identity theft is an important national concern. Tax
preparation for low-income, elderly, and disabled taxpayers is
on the chopping block, and as a constant increased workload,
how would the IRS be able to even to begin to address the real
needs of taxpayers? How will your staff be trained and prepared
for the challenges and work ahead? Are you being stood up for
failure, for disaster?
Mr. KOSKINEN. While we have a very can-do agency of--full
of employees dedicated to the mission who will, I think, go
down swinging doing their best with the resources, but I am
very concerned. As I have said in the past, I spent 20 years in
the private sector managing large failed enterprises. I have
never dealt with an organization, even major ones in
bankruptcy, that is so consistently understaffed across the
board. We don't have enough people in any division of the
organization, and it is not just a few. Everyone, from counsel
on across, is down 10 to 15 percent. We have 4,500 fewer
revenue agents and revenue officers than we had 4 years ago. We
have 350 fewer criminal investigative officers than we had 4
years. The head of Criminal Investigation is--projection is
that he will lose 150 more agents every year.
So, it is--as you say, we are doing more and more, I think,
with less and less. There comes a point at which you hit the
wall, and the wall isn't because we don't have good employees,
and it is not because they are not working hard. It is a wall
that you hit because you simply don't have the resources. So
this coming year, we are very concerned. We have a statutory
obligation to implement the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act
and the Affordable Care Act, and we will do that, but to the
extent that our resources remain constrained, the way we will
have to fund that is out of declining taxpayer services and
taxpayer enforcement.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Commissioner.
Mr. Commissioner, I have a letter here from a group of
civil rights organizations, consumer groups, including the
NAACP, the National Council of La Raza, the Consumer Federation
of America, and the National Consumer Law Center. They are
opposed to a proposal to require the use of a private
collection agency to collect taxes. This is an issue on which
this subcommittee worked greatly, spent so much time in the
past. We listened to examples, a call from private debt
collectors, and discussed 130 years of this committee oversight
on this issue. It was clear that the best interest of taxpayers
was not being upheld and that the collection of Federal income
tax is a core government function. It is the mission and
purpose of the IRS.
Do you have any views on whether we should have--any
feeling or thoughts whether we should have private groups
collecting taxes?
Mr. KOSKINEN. While having spent 20 years in the private
sector. I am a big believer in the private sector. My concern
is--about private debt collection for taxes is we have done
that a couple of times in the IRS, in 1996 and in 2006, and
part of the problem is that it has a huge expense to it beyond
the debt collection because the IRS does have to monitor very
carefully the work of people that are not their employees. And
private debt collectors are limited because they do not have
enforcement authority, so they cannot apply liens or levies
when they go out to collect, so almost by definition they are
going to be less effective than they would be if they had the
tools of the IRS available.
So, the experience in the 1996 experience and 2006 was that
it was an inefficient way for the government to collect taxes,
that you would be much better off if you hired a few more
revenue agents and officers to proceed. In fact, the analysis
of 2006 is we actually ended up losing money because of the
information technology changes we had to make and the amount of
monitoring we had to do to try to make sure the taxpayers were
not abused in the process.
An additional problem now that it was not then is, over the
last year, one of the major tax scams that we have been trying
to warn the public about have been people calling up saying
they represent the IRS and demanding that people either make
immediate payments to them or provide them personal
information. We normally don't contact people by phone to begin
with. We send you notices and letters, so as I have said, as I
have traveled across the country, if you are surprised to be
hearing from us on the phone, you are probably not hearing from
us, which means that it is going to be an additional burden for
private debt collectors, if they are retained, to convince the
taxpayer that they are legitimate on the phone, and they won't
have other means of actually dealing with the taxpayers.
So I think it is going to be an inefficient way to proceed,
and it does have problems that we all worried about, which is
how do we monitor what the conversations are that those people
are having with taxpayers. Our employees are held personally
accountable. If there is an issue, taxpayers can complain to
us, they can complain to the taxpayer advocate. They can write
Congressmen and Senators and will respond. For employees that
are not our employees, it is a more complicated oversight
problem.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Commissioner.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
We are now--we are also joined today by Sam Johnson, who is
a subcommittee chairman, and I am going to break precedent and
allow him 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, thank you.
Thank you, members.
Welcome, Mr. Commissioner. It is good to see you again.
In your prepared testimony for your confirmation hearing
before the Senate, you said public trust in the IRS is most
important, their most important asset. I couldn't agree more.
Unfortunately, it seems, each week goes by, we learn yet
another problem at the IRS which further undermines Americans'
trust in the agency. For example, just last month, we learned
from the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration that
the IRS rewarded tax--IRS workers with tax problems with
bonuses and other awards, such as time off, and that is
outrageous, and you have more or less talked to that. But let
me start off by asking, is the IRS right now still paying out
bonuses and other awards to those who owe back taxes, yes or
no?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Right now, we are not paying bonuses to
anyone because we are between the bonus period, and as I said,
we are negotiating--about to negotiate with the union to make
clear, assuming we can negotiate that out with them, but they
have expressed an interest in it that, going forward, anyone
disciplined for not paying taxes will not be eligible for a
performance award.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. Now, for the record, do you agree that
the IRS workers who owe taxes should not be getting
performance-related awards, and you just said no. Is that in
your regulations now?
Mr. KOSKINEN. No. In other words, there is--the IG
appropriately noted there are no regulations that the IRS or
across the government that did not--would cause someone not to
get a performance award if they were not compliant. We have
that process for senior executives. We are about to negotiate
with the union about making sure that that rule applies to all
IRS employees, and I am----
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, then will it be in law?
Mr. KOSKINEN. It will actually be in the contract, and it
will be in our regulations and policies.
Mr. JOHNSON. Good.
Now, according to the IG, examples of workers with tax
related problems include, quote, willful understatement of tax
liability over multiple tax years. As you well know, the IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 includes the so-called
deadly IRS sins for IRS workers. One of those sins is a willful
understatement of Federal tax liability. According to the 1998
Act, the commission--commissioner, you, shall fire a worker for
this, but instead what happened is that all the IRS rewarded
the workers. It is hard for my constituents and folks across
the country to understand how this could happen. Do you agree
that this was wrong for the IRS to do that?
Mr. KOSKINEN. As I said, we take it very seriously, and I
think that going forward--I can't look backwards. I don't know
what the decisions were.
Mr. JOHNSON. I hear you.
Mr. KOSKINEN. But going forward, if you have willfully not
paid your taxes, you are subject to termination, and we have
terminated employees for that. We have a separate disciplinary
review, but clearly, going forward, it is our policy, and we
hope to be able to negotiate with the union about this, that
you will not be eligible for a performance award if you have
willfully violated--not been in compliance.
Mr. JOHNSON. But you would fire them if you caught them
doing that?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Pardon?
Mr. JOHNSON. You would fire them if you caught them doing
that. Is that true?
Mr. KOSKINEN. We have the ability to fire every--you know,
there is a wide range of situations in which people find
themselves, but the indication, if it is someone for several
years willfully underreported, they would in fact be
terminated.
Mr. JOHNSON. Finally, you come with a reputation as Mr.
Fix-it. I appreciate that. And you certainly have your hands
full, so I will close by saying I have introduced a bill, No
Bonuses for Tax Delinquent IRS Employees Act, to help you
restore the public trust in the IRS. It is a simple and
commonsense bill, prohibits the commissioner from paying out
bonuses and other performance-related awards to workers who owe
back taxes. So we are going to try to help you.
Mr. KOSKINEN. As always, legislation is kind of a blunt
instrument. That bill, for instance, says even if you have an
installment program, which many taxpayers take advantage of
when they have difficulties, and we have low-paid employees,
like everybody else who aren't tax experts, that legislation as
drafted would say even if you are in effect compliant, you are
on an installment plan, you would not be eligible for a
performance award. I am not sure that those nuances can ever be
built in successfully to statute, and as I said, I think you
will be satisfied, I hope, with our union negotiations that the
policies we have are appropriate and that the public can be
satisfied. If you are disciplined for not being compliant with
taxes, you are not eligible for a performance award.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
By the way, Commissioner, I am going to send a letter to
you regarding the Foreign Account Compliance Tax Act with a
number of questions because I--we are not going to have the
time to get into detail on that here today, but I wanted to
give you notice. I will be sending you a letter with a number
of questions and look forward to your response.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I will be happy to do that, and I will do my
best to respond promptly. As you know, I have a strong view
that when I hear from a Member of Congress, A, I should read
the letter personally, and B, we should get back to you
quickly.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I appreciate that.
All right. Ms. Sanchez, you have 5 minutes.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this hearing
today.
And thank you, Commissioner Koskinen. It is good to see you
again. I want to begin by commending you for the hard working
and--the hard-working Federal employees of the IRS for a
successful tax filing season on what we know is a very
challenging and inadequate budget for everything that you are
being asked to do. I know that working for the IRS is
oftentimes a thankless job, and I want to take an opportunity
to thank you and the dedicated men and women who are working
hard to try to process claims, get information to taxpayers and
make the process as painless as possible.
I know that you have been asked to do more and more with
less and less, and if I am not mistaken, your current budget is
under the sequester level budget. Is that correct?
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is correct. We are about $500 million
below where we were before the sequester. We are the only major
agency that is operating, in effect, at the post-sequester
level rather than at the pre-sequester level.
Ms. SANCHEZ. I think it is important for people to bear
that in mind when they ask you to do more and more with less
and less.
Because of that cut in funding to your agency, I know that
IRS was forced to make many service cuts, and you know, the
constituents that I represent, very, you know, hard-working
American families, many of them low income or elderly, they are
doing their best to file complete and accurate tax returns, but
I don't think that we can--we are doing them a big--we are
doing them a tremendous disservice when we slash the budget of
the IRS and take some tools out of their toolbox in order to
help them complete their returns in an accurate way.
I was hoping that you could perhaps speak directly to how
the budget cuts at the IRS hurt all of our constituents in
terms of the services that they are able to get from the
agency.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, as I noted, to begin with, I have been
surprised. One of the surprises that I have had is how much
time, energy, and resources we devote to trying to help
taxpayers, trying to make it easier for them to pay, figure out
what they owe, respond to their questions, so the most
immediate problem and concern I have heard from employees, as I
have talked to over 10,000 IRS employees in the 25 offices I
have visited, their major concern is that not that they are
overworked, although they probably are, it is that they don't
have enough resources to provide taxpayers the services that
our employees think the taxpayers deserve.
So, even at 71 percent as a level of service, as I noted,
that means 30 percent of the calls aren't going through, and
then that builds because if you call and can't get through,
then you call again. So now we have got two calls for the price
of one. This year, also, in addition, for the first time, we
had to tell people we could not answer complicated tax
questions, and they are relatively simple complicated tax
questions. We had to tell people they either had to go to the
Web site, which we are trying to improve, or get private--you
know, hire somebody to help them.
Our employees are concerned because I have heard from
several of them in call centers saying, But we know how to
answer those questions, and I had to explain, but it takes
longer, and the longer we take with that person, the more
people are sitting in the queue. So, we have had to do that. We
don't prepare. We used to, in our taxpayer assistance centers,
for people who would walk in, we would help them prepare their
returns. We don't do that anymore because we don't have the
resources.
On the enforcement side, as I have said, not facetiously, I
don't know who got our $500 million of sequester funds, but I
am sure they are not going to give back the government the $2
billion to $3 billion we would have given had we had those
funds. In our request for 2015, to just hire another 1,200
people, we think we would provide the government $2.1 billion
more, which would be more than the entire budget increase we
are talking about.
Ms. SANCHEZ. So, if the money were well spent on the
enforcement end, you could make up that money and then some in
terms of lost revenue that currently we are not able to get
because nobody is looking at this.
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is right. Our estimate is that we
historically, and nobody is--the argument is whether it is four
or six or eight times the amount of investment, but the
government, we are the only agency where if you give us money,
we give you more money back, and whether it is four times as
much, six times as much depends on the issue, but we are the
revenue arm of the government. We collect over 90 percent of
the money that runs the organization.
So when we have fewer enforcement agents, fewer criminal
investigative divisions, it means we are collecting fewer
dollars. And when I talk to revenue agents and officers, those
that are left, across the country, their concern as well is it
is not theoretic. They know that there are returns that owe us
money that they can't pursue because we simply don't have
enough people.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Right. Really quickly, because my time is
almost up. I want to--you and I have discussed EITC--EITC
payments and the issue of correctable error authority. I just
would like you to quickly, if you can, summarize for the
committee how narrowly tailored authority could help the IRS
process EITC claims more effectively.
Mr. KOSKINEN. What we have now is what is called math
authority, so if your columns don't add up, we can make a
correction and send you a notice and say we have adjusted to
make sure the columns add up. Correctable error authority would
allow us, when we have independent verification of information
that is wrong on your return, would allow us to correct it. So
if you say, particularly in the EITC program, I have three
children, and we have independent information that you have got
one, we would, with correctable error authority, be able to
make that correction, send you the notice. You wouldn't lose
any appeal rights. If you really thought we had made an error,
you could call us up, if you get through, but send us the
information and we could make an adjustment, but what happens
now is we, in many returns, see that there are errors that we
could correct, but the limitation we have is we have to audit
you before we can make that correction. If we had correctable
error authority for the obvious errors, beyond math authority,
we would make those corrections, advise the taxpayer, send a
smaller refund, give them an explanation, they could then
appeal to us if they disagreed, but we estimate that there are
several billion dollars out there that, again, because of
resources, we can't audit our way out of it, improper payments
are being made, and I think it is a wonderful program, but as I
made it clear to people, we need to attack the problem of the
rate of improper payments and the amount of improper payments.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you so much for your time.
I appreciate your thoughtfulness.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you for holding
this hearing.
Commissioner, thank you for being here.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Thank you.
Ms. JENKINS. Commissioner, you suggested that resource
constraints affect the ability of the IRS to stop fraud and
provide customer service, but the committee understands that
the IRS allows employees to spend a total of more than 500,000
hours a year on union activity on the taxpayers' dime. Were you
aware that taxpayers were paying for union activity on official
time?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes. Actually, taxpayers pay for union
activity across the government. Wherever there are employee
unions, part of the organizational structure of the entire
government is that union representatives represent employees,
and they do that while they are working, and that is, in
effect, on government time.
Ms. JENKINS. But wouldn't you agree that some of those
500,000 hours might have been better spent stopping fraud. For
example, how many phone calls do you think the IRS could answer
with 500,000 hours of worker time?
Mr. KOSKINEN. That is a little hard to know, but then you
would have to ask what would happen to labor-management
relationships, the operation of the agency if employees didn't
have the ability to deal with their unions when they have
problems and issues. As I say, one of the issues, and I have
talked to the union about that, is sometimes employees are
nervous about reporting a problem directly for fear that, you
know, their manager won't like that, and I have encouraged
them, A, I have a separate mailbox, they can call me--or
contact me, not call me, but email me directly, but the union
performs a very valuable role for us as an intermediary in that
area.
So, as I say, it is a little like saying, well, if I didn't
pay anybody any awards or if I didn't pay them any pay
increases, I would have more money for something else, you
would, but you would have to look at the negative implications
of what happened when you moved that money. And all I can tell
you is, at the budget levels we are, even if I didn't--if I got
rid of the union and had those 500,000 hours, I still wouldn't
get back to the level of customer service we think is
appropriate, and I would have changed significantly the way the
organization operates.
Ms. JENKINS. It just seems like with limited choices, we
have to--or limited resources, we have to make good choices in
government. And this seems like maybe a less than optimal use
of taxpayer dollars. And my main concern isn't with your
relations necessarily with your employees but looking out for
the hard-working taxpayers that I represent, and I am just sad
for them that they are having to underwrite that cost.
The Affordable Care Act's premium tax credit subsidy will
be based on folks' income estimates, and these estimates will
often use the prior year's tax returns. Taxpayers will
eventually have to reconcile the premium subsidies that they
received with amounts that they are eligible to receive based
on their actual income. So in many cases, whether it is due to
a salary increase, a move across State lines, or another change
in their individual situation, they could find themselves owing
thousands of dollars back to the IRS.
So I am just curious, first of all, do you believe that the
taxpayers fully understand this risk, and can you explain to us
how your agency will handle the reconciliation process?
Mr. KOSKINEN. All right. On the first issue, we are
concerned that taxpayers need to understand that. We have
already started publicizing the issue. In my--every city I have
been to, I have talked with the press and said one of the
issues we hope taxpayers will be aware of, if their situation
changed for the better--they get a promotion, they get a pay
increase, their wife gets a job--something happens and they
earn more, they need to call back the exchange and adjust their
premium tax credit so they don't owe us a refund.
We will continue to do that through the year to try to make
sure that we get taxpayers as much information about this as
possible so that they are not surprised when, fortunately,
would be a good event on their part if they made more money
than they assumed when they first calculated the credit, but we
are anxious for them to make those adjustments as they go
forward. So we will do the best we can to publicize that. We
thought and talked with some about perhaps even providing
frequently asked questions and answers for Members of the
Congress so they could share that information with their
constituents. We have got YouTube video. We have got a Web site
that does it.
Secondly, the way the reconciliation will happen is in the
filing season, which is why we have a major challenge to make
sure next year's filing season is at least as good as this,
because everyone is making an estimate. In fact, we all do when
we make an estimate for our W-2s, about what they earn. We
provided information about the income for 2012, but the premium
credit will be based on what you actually earned in 2014.
So we will, when you file, you will have a form you will
fill out, and we will make the adjustment. If you have got too
small a credit, you underestimated because you wanted to be
careful or some change in your financial circumstances, we will
owe you a refund for that, in other words, the additional
credit. If you withheld too much, which is the concern we are
concerned about with you, you will then have an additional tax
owing, and our hope is to minimize that to the extent we can by
providing as much public information as we can.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner, just recently, I sent you a letter and would
like to compliment you. You gave me a very prompt reply, which
has not been the case with the last three of your predecessors,
and we had a very good visit last week, and I appreciate it.
The issue, as I explained to you in my office that day, is
that there are still a number of groups out there that have not
received a final determination on their 501(c)(4) request. We
are approaching the political season again, and all of these
groups are involved in primaries. They are involved in
educating the public about candidates. They are involved in
educating them on getting out to vote, et cetera, and I just
wonder if there is being any progress made on clearing up the
backlog of those groups that continue to not have a
determination.
Mr. KOSKINEN. We are sensitive to that. We are trying to
proceed. Of the more or less 145 backlogged organizations a
year ago when the issue was raised, 90 percent of those have
been cleared through, so we are down to a relatively small
number. Some are suing us, so you know, it depends on what the
process of litigation is. As you know, we did have a
streamlined proposal Acting Commissioner Werfel put in place
last summer that any organization that made a commitment that
it was going to spend no more than 40 percent of its resources
on political activity would automatically be approved, and
about 40 to 45 organizations immediately accepted that process.
So there are a handful left. We are doing our best;
although if they are in litigation, it is harder for us to try
to resolve those because my sense on all of these is whether we
are voting up or down, whether we are saying you are approved
or denied, what we need to do is be as quick as we can, as
prompt as we can, and so, going forward, that is our
commitment. We are trying to redo the 501(c)(3) area, again, to
make sure that one way or the other, you get an answer as
quickly as we can. And so, as you and I have talked, we will
review, and I have asked people to review to make sure that we
are doing everything we can to resolve issues that are pending.
Mr. MARCHANT. In this letter that you sent me, and I made
it available to my constituents so they could see the response,
it was indicated that if a lawsuit was pending, that that could
be a factor in the determination. Is that still the case?
Mr. KOSKINEN. If you have got a lawsuit pending and you are
suing us, then you know, you can always settle that. We settle
litigation without forcing everybody to go to trial. In fact, a
lot of these we would be delighted to settle. Litigation is a
complicated, expensive way to resolve any issue. So the fact
that you have sued us doesn't necessarily mean you can't
actually negotiate with us to settle the case.
Mr. MARCHANT. So to be clear, can you issue a determination
letter if you are in active litigation?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, that gets more complicated. If you have
actually sued us and it is in litigation, then you know, we are
sort of caught in the litigation process back and forth and
there are issues that if we could have resolved them we would
have. And so if you are suing us, then it makes it much more
difficult while the lawsuit is going on to actually then issue
independently that determination.
But it is a case-by-case issue. There probably are some
where the issues in the lawsuit are separate from, the
determination process in which we could do that, and I have
asked people to take a look to make sure that we are not
holding things up unnecessarily. As you and I discussed I think
there are probably some people who are happy to sue us because
it keeps the issue alive longer. We have actually I think
reached out as much as we could to organizations trying to
resolve issues as quickly as we could.
Mr. MARCHANT. We also--I use the same rule that you do. If
I receive any mail from a constituent about a subject,
sometimes it is an isolated situation and it is anecdotal and I
treat it that way. But, when I receive half of my emails on a
particular subject, then I actually take that one much more
seriously and I think that it does represent a greater slice of
what my constituents are thinking.
And I can, without duplicating what other members have said
up here today, this issue of bonuses to IRS employees that have
delinquent taxes, is a big issue in our constituencies and in
your negotiations with the labor unions, it is something that
needs to be resolved, it needs to be addressed. There may be
legislation, there may be a law passed before that gets done.
But thank you for your time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
We will go to Mr. Davis next.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
Commissioner, thank you for being here. And I appreciate the
work that you have done.
Everything that I have read, seen or heard suggests that we
have had a pretty smooth tax filing system and experience this
year, notwithstanding any shortages that there may have been
relative to man or woman power. So let me compliment you and
the agency on that.
I also detect from people I speak with, news reports that I
get and what I read, that there has already begun, even though
your tenure has been quite brief, a different level of
confidence that people feel in the agency and that their
experiences and problems are being resolved far more quickly
than what they may have experienced in the past, and I want to
compliment you and the agency on that.
I want to follow up a little bit on a question that was
raised by Representative Sanchez. It is my understanding that
maybe 70 to 80 percent of the individuals who are entitled to
make use of the Earned Income Tax Credit are doing so. Because
of the fact that there is such a large number of individuals
who could in fact and do qualify, many of them live in my
Congressional District, which has lots of low income people,
are there any ways that we can think of that might increase
utilization of that opportunity?
Mr. KOSKINEN. It is a major challenge. As I say, we have
both sides of the question. On the one hand we want to make
sure the payments are properly made to the right people for the
right amount and on the other hand we want to make sure that
everybody eligible participates. So we do again a significant
amount of outreach. I was in Baltimore at the start of filing
day. There is an EIT awareness day that we hold across the
country in January.
Part of the challenge is that, and it is probably a good
sign for the program, about one-third of the people every year
rotate in and out of the program, which means they are in the
program, they earn enough that they no longer need that
subsidy. So part of the challenge is, if it were a stable
population, we could probably make bigger inroads. Right now
about 80 percent of the eligible people participate. But with a
third of them rolling over, it means we have got to keep 20 to
25 percent new people coming in just to sustain ourselves.
So we are again spending a reasonable amount of time and
effort trying to give visibility to the program, publicize it
through our local sites, work cooperatively with people in
communities. But it is a significant challenge to make sure
that everybody eligible is aware of the program and
participates.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
And of course we know that next year the Internal Revenue
Service is going to have some additional responsibility for
assisting taxpayers with the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Correct.
Mr. DAVIS. How have you been preparing for that?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, we are preparing for it--well first, we
have a fairly significant technological challenge to adjust all
of our systems to be able to absorb the data and process it
appropriately in terms of matching what people thought they
were eligible for in terms of an advanced premium credit and
what they actually were entitled to.
So the technology challenge in our budget for this year was
$300 million of technology work. We got zero dollars for it, so
we have had to in effect postpone another $300 million worth of
work. So I meet every two weeks with the interagency, across-
agency group of IT people, policy people, operating people, to
make sure we are on schedule to be able to implement.
As I said earlier, we also are anxious to provide as much
information to the public as we can about eligibility, about
making sure that they are not over--as their income gets better
that they don't in effect get too large a premium credit so
they will owe more taxes when they file as we go forward.
So, we are doing the best we can. Our concern is we
estimate we are going to get 11 million more calls during the
filing season next year about the Affordable Care Act, on top
of the normal calls we get, and that is a major concern for us
going forward. We are trying to make sure our website is as
user friendly as we can between now and then so that people
will be comfortable, they can go to the website, get simple
answers to their questions so they don't have to call us to the
extent that we can avoid that.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
And I know that my time has run out but could I get a
response in writing for this question. 2006 data suggests that
there was a big gap of $67 billion unreported of corporate
income and I would like to know how we are trying to figure out
ways to recapture and collect some of that money.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I would be happy to provide that information.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Commissioner, for being here today, and
thank you for the hard work you are doing in regards to the IRS
and overseeing the IRS and I appreciate it. I am glad to see
the results of this tax season and your testimony and the stuff
we read over last night in preparation for today.
And I know my colleagues have asked about issues that are
just important to me as it is to them, but I wanted to narrow
down on a kind of a narrow issue that impacts my district and
that deals with Native American sovereignty in particular.
I represent the western portion of New York. We have long
heritage of the Seneca Nation being part of our area, and what
I am concerned with is I have been getting reports from not
just that nation, as well as other nations of a general sense
or concern about the IRS' operation when it comes to
challenging tribal general welfare programs, many of which are
nearly identical to programs provided by Federal and State
governments. There is a sense that the IRS may be unfairly
targeting these Native American nations, but is also not
respecting tribal sovereignty, and that is something that I
want to bring to your attention.
And I know in 2012, December 2012, the IRS issued guidance
on the application of the general welfare exclusion to Indian
nations and their citizens and that was viewed as a very
positive development. But the guidance still remains in draft
form and is deficient in several important respects in my
opinion and in the view of many Native American tribes across
America.
So my question, Mr. Commissioner, is this: What can Native
American nations expect of you as the new Commissioner and the
agency you run with respect to these issues and the fundamental
relationship between the IRS and tribal nations of America?
Mr. KOSKINEN. I think it is an important issue. Obviously
as you said I think it is critical for us to respect the
sovereignty of tribal nations, to treat them appropriately,
respectfully. I am concerned across the board whenever things
take too long, and so I can commit to you that if we have got a
draft regulation that has been out since December of 2012, that
we need to get that finalized and I will commit to you.
It is a joint effort when we do regulations with the
Treasury Department and the IRS tax policy, it is the domain of
the Treasury Department, but I have been trying to make it
clear, I have actually asked for a list of everything that has
been around for more than a year just to see if we can't
expedite it. My experience has been in the private sector and
my private life as well, everybody's, is that you are much
better off giving people an answer even if it is ``no'' early
than ``yes'' late, because by the time you get around to it
late they are aggravated enough and disappointed enough that it
doesn't get you much credit.
So on the outstanding regulation, I am committed we will
look at that and get it put into final as quickly as we can.
Mr. REED. Well, I greatly appreciate it, and I greatly
appreciate your comment about respecting the sovereignty of the
tribal nations, and I think that is something that is critical
to the future relationship with the nation and I am glad you
shared that belief as I do. So I appreciate the work there.
I wanted to ask just a general operations points of view,
and we have had this conversation before and I am a big
believer in metrics and asking for, okay, you want more money,
you want more staff, okay, what are you going to do with that
type of thing.
But one thing I was looking at in preparation, last night
for your testimony today is, we have a lot of effort up here on
this committee to engage in comprehensive tax reform, and I
wanted to know from you as the Commissioner have you looked at
what a revised simplified complete rewrite of the code would
bring in regards to the relief on your resources, be it
staffing, funding levels; that if you had a code, you know, the
chairman has put out a draft, we put out a draft after 2\1/2\
years of work, that really in my opinion goes a long way to
simplify that code, how much of that simplicity have you ever
thought about, and if you haven't, I would ask you to consider
it, would that mean in relief to your agency when it comes to
funding and staffing requests that you are putting forward to
us.
Mr. KOSKINEN. I don't have a number for you. As you know, I
am a big believer in tax simplification because I do think the
most important impact would be it would make it a lot easier
for taxpayers to figure out what they owe and compliance I
think would go up and we would certainly spend a lot less time
and money across the country and across the economy filling out
tax returns.
It clearly would make our life simpler, particularly in
taxpayer service on the call centers. If you had a relatively
simple straightforward Tax Code, we would get a lot fewer
calls. It wouldn't mean we wouldn't get any because there will
always be issues about filing status, heads of household, other
issues. But, a significant part of the calls are related to the
complexity of the code. So we would be able to without many
additional resources significantly improve our level of service
on that end.
On the enforcement end, again, to the extent it was if
compliance went up you would expect we would have somewhat
lowered enforcement needs, but there again, no matter what it
is, because it is not going to be a simple one line form, my
expectation is that a lot of our enforcement activities against
people who are actually are consciously trying to cut corners,
and whatever the rules are they will keep trying to cut the
corners. But, again, I think that the willing-to-pay as we say
who are trying to figure out the right amount would in fact be
able to do it much more quickly.
Mr. REED. I know my time has expired, and I so appreciate
you saying that, and maybe we can work offline having a further
conversation about it, what simplicity would mean to you in
regards to that deficiency of the agency, and that is where I
think there is a lot of common ground. If we all agree that
simplicity will result in less need for resources, there will
still be a need for that resource but a less need for that
resource, be it staff or financial resources, where it is a
win-win situation in my opinion, and I look forward to working
with you on that, and any information you have in regards to
that from your day-to-day operations would be helpful.
So, with that I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Commissioner.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, chairman.
Mr. Koskinen, good to see you again, and as Sam Johnson
said, you are the fix it guy. But I think Mr. Reed just hit on
the issue. It is the code. It is the code. That is the problem.
The problem isn't that you don't have enough people, you don't
have enough money, the problem is the code is far too big to
work with.
You mentioned fraud, people out there are who are sending
letters to people, to taxpayers, and they are unwittingly
spending money in, and the reason they are doing it is because
they are scared to death.
Here is the problem. Of all the things you are talking
about, if we cannot restore faith and confidence in this model
Government that we have, of the general public, everything we
talk about is just chatter, just idle chatter.
We talk about revenue. We need more revenues. Do we? So
let's make it really hard on the people who produce the
revenues. Let's make it so damn difficult for them that they
are afraid to do their own tax return; not because they don't
want to pay their fair share, but they are scared to death that
somebody is going to come in and hold them accountable for a
mistake they didn't mean to make but happened.
And I got to tell you coming from the private sector as you
had, you can be Mr. Fix it everywhere you want, but until this
code gets fixed, there ain't no fix. There is no way that
anybody can look at our current situation and feel that somehow
they can trust and have confidence in what we are doing with
them. It is just as impossible, it just can't be done.
I know you are talking about giving credentials to people,
now, what is the term, and this is a town that works on all
these acronyms, the PTIN. These are the preparers tax
identification numbers. In order to get that number you have to
make a fee of $63 and take 15 hours of continuing education
courses and that was shot down.
Mr. KOSKINEN. That was shot down.
Mr. KELLY. Yes. Okay, so now, now what are we doing? What
is the IRS doing now? Is this a suggestion, about having this
PTIN or having the people who have the credentials to do these
things?
Mr. KOSKINEN. No. What happens is the court said we could
ask people to register so we would at least know who was out
there holding themselves out as a preparer, and this year we
have about 667,000 of them out there, PTINs, as they are
called, but we have no other ability to supervise them. So they
could be totally incompetent, which a few of them are. Most
preparers are well-educated. They do a good job.
Our concern is a lot of people--as somebody once said,
hairdressers are regulated in all 50 States, tax preparers are
regulated in four, and you ought to be as at least concerned
about who is doing your tax preparation as who is giving you a
haircut.
Mr. KELLY. No, and I get that. Again, it goes back to what?
A code that is so complicated that the average person is scared
to death to do it themselves. Now, I got to tell you, the
problem isn't that--they don't trust any of us, by the way. You
know, approval ratings are not very high and we are all getting
painted with the same brush. And I got to tell you, I serve
with a lot of really outstanding people, on both sides of the
aisle, by the way and I don't know that we talk about ourselves
as strong Republicans or strong Democrats, but we talk about
ourselves as strong Americans trying to protect something that
was given to us. This is a long, long process of people passing
on to the next generation something that makes a lot of sense
and is the envy of the world.
This particular agency though, for as many good people as
you have, you are getting painted with the same brush. And I
got to tell you, being from the private sector, if I got a
letter in the mail and the outside of the envelope had the IRS
address, I was scared to death to open it, because it was never
good news.
And we talk about improper payments. Improper payments
would also be defined not only underpayment or nonpayment but
also overpayment. Right? I mean, so if we are using that
definition. I think what we are trying to get to, and, again,
as Tommy talked about, and I think this is critical, if we
don't get this Tax Code reformed, if we don't get it to the
point where people can actually read it and understand it, if
we don't get it to the point where they have confidence that
the people who are enforcing that code are on their side and
not on the other side, then America loses and continues to lose
and the gap keeps widening between what the American people
have faith and confidence in and what they have been subject
to.
That is your toughest job. I know you are a turnaround guy
and you are a fix it guy, but, man, you are working with a
pretty tough operation right now to get through it. I had a
flat tire on the way here yesterday. I got out the owner's
manual. Hell, it took me almost 20 minutes just to find the
section about changing the spare tire to find out where the
tools were and I would have paid somebody else to do it at the
time but there was nobody available. So we are having the same
problem with people when they do their tax returns.
Mr. Chairman, we are doing a lot of good things here, but
the one thing we better decide on really quickly is these are
American problems. This is not a Republican issue or a Democrat
issue or a libertarian issue or an independent issue. We are
talking about revenues that supply all the vital monies that we
need and you know who we are holding hostage and making the
trouble maker in this? The taxpayer.
There is something wrong with the model where we continue
to do that. I got to tell you there is an old saying, is about
don't worry about the mule, just load the wagon. The mule is
starting to unhitch himself. He is going to walk away from it
because there is just no upside to what we are doing.
Thanks for what you are doing. Good luck and we will keep
doing everything we can to make it easier for you to do your
job and make it easier for the American people to actually put
their head on the pillow at night and know it is not the
Government they have to worry about or the IRS coming in their
place or some other agency that can destroy their personal life
with just a little bit of an investigation.
So, thanks for what you are doing. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Black.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for this
hearing.
This certainly is a very important issue. I do want to just
tag a little bit on what my colleague said about trust, and
certainly that is something that I think right now the American
people have had, broken trust. And I appreciate what you are
doing, the efforts that you are making to reestablish that
trust in the IRS.
In your opening comments you made a statement that you are
making important progress in identity theft, and that, of
course, is so, so important and we look at that from so many
different realms, not just within the IRS but with a lot of
other issues, and banking and even medicine, and identities are
being stolen.
Most recently we have started getting information, not
particularly in the State of Tennessee but as I look at several
of the States and territories that are affected by this and
victims of fraudulent tax filings and stolen identities within
State medical associations.
Mr. KOSKINEN. Yes.
Ms. BLACK. And it seems to me that this is really, as I
look at the number of States, it is a growing issue and I think
that certainly it is one that we have got to look at very
quickly, because these are physician databases and being
uncertain about just where they are getting the information
from, how many people that are within this database are also
potentially a victim for potential theft, ID theft, and some
stolen refunds I understand are occurring right now.
So my question is actually three parts on asking you about
whether you will make this a priority, how you seek to resolve
this and how you think you might be able to prevent it and
whether as you look at this will you look at it as a national
issue or because this seems to be regional will you be
addressing it more regionally?
How will you let the public know about this, whether this
will be a public release that the people can be aware of and
watching out for. And then, finally, the concern of the Federal
identification numbers, such as the Medicare's national
provider ID or the DE registration numbers for those
prescribers of controlled substances. Will you take a look to
see is this the cause that is occurring?
So let me go back to the three. Will you make this a
priority? Number two, how do you propose to resolve it? And
then looking forward, how would you prevent it?
Mr. KOSKINEN. Well, it clearly is a priority. It became an
explosion in 2010 to 2012, it overwhelmed law enforcement as
well as the IRS, and we have made great progress. It is a high
priority. We have 3,000 people who spend no time on anything
other than worrying about refund fraud. We have very
sophisticated modelers who are developing our ability to look
for schemes as they come through the system. As I noted, we
stopped three million suspicious returns in this filing season
that didn't get through our filters.
As somebody said, because as I noted, I pulled everybody
together and said we are making progress but we have got to
take a fresh look at what else can we do to fight this battle.
I want to see if we can change the rules of the game a little,
so we are not fighting in their ballpark, we move it to our
ballpark, which is why I have asked for some of the legislative
changes we have got.
But as somebody said, we have eliminated a lot of the
amateurs who were doing this one or three or five returns. We
are now dealing with organized criminals and crime and some
nefarious tax preparers. The organized crime people are filing
hundreds of these and as we develop filters they are just
reverse engineering and figuring out what goes through, what
doesn't go through, and they can pretty much figure out where
we are and so we are again trying to figure out how to change
that.
One of the things that will help will be to get W-2
information earlier. We are a victim of our own success. It
used to be the refunds went out in August. Now the technology
is such we will say we will give you a refund in 21 days. So we
gave 90 million refunds out before the end of the filing season
on April 15th, most of those before the third party information
got to us. Now, we have sophisticated filters. W-2s won't solve
the problem by themselves, but they are very critical.
We are looking at all sorts of E-authentication methods so
that in effect we circumvent Social Security numbers. Because
part of the problem with preparers, with medical services, as
you note, everybody's Medicare card is their Social Security
number, and so there are file cabinets around the country full
of Social Security numbers.
Hackers have now discovered if I could hack into a tax
preparer's databases I have got all of their clients. More
important just their name and Social Security number, I have
got all of their returns so I can prepare a false return that
looks a lot better than the one I just make up as we go.
So it is an ongoing battle. I think that we are holding our
own, I would say. I am not sure which is better than we were
doing a couple of years ago where we looked like we were
overwhelmed.
We have programs going on with financial institutions, with
prisons, where it first started, with law enforcement. We have
task forces with hundreds and State and local law enforcement
agencies. When people get arrested we suddenly discover they
have got all sorts of Social Security numbers or debit cards.
You know, one of our problems is how to deal with debit
cards. When we send out the refund, the debit cards can all
go--you know, somebody can go get debit cards in a grocery
store. You just pull them off the rack. And they are harder for
us to track. They are virtually untraceable.
So it is a complicated problem. There is no higher priority
for us both to stop the fraud and the refund fraud, but also to
deal with taxpayers. There is nothing more I think anxiety
producing for a taxpayer than to suddenly file their return and
get it rejected because somebody already filed with their
Social Security number.
So there, as I have noted, we actually used to take almost
a year to resolve those. We are now down to 120 days in
resolving them. Our backlog has gone from over 600,000 to about
98,000. But we are trying to do better there as well because we
understand the burden on the taxpayer.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, if I may, I have another question about
minors' Social Security numbers being stolen and how that is
being handled. I will put that in a letter form and send it to
you. I would really like to hear back from you on that issue as
well. That is a really important issue we have to make sure we
are addressing.
Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentlelady.
Commissioner, thank you for being here. Thank you for the
status report on a whole host of activities. We want to
continue to work with you to reform, make improvements, rebuild
trust and right size the budget on all this. So we appreciate
you appearing before us today.
Please be advised members will submit written questions as
has been stated to be answered in writing. All of that will be
made part of the formal record as will be your formal
statement.
With that, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Richard N. Brown

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H&R Block

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RAC COALITION

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Questions for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
