- MEDPAC'S JUNE REPORT TO CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDPAC'S JUNE REPORT TO CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 18, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-HL13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-997                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of June 20, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESS

Mark E. Miller, Ph.D., Executive Director, Medicare Payment
Advisory Commission............................................     7

SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

AHCA, statement..................................................    42

MEDPAC'S JUNE REPORT TO CONGRESS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Kevin Brady
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Wednesday, June 11, 2014
No. HL-13

Chairman Brady Announces Hearing on

MedPAC's June Report to Congress

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Kevin Brady (R-
TX) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
on the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission's (MedPAC) June report to
the Congress. The report details the Commission's recommendations for
reforming Medicare payment policies. The Subcommittee will hear from
MedPAC's Executive Director, Mark E. Miller, Ph.D. The hearing will
take place on Wednesday, June 18, 2014, in 1100 Longworth House Office
Building, beginning at 10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available, oral testimony at this
hearing will be from the invited witness only. However, any individual
or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a
written statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion
in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

MedPAC advises Congress on Medicare payment policy. The Commission
is required by law to submit two reports to Congress on an annual
basis. The first report reviews Medicare payment policy and is due by
March 15. The second report examines specific issues facing Medicare
and is due by June 15.

In its June 2014 report, MedPAC examines:

The need to compare Medicare's policies across
traditional fee-for-service, Medicare Advantage, and
Accountable Care Organizations;

Policy options for financial assistance for low-
income beneficiaries in the context of its June 2012
recommendation to restructure the Medicare benefit design;

Whether changes to Medicare's risk adjustment
methodology, which accounts for severity of patient illness,
can improve payment accuracy;

Payment changes to bolster primary care and ensure
access to these services;

How payments to Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities
(IRFs) and Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNFs) differ for the
treatment of similar patients; and

The impact of improved medication adherence on
overall Medicare spending.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Brady stated, ``It is our duty
to make sure we have a strong Medicare program that works for seniors
and taxpayers. MedPAC is a key advisor in this effort. I am pleased
that the Commission continues to call attention to the need to improve
Medicare's benefit design. This commonsense step would modernize the
Medicare benefit so it looks more like other health plans. I commend
the Commission for highlighting the need to compare fee-for-service to
Medicare Advantage and other payment system options. We owe it to our
seniors to provide an apples-to-apples comparison of quality and cost
of these options in their geographic area. This hearing enables the
Committee to hear MedPAC's valuable insights on these and other
important issues.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on MedPAC's June 2014 Report to Congress.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Wednesday, July 2, 2014. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-3943 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BRADY. Good morning, everyone. I would like to
welcome back the Medicare Payment Advisory Committee. Neither
MedPAC nor its witness here today, Executive Director Mark
Miller, is a stranger to this Committee. MedPAC is the key non-
partisan advisor with a lot of analytical firepower. There is
bipartisan interest in this work.
MedPAC issues two reports annually to the Congress. Its
March report focuses on the adequacy of payments made to the
various Medicare providers. The Committee pays close attention
to those important findings, and has had MedPAC testify on them
in past years. The June MedPAC report focuses on how to improve
the Medicare program.
Improving Medicare, that is the focus of our hearing today.
We are at a critical juncture. The program faces serious
financial challenges. The Part A Trust Fund, which was paid out
to more than it takes in over the past several years is slated
to go bankrupt in just over a decade. The funding needed for
the Part B Trust Fund will be in--such an increasing drain on
the treasury that it is sure to crowd out other priorities.
According to independent researchers, this important program
pays out, on average, three times the benefit it collects from
workers over their lifetime.
We are in a state of flux on how we pay our health care
providers in Medicare. The popular Medicare Advantage program
faces severe cuts after several years of the White House
delaying the damaging Affordable Care Act cuts. Providers
increasingly have their payments tied to performance, whether
in traditional fee-for-service or some alternative payment
model.
The MedPAC June 2014 Report addresses a number of policy
issues that are key to improving Medicare's viability and
future direction. The report reiterates MedPAC's 2012
recommendation to improve the design of the confusing and
outdated Medicare traditional fee-for-service benefit for
seniors. It also discusses policy options that could help to
ensure that the new benefit design works for low-income
seniors.
MedPAC has outlined a design that brings clarity through a
single deductible and uniform cost sharing and peace of mind by
capping the amount that seniors have to pay out of pocket. The
design would also reduce the need to buy a supplemental policy.
Benefit redesign is not a new issue. The Bowles-Simpson
Commission appointed by President Obama, and the bipartisan
Policy Center have also recommended it. The Committee has
called attention to it, even devoting a hearing exclusively to
the topic last year.
At that hearing, I asked witnesses to conduct what I view
as the most informative analysis: beneficiary impact over
multiple years. The fact that a senior may pay a little more in
any given year is not nearly so important as avoiding the years
in which a senior may face frighteningly high costs. Any
beneficiary who has high costs, such as those that come with a
stay in the hospital, will see a significant reduction in out-
of-pocket costs. Since we know the majority of seniors will
have a hospital stay over the course of their lifetime--some,
many trips to the hospital--this protects seniors from cost
spikes in a year when they are particularly sick.
With a mom who relies on the confusing Medicare system, I
am sold. If it were up to me, this common-sense change would
already be done. Hearing MedPAC's views on how an improved
design can work for low-income seniors furthers the discussion.
I am confident that this reform can be done in a way that has
net benefit for beneficiaries, even as it reduces future
expenditures. Listening to those who have concerns, we must
continue to work to make this happen.
The report also highlights the need to be able to compare
traditional fee for service, Medicare Advantage, and the
accountable care organizations. We owe it to our seniors to
provide an apples-to-apples comparison of quality and cost of
these options in their area. This effort can also provide vital
information to set the stage for more sweeping reforms that
further empower seniors and are more responsive to senior
health care needs.
The report also examines how payments to in-patient rehab
facilities and skilled nursing facilities differ for the
treatment of similar patients. This is a continuation of a
robust site-neutral payment policy discussion that has happened
over the last few years. The House passed a site-neutral policy
back in 2011. In fact, a provision establishing parity between
in-patient hospital and long-term care hospital payments was
signed into law late last year. This is a topic of great
interest to Members of this Committee, and has significant
impact not only on health care providers, but seniors and
taxpayers. MedPAC's work has been instrumental. We appreciate
its continued focus.
The report looks at whether the method of accounting for
expected patient costs or risk adjustment can be improved. This
is important, because we need to make sure payments to Medicare
Advantage plans and providers are as accurate as possible.
There is a lot of interest in the topic of medication
adherence, which means taking medications exactly as prescribed
by the doctor to result in better patient health and outcomes.
The report examines the extent to which better adherence by
seniors reduces overall Medicare spending.
Finally, the report discusses possible payment policy
changes to bolster access to primary care.
Well, before we hear from Mr. Miller I want to say that
this MedPAC report is not a book that will just sit on the
shelf. For many of the issues, it represents an ongoing
dialogue. This hearing is a valuable part of that conversation.
I look forward to working with the Members of the Committee and
MedPAC to enact policies that make the Medicare program work
better for beneficiaries, for providers, and taxpayers.
Before I recognize the Ranking Member, Dr. McDermott, for
the purposes of an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent
that all Members' written statements be included in the record.
[No response.]
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Dr. McDermott, for 5
minutes for the purposes of his opening statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Dr.
Miller, for coming today to discuss MedPAC's most recent
report. It is an important hearing, and I hope that we can have
a constructive conversation this morning that focuses on
finding solutions to the challenges that Medicare faces in a
way that protects beneficiaries.
Through its expertise and non-partisan analysis, MedPAC in
the past has helped Members of Congress come together to
discuss options for reform that improve the payment system, cut
down costs, and improve the quality of care that beneficiaries
receive. Now, we may not always agree, but reports like the one
we are discussing today often start as a good point for a
starting point of a discussion.
Unlike previous reports, the MedPAC has submitted to
Congress a report that does not contain any recommendations.
Instead, today's report represents a number of ideas we can use
as a framework for today's discussion. We do not need to leap
to any conclusions, there is no crisis. We should hear, listen,
question, analyze what we hear, and, after a careful review of
the issues, we can then determine what proposals to move on.
Whatever changes we make, we need to focus on some key
principles.
First, we need to make sure that beneficiaries are
protected from having to bear an increased financial burden.
Current Medicare beneficiaries pay a greater share of their
income for health care than the average American. And yet,
often the Republicans say they need more skin in the game. They
pay taxes during their working years to earn eligibility, and
they continue to shoulder a share of the load through premiums,
co-pays, or co-insurance and deductibles.
Second, we must get health care costs under control. We did
a lot of great things through the Affordable Care Act,
particularly in the protecting of consumers and expanding
access to affordable health care coverage for millions of
Americans. The ACA improves Medicare's benefits by improving
coverage of preventative care, and increasing prescription drug
coverage. And the ACA helped constrain Medicare spending such
that we have record low-per-capita spending growth, below
inflation in the years following enactment of health care
reform.
We must continue this work by focusing on controlling costs
and improving outcomes. Just this week a report from the
Commonwealth Fund found yet again that the United States spends
more per capita than any other country on health care, yet we
don't get the best results. We have to fix that.
Third, we must make sure that payments are accurate and
fair. This involves a careful review of how Medicare pays
doctors and hospitals, with an eye towards overpayments, which
need to be eliminated, and fraud, waste, and abuse in the
system. This will allow us to strengthen the program without
harming the beneficiaries.
Finally, we should focus on saving money through innovative
payment models. The ACA introduced a number of promising
reforms to Medicare, including accountable care organizations
and the Medicare shared savings plan, which will cut costs
without harming beneficiaries. We need to continue to remove
barriers to setting up these innovative programs.
I am concerned that my Republican colleagues will use
today's hearing to suggest radical changes in Medicare. Whether
it is a proposal to eliminate the program's defined benefit
through a voucher program, or increasing cost sharing for
seniors, I have heard a lot of bad ideas in the past. MedPAC
has not suggested we make any of these changes in its report,
and I hope our conversation doesn't use this hearing as a cover
for those kind of bad ideas. I know that the chairman is
interested in making changes to make Medicare stronger, and I
hope to work with him. Thank you very much. And I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Doctor. And we will now hear
from Mr. Miller. And you are recognized 5 minutes for the
purpose of your oral statement.

STATEMENT OF MARK E. MILLER, PH.D., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
MEDICARE PAYMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION

Mr. MILLER. Chairman Brady, Ranking Member McDermott,
distinguished Committee Members, thank you for asking the
Commission to testify today.
As you know, Congress created MedPAC to advise it on
Medicare issues. And in the June report you will see themes
that we have often repeated: moving the Medicare program away
from a fragmented, volume-driven system to one that is
coordinated across providers and settings, and focused on
patient outcomes; rewarding providers and plans that take risk
and improve quality with higher payments and reduced regulatory
oversight; assuring that Medicare's payment systems don't favor
one payment model over another; and assuring that traditional
fee for service remains an option, but at the same time
assuring that that payment system is accurate, accountable, and
as fair as possible.
Medicare now has 3 payment systems: 30 million
beneficiaries are in traditional fee for service; 5 million are
in accountable care organizations; and 15 million are in
private plans. The Commission's June report discusses
synchronizing Medicare's payment, quality measurement, risk
adjustment, and regulatory oversight across the three payment
systems. Our motivations are to protect the patient by setting
common risk adjustment and quality standards, to assure
fairness among plans and providers within a market by setting
common financial and quality standards, and to protect the
taxpayer by assuring that Medicare supports the lowest cost,
highest quality payment system in any given market.
Regarding this last point, we used data from 31 markets to
compute current payments and to simulate a common benchmark for
Medicare across ACOs, traditional fee-for-service, and private
plans. There is a lot of technical details here, but here are
two take-aways. A common benchmark could make ACOs and MA plans
more competitive with fee-for-service. And, most importantly,
the simulations show that driving volume to any one model may
not be desirable because no one model is always the most
efficient in a given market.
Just as an aside, I would also note that on Monday we put
out new guidance to the Congress and HHS on the next generation
of ACOs that we believe is consistent with these longer-run
goals.
Moving on to quality measurement, the Commission has become
concerned that Medicare's quality programs are overbuilt,
burdensome, focused on process, rather than outcomes, and out
of synch with the private sector. To address these issues, the
Commission discussions have evolved towards an alternative view
that would focus on a small set of population-based outcomes
and patient experience measures, and then to compare and report
quality across traditional fee-for-service, ACOs, and private
plans. For the purposes of rewarding and penalizing, our
conversations are incomplete. But the direction of the
discussion is around using those population measures for ACOs
and managed care plans, while continuing to use provider-based
outcome measures for fee-for-service.
Moving on to modernizing fee-for-service, in this report we
explore three ideas. With respect to beneficiaries, we provide
information on the Medicare support programs and reiterate the
Commission's recommendation to increase eligibility for the
program up to 150 percent of poverty. This recommendation
should be viewed in the context of the Commission's broader
recommendation on reforming the traditional fee-for-service
benefit in order to rationalize that benefit design, to protect
the beneficiary from high and unpredictable out-of-pocket
costs, and to create price signals to discourage first dollar
supplemental coverage. The MSP expansion will offer greater
out-of-pocket assistance to low-income beneficiaries under the
reform benefit design.
With respect to provider payments, the report discusses
primary care services, which the Commission believes are under-
valued in the physician fee schedule. The policy idea would
maintain the primary care add-on in a budget-neutral manner,
but would move to paying for these services on a patient basis,
rather than on a service basis. We believe that this would give
physicians, advance practice nurses, and other qualified
professionals the resources and flexibility to provide non-
face-to-face services, and to provide coordination services.
Finally, we continue the discussion of our site-neutral
payment policy. As this Committee well knows, MedPAC has made
recommendations to narrow payment differences in the ambulatory
setting and between the in-patient hospital and the long-term
care hospital setting. In this report we begin the discussion
of narrowing payment differences for in-patient rehab and
skilled nursing facilities--again, focusing on trying to
identify comparable patients, where this makes sense.
I would like to thank you for asking the Commission to
testify today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Miller. I want to talk a
little about--or ask you a little about--the recommendation to
redesign the Medicare fee-for-service benefit. The current--for
seniors, the current benefit design is very confusing. It
really is, essentially, two different insurance products, one
for the hospital nursing facility care, another one for
physician services and other out-patients. Every one has its
own deductible cost-sharing requirements, adding in a Part B
medicine benefit and often a supplemental plan. You know, it is
tremendously confusing.
So, I am pleased the Commission wants to address these
problems. Can you explain the benefits to seniors of a
redesign? And my thinking is, you know, the current system
works fine as long as you never go to the hospital, you know.
But seniors are going to go to the hospital. And some--many
times in their lifetime. And so, having a redesign that
provides, you know, one clear deductible that creates a co-
payment, rather than co-insurance, so there is more, I think,
limits to those, and then an out-of-pocket cost where, in those
years where you are ill and in the hospital, you are not going
to go lose your life savings as a result of it.
Can you talk a little about sort of the context we ought to
be viewing this? And we all want to make sure that we are
protecting low-income seniors, as well.
Mr. MILLER. Okay. So I think, if you want to talk about it
from the beneficiaries' point of view--and I think that that
was a motivation for a lot of the Commission's work here--the
first thing is that the benefit, as it is designed, doesn't
include a catastrophic cap. And the market has changed
significantly on that point over time. The managed care plans
all provide catastrophic caps, for example.
And so, the first benefit to the beneficiary is to have a
catastrophic cap, where their out-of-pocket would stop at some
point. You know, we have modeled different options, but let's
just say $5,000. So that is the first thing.
The second thing is line of sight on their out-of-pocket
costs. So right now you have a couple different deductibles, as
you have said, and you also have percentage-based co-payments.
I am going to pay 20 percent of something. And so, the
Commission would rationalize those deductibles and move from
co-insurance percentages to a co-payment amount for a service.
And the hope here is that the beneficiary has a clear line of
sight on what their out-of-pocket will be.
And then that, coupled with catastrophic, brings me to the
third point, and make the need for the supplemental insurance
significantly less, because they have greater protections and
greater certainty about what they are going to be paying out of
pocket. And so, the need for supplemental insurance, if that
becomes much less, you have just relieved the beneficiary of
the premium for--that they pay for the supplemental insurance.
And then a final point, which you have also referred to, is
if you have protections up to, say, 150 percent of poverty for
low-income, then you are helping beneficiaries with any of
their premium costs.
Chairman BRADY. Two things to that point. Should we be
looking at the Medicare savings plan program in the context of
this redesign?
And, secondly, are there benefits to continuation of care
by redesigning the Medicare benefit?
Mr. MILLER. Yes, we are talking about 150 percent in the
context of the broader re-benefit design. I am not sure if I
followed the continuation of care----
Chairman BRADY. And the re-design is--by this providing
clarity and line of sight, in looking at your recommendations
there seems to be a suggestion that this also helps seniors as
they experience a continuation of care, from leading in the
hospital and----
Mr. MILLER. Right, I now follow your point. I am sorry I
missed it.
Yes, and we did--actually, we did some analysis for this
Committee very directly on this question and gave it to you a
while back. But for example, there are numbers like, you know,
nine percent of beneficiaries have a hospitalization in a
single year, but over multiple years--say 4 years--you can get
up into 40 and 50 percent of beneficiaries having a
hospitalization. And so, the benefit, the insurance value
benefit, if you will, to a redesigned, you know, benefit, is
that it also provides protection over a longer run.
Chairman BRADY. Can I switch about MedPAC's discussion
measuring quality by focusing on the entire patient population,
as opposed to assessing each individual provider? Being able to
compare quality in an area between fee-for-service, Medicare
Advantage, and other options, I think, is a very important
thing. I understand the Commission's reluctance to adjust
provider fee-for-service payments, because it makes them
accountable for things outside their control.
My question is, in the context of how Medicare pays
physicians, considering that the current sustainable growth
formula adjusts payments based on the collective actions of
physicians nationwide, wouldn't adjusting payments to
physicians in a relatively small area signify an improvement?
Mr. MILLER. I think this is something of a trade-off in the
sense that at the national level it seems very clear that you
have sort of a tragedy of the commons type of situation. So I
might--if volume increases as a physician, I might be concerned
about a fee reduction. But if that fee reduction is shared
across the entire country, then I might benefit more in the
short run by increasing volume, and then have the fee reduction
shared by all physicians.
It is arguable that doing that on a smaller basis would do
two things: make the physician more aware of the pool of
physicians that they are actually at risk with, and perhaps
give them more of a jump-start to moving into more organized
systems. Say, as long as I am being judged with other
physicians, maybe I want to pick those physicians and go to an
accountable care organization.
However, it is really important for me to say this: the
Commission was concerned that in that circumstance, in a fee-
for-service environment, there is no unified entity, so they
were concerned about judging providers on that basis because of
that. But that is kind of your trade-off.
Chairman BRADY. No, I appreciate it. A final point, not a
question, but I appreciate the Commission's work on trying to
create an apples-to-apples comparison across all three of the
payment models: spending benchmark, quality measurement, risk
adjustment, regulatory oversight. I think for us to continue to
improve the Medicare system, it is really critical we have an
apples-to-apples comparison. So thanks for the work you are
doing there.
Mr. MILLER. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You made a passing comment about paying primary care
physicians for per-patient amount, rather than per-service. I
have always thought that we would have a much better system if
everybody had a medical home, some general medical person who
knew them and knew their situation. And it sounds to me like
you are talking about a plan where you would give a fixed
amount to a doctor to pay to do the general medical things that
are necessary. They could then refer out for the rest of their
care to the more general system.
I would like you to talk a little bit about what you meant
by that.
Mr. MILLER. Yes. That is what we meant by that, that the
notion would be that, instead of a primary care physician or
advanced practice nurse, or whatever the professional is that
is providing the primary care service, in order to get
reimbursed they have to see the patient and they have to--you
know, face to face, and provide a service.
But I think the Commission's view is that, particularly and
more coordinated systems, you want that professional to have
the flexibility to do things like make phone calls, deal with
the patient through email and phone calls, and also the
flexibility to coordinate their care, which they aren't
directly paid for now. So, the notion is moving to a payment
for a population that you have responsibility for, rather than
paying them service by service.
To your medical home point, this concept is not
inconsistent with that thought. We are not saying it has to be
a medical home, but we are saying that the payment should move
more to a patient-based payment, which then gives resources for
the professional to be flexible.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Are you talking, then, to a large
organization getting a certain payment to cover, let's say,
30,000 people that get $100 a month for each one of--I am just
picking numbers out of the----
Mr. MILLER. Doesn't have to be a large organization. We
would see this as, you know, this is how we would pay primary
care providers and services in Medicare, whatever their
situation is. So, no, it is not you have to be organized to do
this.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I mean most seniors--8 out of 10--don't go
to the hospital in a given year--moreover, a four or five-year
period, as Mr. Brady has said. Aren't they protected by their
supplemental insurance from the co-payment problems?
Mr. MILLER. Yes. If I understand your question, yes. If you
have a supplemental product, you can purchase products that
cover your first dollar, your deductible in your hospital case,
and you can purchase products that have a back end catastrophic
coverage. That has produced a supplemental market.
And without being, you know, too unpleasant about it, there
is a lot of questions about the value of some of those
products--the premiums people pay in exchange for the value
that they get. And those products also impose additional costs
on the taxpayer, because they generate services. There is
fairly clear evidence on that.
And so, the thinking is----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Tell me about the evidence that that----
Mr. MILLER. Say again.
Mr. MCDERMOTT [continuing]. Having this supplemental policy
generates----
Mr. MILLER. Yes, what we----
Mr. MCDERMOTT [continuing]. Services, where is the data
that says----
Mr. MILLER. Okay, and we have published it, and we can make
sure that we, you know, re-deliver it to you. There is a fair
amount of evidence that when you--and not just a beneficiary,
any person--of first-dollar coverage in their consumption of
health care, utilization increases. And the issue with these
products is the price I pay to get that product is about the
actual wrap-around services, and the price doesn't contemplate
the additional cost to the program that the product imposes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Is it--am I correct in thinking that 90
percent have supplemental coverage, about 90 percent?
Mr. MILLER. Yes, and that is composed of three types. One
is employer-sponsored insurance. One is the private Medigap--
individual Medigap market. And then another number is their
Medicaid supplemental.
And the kind of comments I am making, and what the
Commission is talking about with this benefit redesign pertain
to the employer-provided and the Medigap products. And our view
there is the beneficiaries should have the choice of accessing
those products. But the products' price should more fully
respect--or reflect the full cost of purchasing that product,
which is the wrap-around services and the additional costs that
they impose on the program.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Miller, the
Commission report talks a lot about how Medicare under-values
primary care services, including the fact that average
compensation for specialists can be more than double what
primary care practitioners earn.
It is also my understanding that cognitive physicians, like
neurologists and rheumatologists, are in a similar position to
primary care in income, recruiting, and even--cognitive
providers perform care coordination for beneficiaries with
multiple chronic conditions, often for an aging population.
My question is, does the Commission have any plans to also
recognize cognitive providers, along with primary care
providers, in its recommendations?
Mr. MILLER. Okay. And this is a matter of degree, rather
than philosophical difference.
So, if you think about the Medicare physician fee schedule,
I think what the Commission--you know, if all 17 were here--
would say to your answer--to your question is this. There is
great concern that the procedural side of the fee schedule is
over-valued. If you go to the cognitive side, there is concern
that that is under-valued, because we are talking about time-
based services. You don't have as much ability to generate
volume and compensate yourself.
And so, cognitive becomes more of the concern. But if you
have to pick priorities, and there is limited amounts of
dollars, then the Commission's point is the first and primary--
or first concern is the primary care sets of services, and I
will stop in just one second. And I think part of that
reasoning is they see that as so critical to the care
coordination that many people are looking for in the system.
So it is not--you know, I completely--you know, the
Commission disagrees, it is really a matter about--of
priorities.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. But you are looking at it.
Mr. Miller, the June report repeats a previous finding that
Medicare Advantage beneficiaries who dis-enroll and return to
fee-for-service Medicare have a 16 percent higher fee-for-
service spending. Does that mean that Congress ought to build
in extra incentives to keep beneficiaries in Medicare
Advantage?
Mr. MILLER. We haven't made a recommendation on--a direct
recommendation on this point yet, but you are picking up on,
decidedly, what--the issue that is being raised in the report.
The actual number these days--we have re-estimated it using
some later data--it is about 12 percent. But your point still
stands. And I think there is some concern here that if you find
a plan that has excessive dis-enrollment relative to what you
see out there in the environment generally, you might want to
contemplate some kinds of incentives or penalties to forestall
that kind of action.
And one of the things I would relate that to is we can
always try and prove risk adjustment. It will probably be
imperfect for a long time, and maybe forever. There are other
administrative actions that you can take to try and get the
behavioral response that you are looking for, and that is one
of them.
But, yes, you get about a 4 percent dis-enrollment
occurring every year, and those people tend to be about 12
percent more expensive than average. And I just don't want to
vilify the plans here. Beneficiaries dis-enroll for their own
reasons, as well. So this is both the beneficiary and the plan
that are involved in the dis-enrollment.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. I appreciate your comments.
Mr. MILLER. Can I say one thing really quickly? I forgot to
say to Mr. McDermott the other supplemental coverage is managed
care. I didn't mention that in answering your question. Sorry
about that.
Chairman BRADY. No, thank you.
Mr. Thompson.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Miller, thank you for being here. I would like to
touch on the under-value of primary care, as well. And
specifically, in the ACA, we put in provisions to provide
incentive payments for primary care docs. And in your report
you state that access for beneficiaries seeking new primary
care physicians raises more concerns than access for
beneficiaries seeking new specialists. And I hear that in my
district, as well. Folks tell me that they have long wait times
for appointments, there is few docs, primary care docs, who
will take new Medicare patients.
And why is this problem persisting? And have the incentive
payments helped to reduce this--the extent of the problem?
Mr. MILLER. Okay. I don't--going to the last part of your
question first, I don't want to overstate that the primary care
add-on payment, which we recommended--and we, you know, accept
responsibility for, and the Congress enacted, and so we think
that that is the right direct--I don't want to overstate that
this will correct the primary care, you know, wait times and
difficulties that people are experiencing.
But we think it is a really important signal to primary
care providers about the value that they can potentially
provide in care coordination in a reformed system. And we think
that it is important that that signal persist.
We do think that the fee schedule is out of balance for
these types of services, and we are trying to say there is some
attention to trying to rectify it.
Last thing I will say and I will stop is we have also
talked about other things to get greater value in that fee
schedule, but I won't go into them in the interest of your
time.
Mr. THOMPSON. So we should continue----
Mr. MILLER. Yes.
Mr. THOMPSON [continuing]. After the 2015 date when the
incentives expire, we should continue to do those?
Mr. MILLER. The Commission has not made a hard
recommendation on that, but the conversations that they are
having, and that they are going to pick up with in the fall are
all headed in that direction.
Mr. THOMPSON. So thank you for being respectful of my
time----
Mr. MILLER. Trying to.
Mr. THOMPSON [continuing]. But let's go into those other
things that we should be doing----
Mr. MILLER. Okay----
Mr. THOMPSON [continuing]. In addition to the incentive
payments.
Mr. MILLER. No, no problem. I just didn't want to get you
off your point, and you may have had another one.
So, for example, in our SGR recommendations that we have
made to the Congress--and you know, these are not popular, but
none of our stuff is--so one of the things is we have made a
set of recommendations on data collection and requirements for
the secretary to identify over-price procedures in the fee
schedule. We think that most of those over-price procedures
reside on the procedural side of the fee schedule. Then you
would have resources that you could re-balance to the cognitive
or to the primary care side of the fee schedule, as you saw
fit. That is one thought.
A second thought is that--and again, this is somewhat
unpopular--in solving the SGR issue, in order to keep the cost
of the SGR fix down--and, remember, it used to be a lot more
expensive than it was--you can differentiate the conversion
factor for primary care or cognitive, or whatever the Congress
decided, relative to the procedural services. And that is
another way to get a re-balancing effect.
Mr. THOMPSON. Is there anything else that Congress should
do to try and get a handle on this problem?
Mr. MILLER. I am sure I am forgetting something, but those
are certainly the things off the top of my mind.
Mr. THOMPSON. Okay. If you remember, why don't you drop me
a line?
Mr. MILLER. We will do that. And we talk to your people all
the time.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank you
again for holding this hearing. I appreciate MedPAC's work in
so many areas to try to make a health care system that works
for patients. As I often times say, we tend to forget the
patient in many of these discussions. We talk about money, we
talk about other sorts of things, but often times forget the
patient.
I want to thank MedPAC for what appears to be a further
maturation of and appreciation that patients in various medical
specialties are actually different, that one-size-fits-all
doesn't often times--doesn't work hardly at all, in terms of
health care.
To that end I want to talk a little bit about medical
specialties and the difference that they have, and specifically
pathologists, as it relates to meaningful use requirements and
electronic health records. You are familiar with that program,
are you not?
Mr. MILLER. A bit. I am not real deep right at the moment,
but I will do my best.
Mr. PRICE. The kind of rewards, incentives that are being
provided for physicians as it relates to electronic medical
records and meaningful use are pretty much standard across the
board. So we have got pathologists who, candidly, look at
slides all day, or lab results all day, and are being asked to
figure out whether or not that slide has an allergy or whether
it smokes. And that doesn't make a whole lot of sense, does it?
Mr. MILLER. To the extent that I understand what
conversation I am in the middle of, no.
Mr. PRICE. Well, all right.
[Laughter.]
Maybe I could ask MedPAC to take a look at that, because
this is resources that are being utilized and caring for
Medicare patients in a way that, frankly, doesn't make a whole
lot of sense for either the patients or the physicians that----
Mr. MILLER. And the question is whether there should be
differential requirements across specialties on the EHR----
Mr. PRICE. Exactly.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. Meaningful----
Mr. PRICE. Exactly.
Mr. MILLER. I can take that question back.
Mr. PRICE. Let me come to something that you have been
pushing on for a long time, and that site-neutral payments in
the surgical setting. Obviously, ambulatory surgery centers,
you mention that we ought to be looking for the lowest cost and
the highest quality. And ASCs often times provide the highest
quality at the lowest cost, and you have been a champion on
that.
I want to touch on the site-neutral payments that you have
mentioned here in this report on SNFs and IRFs, skilled nursing
facilities and in-patient rehab facilities. And I am curious as
to whether or not CMS has given you any feedback on your
recommendation.
Mr. MILLER. And we have not made a recommendation yet. We
are exploring this. We have just entered this particular area.
They are aware that we are working on it. I don't think I have
gotten feedback as in, ``Way to go,'' or, ``Stop what you are
doing,'' nothing like that.
Mr. PRICE. Can you imagine any reason why CMS ought not be
supportive of site-neutral payments for various facilities
providing similar care to patients, regardless of that site?
Mr. MILLER. Oh, and I didn't mean to imply that they were
broadly hostile to this at all. I was thinking very narrowly
about the in-patient--or, sorry, the rehab and the skilled
nursing facility. I haven't gotten a lot of feedback on that.
I think there is a sense and an understanding at CMS that
this is an issue. I think there are some differences about how
they would go about it, but I don't think they are ignoring it.
Let's put it that way.
Mr. PRICE. I think it is a healthy discussion to have, and
I think we are actually having some admission on the part of
CMS that, again, that one-size-fits-all doesn't actually work.
I want to also commend MedPAC for the work that you are
recommending, or the discussion that you are having around
quality measures. Those of us who have been physicians and
practice clearly understand that one patient and another
patient, even though they have exactly the same diagnosis, the
quality treatment for each of those patients may be
significantly different. Is that not true?
Mr. MILLER. Agreed. And we are trying to not only get a
more consistent set of quality measures, there is a very strong
motivation on the part of the Commission to relieve the burden
on the provider.
Mr. PRICE. And to that end, wouldn't it be most--do you
think it would be helpful to have the quality measures be
determined primarily by those folks actually providing the car,
the specialty societies, and not have them be a--the kind of
duplicative and often times contradictory measures that we
currently have in place?
Mr. MILLER. Well, this was going too well to last, and so
here we are.
[Laughter.]
I think the Commission has great concern that the quality
measures, if they are determined entirely by the specialty
societies--there is two concerns. Number one, that it creates
and reinforces silo types of approaches to care: ``Here is my
set of metrics for the thing I did,'' as opposed to what was
the general outcome for the patient throughout the entire
episode; and I think the second concern that the Commissions
have--and this is with all respect, but the specialty societies
all say it about each other--some of them have rigorous
standards, some of them less so.
Mr. PRICE. And my time has run out, but I look forward to
having--maybe we can get another round, Mr. Chairman, as we
move forward. Thank you.
Mr. MILLER. And, if not, we are happy to get on the phone
and talk to you about this, as always.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding this
hearing.
Mr. Miller, thank you for your testimony today, and for the
work MedPAC does. I wasn't going to ask you this in my question
period, but since Dr. Price raised it, I have teamed up with
him in regards to the whole meaningful use with certain
specialties, especially as it relates to pathologists. So maybe
we can follow up with you in regards to legislation that we
specifically introduced to try to get MedPAC's response to it,
as well as a letter that we are doing to CMS to try to
highlight this issue. There have been some extensions, we are
not sure if there is going to be another extension in the
future. But, nevertheless, it would be nice to get MedPAC's
incentive on it.
You know, in past MedPAC reports to this hearing, I have
been not so much critical, but impatient with MedPAC's
recommendations in regards to payment reform. So I want to ask
you yet here today--I mean there are a lot of tools out there,
a lot of different payment models that are moving forward, a
lot of experimentation taking place. But from MedPAC's
perspective, where can we be accelerating this payment from
fee-for-service to a quality or value-based reimbursement
system?
Where are there some very promising initial results coming
back that is showing us that we can get much better quality of
care, but also at a much better price?
I think--I forgot who it was, Dr. McDermott or someone just
cited the Commonwealth study that just came out this week,
showing that we are still, by far, spending way too much per
beneficiary in health care, as an entire system. And often
times, getting worse results compared to most of the other
developed countries around the world.
And I think part of this is being driven by this archaic
payment system that rewards volume over value. And I know
MedPAC has had recommendations in the past. But right now,
from, you know, where you see us today, where do you think we
can be pushing more aggressively to get to a value or outcome-
based reimbursement system?
Mr. MILLER. Okay. That is a pretty--you know, broad and
complicated. But I would say a few things.
I think, you know, we are going to be living with fee-for-
service for some period of time and, you know, perhaps forever.
And I am not sure that that is a bad thing, because fee for
service can be efficient and high quality in some parts of the
country. But I think there are pursuits inside fee for service
that can produce better quality results. Here is one.
The re-admissions penalty, which is, again, not a popular
idea, but it is--it looks like re-admissions are falling, and
people are paying a lot more--hospitals are paying a lot more
attention to it.
On more of a systems-wide basis, you know, the ACO concept
is still a concept, still entirely unproven, but we have been
talking a lot to accountable care organizations on what is
going on out there, and decidedly--at least for some of them--
it changes the underlying dynamic. You know, generating
services is working against you. And as long as the quality
standards are clear and present, they move more in that
direction.
And I think another area that we are talking about in this
report is the notion of population-based quality measures. So
get out--and I know there is some conflict over here--but get
above the individual process-based, ``I did this particular
thing,'' and say, ``Is this population avoiding admissions that
are unnecessary? Are they staying out of the emergency room?
Are they not being re-admitted?''
A concept that we are only breaking ground on is the notion
of can we count how many healthy days they have at home. That
is what everybody wants. Can we start to construct measures
that say, ``This is really where you want to be?''
And then, finally, I think, you know, bringing both the
beneficiary and the provider into the--we, MedPAC, I think the
Congress in general, have spent a lot of time on trying to
design payment systems and measurement systems to incent the
provider, but also bring the beneficiary into that process too,
so that you have both actors at the point of contact involved.
Mr. KIND. And that is--I would love to be able to follow up
with you and see what we can explore and move forward on.
But one other thing before my time expires. Obviously, we
had the CMS data dump on physician reimbursements recently.
And, yes, it does provide a glimpse, but it was an incomplete
picture, because it also didn't explain what results were
happening, what the protocols of care--and I also discovered
during that that you have multiple doctors using the same
billing number. I mean, does that make sense? Don't we want to
dis-aggregate that information if we want to really drill down
to find out where the reimbursements are going, and if there is
perhaps some over-utilization occurring?
Mr. MILLER. Yes. I think the ability--I mean there are 10
tax identification numbers, and then there are individual
provider numbers. And I think it probably makes a lot more
sense to be able to track through to the individual provider,
because if there is a particular provider who is ordering a
bunch of services that are really out of synch with general
accepted practice, it is hard to get at that if you can't get
to the individual.
Mr. KIND. All right, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Smith, you are recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Miller, thank you for joining us here today. Medicare
Part D, we are learning that there is cost savings, that costs
are less than originally projected. Can you speak briefly to
that, and how and why you have seen that take place?
Mr. MILLER. I think probably the single most important
reason that that is the case is that there was a fairly heavy
move to the use of generic drugs that was driven inside the
Part D program that may have resulted in the expenditures that
were less than what was being projected when the program was
implemented. But if there was one thing to point to, I think it
is probably that.
Mr. SMITH. And how about the penalty that is--rather than
mandating seniors have Medicare Part D, there is a provision
that is a penalty if they don't sign up during the open
enrollment period.
Mr. MILLER. Which is pretty true throughout Medicare. If
you don't sign up for Part B, it is kind of the same----
Mr. SMITH. Right, but there is no individual mandate, if
you will. Correct?
Mr. MILLER. There is no individual mandate. That is
correct.
Mr. SMITH. And can you speak to the effectiveness of that
provision?
Mr. MILLER. In lowering cost?
Mr. SMITH. Well, not necessarily just in lowering costs,
but in incenting individuals to sign up.
Mr. MILLER. Well, I think the existence of a penalty
probably focuses the attention of the beneficiary, if that is
what you mean. And I think it was put into Part D and into Part
B because of the concern about selection. If you don't move
broad ranges of the population into these programs, what you
get is the sickest, and then the premiums become unsustainable
over time, and the program collapses--in the extreme. It is
death spiral in the--you know, kind of the actuarial terms.
So, those things are created to draw the beneficiary or
whoever the person is, his attention to purchase the insurance,
so that you get a relatively broad representation of risk.
Mr. SMITH. Very well. I thank----
Mr. MILLER. Is that what you are asking?
Mr. SMITH. Yes. Thank you very much.
Mr. MILLER. Okay.
Mr. SMITH. I yield the balance of my time to Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Oh, thank you. Thank you very much. I was--I am
sorry Mr. Kind left, because I was remiss in not thanking him
for his assistance on this issue of some specialties,
especially pathologists, and the meaningful use in electronic
medical records.
And you did make a comment to--in response from Mr. Kind,
though. You said that re-admissions were falling. Have you
looked at the change in observation status in hospitals?
Mr. MILLER. Observation status has been increasing. We have
looked at the relationship between those two. We don't think
that that is driving the impact that we are seeing on
admissions. But we are looking at observations. We do think
that there are some real issues there. We are looking at the
to-midnight rule, which I think has been a subject of some
conversation.
I am not in a position to give you, you know, data and
analysis, although I may have some fact points. But the
Commission--the staff right now--I haven't rolled it out in
front of the Commission--is looking at an alternative approach
that would change--I don't want to get too deep here--the in-
patient payment system to make it more clear when a person is
in-patient, and to pay on a more rational basis, so that there
is not as much need for this observation spike----
Mr. PRICE. I think that would be extremely helpful, because
all you have to do is go to an emergency room and you ask them
where their observation beds, and they have increased--well,
now that we have observation beds. The only reason for that is
because of a payment system that we have put in place, as you
know.
I want----
Mr. MILLER. This fall we will have some of this information
out in our public meetings, and you and your staff can start
paying attention.
Mr. PRICE. Great. I would like to touch on the
recommendation or the comment that you made in the report about
paying--using a per-beneficiary payment. Some people have
called that capitated payment system. How does what you
envision to be appropriate differ from what some folks call
concierge medicine, or personalized medicine? How does the
paying a primary care physician or a medical home physician
differ from what you are envisioning?
Mr. MILLER. Well, I----
Mr. PRICE. Or does it?
Mr. MILLER. Well, I think I see the linkage that you are
making.
The--I think the first distinction--and maybe it is the
only one I can think of off the top of my head--is that what a
concierge payment usually gets you is exclusive access to a
physician. And generally, physicians use it to lower their
panel counts, and then focus more attention on an individual
patient.
This wouldn't have any exclusivity to it. The payment would
be attached to the provider on the basis of a preponderance of
contact with a patient. And we would say, ``Okay, you seem to
be seeing this patient for their primary care. Here is a block
of dollars for you to coordinate and, you know, have non-face-
to-face service with that beneficiary.'' That portion does
sound like the concierge type of experience. The exclusivity, I
think, would be a difference, though.
Mr. PRICE. Maybe we can take a peek at that.
Mr. MILLER. Yes, absolutely.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you. Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, thank you. This year's June
MedPAC, Director Miller, reaffirmed--in my mind, anyway--that
we don't have to scrap the current system in order to save
Medicare. I think it is conclusive evidence to that effect.
We are talking today about strengthening Medicare. The
Affordable Care Act is already hard at work actually testing
the new payment system and the delivery system. That will lead
to innovation, not only for Medicare, but everybody in the
entire health care system.
The point I would like to make is that health care reform
is already moving Medicare, I think, in a new direction. That
is my estimation of what is going on. And we should always be
open to new ideas. There is no two ways about that. But I think
my colleagues need to take a look at the work happening today
that is making and moving Medicare towards paying for the
quality of services, not necessarily the quantity of services,
for our seniors.
Here is my first question to you. Health care, to me--
health care reform is entitlement reform. Not only did the
Affordable Care Act reduce costs for Medicare, it also reduced
costs for beneficiaries. Mr. Miller, can you discuss the ways
in which the Affordable Care Act has helped the solvency of
Medicare?
Mr. MILLER. Well, I mean, I think a couple of things. The
changes in the basic payment rates for the fee-for-service
providers that were restrained as part of the ACA meant that
there would be lower spending for that reason. So, you know,
the reductions in the market basket, I think, you know, might
be a way to talk about that vocabulary.
I think a second reason is the reduction in the managed
care payments, which the Commission did a lot of work
demonstrating that we were basically subsidizing and paying
more than we needed to to get that benefit. And I think that
lowered expenditures.
What I think the jury is still out on is, for example, take
ACOs. You now have five million people in ACOs. So decidedly,
there is change occurring. There results are mixed, which,
actually, I think everybody expected them to be.
Mr. PASCRELL. Right.
Mr. MILLER. So the ACOs are actually saving money. There
seems to be increases in quality, pretty broadly, but some are
saving money, some are not.
Mr. PASCRELL. Before we get into out-of-pocket expenses--I
am very concerned about that--you don't disagree that the life
of Medicare has been extended about eight years because of the
ACA?
Mr. MILLER. Well, I am not sure I have walked through that
thinking for myself. I know the trust fund is extended. There
is lower expenditures in Medicare rates right now. That is
extending the life of the trust fund. There is big discussions
about how much of that is secular and how much of that is ACA.
But to your question, the things I pointed to did reduce
Medicare's spend.
Mr. PASCRELL. The average Medicare beneficiary has an
average annual income of less than $23,000. I am concerned that
if it doesn't provide adequate financial assistance for lower
income beneficiaries, benefit redesign puts these beneficiaries
in a very, very vulnerable financial situation. And they may--
it may discourage them from assessing--accessing the care they
need because of the cost. I am very concerned about that.
We discussed this when putting the bill together. While the
intention of setting an out-of-pocket maximum is to protect
beneficiaries from high out-of-pocket spending, it would only
be effective for those who have the financial means to reach
that threshold. When MedPAC proposed Medicare benefit redesign
back in 2012, which was also referenced in the most current
report in June, does MedPAC envision redesigning the benefit
for the purposes of achieving cost savings of the program? Is
that the reason why you have suggested that?
Mr. MILLER. No, but I am going to parse my way through this
answer carefully.
The benefit redesign portion of our proposal is
explicitly--and we say this very clearly--designed not to
increase the aggregate liability for the beneficiaries. We all
understand the distribution----
Mr. PASCRELL. Right.
Mr. MILLER [continuing]. Can change, but the aggregate
liability.
However, we have said that the first dollar coverage should
have an additional charge to it. And our hope is that people
see that they don't need it, and then they drop the first
dollar coverage, and that frees up more resources for them. But
if they choose to hold on to it, then they would pay more for
that product.
Mr. PASCRELL. Right, because, Mr. Chairman, we have talked
about this several times about out of pocket. So we need some
kind of a balance here so that, you know, we don't cut off our
noses to spite our faces.
Chairman BRADY. Let's see if we can find that common ground
as we go forward.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you.
Chairman BRADY. Which is why the recommendations are, I
think, helpful in this discussion. So thank you.
Mrs. Black.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate your
allowing me to be sitting in on this Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Miller, for being here today. This is such
an important subject matter, and we need to continue to make
sure we are discussing it. In your June report you discuss the
quality in fee for service and in the Medicare Advantage
program, and I would like to discuss just a few concerns about
how the quality is measured in Medicare Advantage, especially
among that dual eligible population.
I don't have to tell you, you know that dual eligibles only
account for about 19 percent of Medicare beneficiaries, but
they account for about 34 percent of all the Medicare spending.
So this is an important population. And having been a nurse for
over 40 years, and having worked with this population, I
certainly recognize that they are the most vulnerable, they
have the highest rates of chronic illness, of disability,
mental illness, and frailty than the rest of the Medicare or
the Medicaid populations. And this means that Medicare
Advantage will play a critical part in getting those services
that they so critically need, and the larger services in
coordinated care and benefits to access those services that
beneficiaries most in need of, and especially in care
management, in managing their care, since they have so many
issues.
Would you agree that we need to take into account these
fragile populations when we make comparisons across the fee-
for-service and the accountable care organizations with
Medicare Advantage plans to make sure that we are really
comparing apples to apples in both our costs and our quality.
And then, if so, I would like for you to speak to how you
think we might be able to do that.
Mr. MILLER. Okay. So let me take this through a couple of
steps here.
So, the plans in managed care that take a lot of dual
eligibles, the special needs plans, are--take a lot of these
populations, although these populations are throughout the plan
types.
What we have done is we have looked at the risk adjustment
system. And a way to think about it is, if this is your
distribution of your population--expensive people, not
expensive people--the risk adjustment system overpays a bit for
not expensive, underpays for expensive people. And then, if
you, as a managed care plan, kind of go after this end of the
distribution, you could be potentially disadvantaged.
We made three recommendations recently in which we said,
``If you make these technical changes''--and I will take you
through them, if you really want to glaze over--but, ``If you
make these three changes, it will move a little bit more to
this balance.'' So we think that that is a way to approach
these kinds of payments and quality measurement in a way that
is a bit more equitable.
Now, as everything in health care, things get a little bit
complicated. When you look at these plans' financial
performance, they aren't really on a profit basis. That
disadvantage--I mean, in some cases, have the highest profits
relative to other plans. And so, you know, what we think should
happen here is that there should be a common suite of
measurements across any plan type, so that the beneficiary can
look at it and say, ``This plan does well, this plan doesn't do
well,'' whatever the--or fee-for-service, whatever the case may
be.
I have talked to these plans many, many times, and they
say, ``You know, the way you do it in''--or, ``The way Medicare
does it in managed care, it is not fair to us.'' And I say to
them, ``What measures would you add to this suite that capture
your line of business better than is happening now?'' And I
have to say they have not come forward with those measures.
And so, I see your point. I--we have made these
recommendations for the risk adjustment. We think if there are
measures that this portion of the industry can come forward and
say, ``This is really what we are about,'' the Commission's
view is let's evaluate them and make them part of the
measurement process. But, to date, there hasn't been a lot
forthcoming.
Mrs. BLACK. Do you have any research that you are currently
doing, or plan to do, in being able to put forward some
measures that you think would be applicable?
Mr. MILLER. See, we are a very small operation. There is 30
of us at the--on staff anyway, and we don't really view
ourselves as the people who create the measures. We try and
draw them from the environment, evaluate them, point them out,
and say, ``Here is a good set of work that is occurring.'' We
can try and put effort into that.
But to date, no, we have not come up with a set of measures
that at least those special needs plans would say, ``Yes, that
is the set-up measures.'' We have talked to them a bit about
them, but we haven't gotten a lot of traction.
Mrs. BLACK. I was just curious, because there are certainly
areas such as the chronic illness, and the disability, and the
mental illness that set a stage for saying, ``Here are the
disease processes that are going to cost more,'' as to whether
you have actually seen any measures out there that you think
would be applicable for what is already there.
Mr. MILLER. Now, to those types of things, at least, our
risk adjustment recommendations should address some of that.
So, if--one of the measures is basically a chronic condition
count. And when you enter that into the model, it makes this
risk adjustment system more balanced.
So, to the extent that those are conditions that are
present, we have made recommendations, and we have done
research. I thought you were asking more about this is an
activity that we are engaged in, and we should be measured on
this activity. That is where we haven't brought new information
to the conversation.
Mrs. BLACK. I think it is both areas.
Mr. MILLER. I agree with you. And one we have standing
ideas. One we are trying to work with the industry to identify
them.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BRADY. Thank you, Mrs. Black, for joining us. If
anyone thinks this is a check-the-box hearing, they are wrong--
MedPAC does a report, we hold a hearing, that is it. Truth is,
this Committee has spent, as you would imagine, a lot of time
on the rollout of the Affordable Care Act, and spent a lot of
good time, and I think a fairly historic agreement on how we
fix permanently how we reimburse our doctors in Medicare.
Now we are turning to how do we improve the Medicare
program. There is a lot of challenges to it, there is a lot of
opportunities. And it is my hope that we will build on some of
the recommendations, adjust them, and, on a bipartisan basis,
find a way to improve Medicare for our seniors.
As a reminder, any Member wishing to submit a question for
the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, Mr. Miller, I ask that the witness respond in a
timely manner. And I thank you for your testimony on behalf of
MedPAC here today, and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
