- WHAT WORKERS NEED TO KNOW ABOUT SOCIAL SECURITY AS THEY PLAN FOR THEIR RETIREMENT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHAT WORKERS NEED TO KNOW ABOUT

SOCIAL SECURITY AS THEY PLAN

FOR THEIR RETIREMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 29, 2014

__________

Serial 113-SS11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

92-445                       WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM McDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, Jr., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, Jr., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              XAVIER BECERRA, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio                    MIKE THOMPSON, California
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
KEVIN BRADY, Texas

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of July 29, 2014 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Charles P. Blahous III, Ph.D., Public Trustee, Social Security
and Medicare Boards of Trustees, Testimony.....................    14
Sylvester J. Schieber, Ph.D., Independent Consultant, Testimony..    24
C. Eugene Steuerle, Ph.D., Institute Fellow and Richard B.
Fischer Chair, Urban Institute, Testimony......................    53
Joan Entmacher, Vice President for Family Economic Security,
National Women's Law Center, Testimony.........................    65
Andrew G. Biggs, Ph.D., Resident Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute, Testimony...........................................    76
Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Ph.D., William Fairfield Warren Professor,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, Testimony............    89

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Charles P. Blahous III, Ph.D.....................................   123
Sylvester J. Schieber, Ph.D......................................   129
C. Eugene Steuerle, Ph.D.........................................   132
Andrew G. Biggs, Ph.D............................................   135

PUBLIC SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

Financial Planning Association...................................   138

[[Page (1)]]

WHAT WORKERS NEED TO KNOW ABOUT

SOCIAL SECURITY AS THEY PLAN

FOR THEIR RETIREMENT

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 29, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Social Security
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Sam
Johnson [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

[[Page 2]]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

Chairman Johnson Announces Hearing on

What Workers Need to Know About

Social Security as They Plan

for Their Retirement

B-318 Rayburn House Office Building at 11:00 AM

Washington, July 22, 2014

U.S. Congressman Sam Johnson (R-TX), Chairman of the House
Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Social Security announced
today that the Subcommittee will hold an oversight hearing on what
workers need to know about Social Security as they plan for their
retirement. The hearing will take place on Tuesday, July 29, 2014 in B-
318 Rayburn House Office Building, beginning at 11:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

After paying payroll taxes throughout their lifetimes, workers and
their families count on the essential income replacement Social
Security provides should they retire, become disabled, or die. Nine out
of ten seniors age 65 and older receive Social Security benefits, which
are a major source of income for most seniors.

Future retirees face far more questions than answers, as according
to last year's Annual Report of the Social Security Board of Trustees,
unless Congress acts, revenues will cover only 77 percent of scheduled
benefits beginning in 2033. Worse, revenues will cover only 80 percent
of disability benefits beginning in 2016. These findings will soon be
updated in the 2014 Annual Report.

Social Security is central to retirement security, yet Social
Security's complex benefit formula is often confusing to workers and
their spouses. Lifetime benefit amounts can vary based on income,
marital status, and life expectancy, as well as when an individual
claims benefits, making it difficult for individuals to know when they
should retire and the benefit amount they will receive. In addition to
general information on its website, the Social Security Administration
makes available online and periodically mails the Social Security
Statement with estimated future benefits and also provides a Retirement
Estimator on its website to allow users to estimate their benefit
amounts. Even with these tools, few workers know the amount of benefits
they can expect to receive from Social Security.

Further, as workers plan for their retirement security, they should
also consider any employer pension they may receive, along with other
assets they may accumulate, such as IRAs. Understanding the portion of
retirement income Social Security represents is also important for
policymakers as they weigh options to strengthen Social Security. It is
an increasing challenge to comprehensively measure retirement income,
since the amount of monthly income derived from retirement accounts,
such as 401(k)s and IRAs, can vary widely and is often underreported.

In announcing the hearing, Social Security Subcommittee Chairman
Sam Johnson (R-TX) stated,``Hardworking Americans are increasingly
facing real challenges in being able to achieve a secure retirement.
Not only will Social Security be unable to pay full benefits in 2033
unless Congress acts, but the

[[Page 3]]

rules are so complex that workers need help in figuring out their
benefits. Americans want, need, and deserve a Social Security program
they can count on and understand.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the financial status of Social Security
programs, the factors influencing the benefits paid, the status of
Americans' retirement readiness and how workers can be helped to better
plan for their retirement.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov/, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Tuesday, August 12, 2014.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman JOHNSON. Well, good morning and welcome. Yesterday
the Social Security Board of Trustees, folks who provide us

[[Page 4]]

with results of Social Security's annual financial check-up,
again sounded the alarm over the Social Security financial
health.
Unless Congress does its job, full benefits can't be paid
on time beginning in just two years for those receiving
disability benefits. Further, when today's 48 year-old workers
reach their full retirement age in 2033, they and everyone else
receiving retirement and survivor benefits will see a 23% cut.
Today, 9 out of 10 seniors, age 65 and older receive Social
Security benefits, which is a major source of income for most
seniors.
Since I've been Chairman, I've been committed to making
sure that Social Security will be there, not just for today's
seniors, but for their children and grandchildren. The price of
delay gets higher every year, so the sooner we act the better.
As public trustees informed us yesterday, the changes
needed today are bigger than what Congress passed in 1983. It
is no wonder that young people don't believe they will ever
receive benefits.
A recent survey by Transamerica Center for Retirement
Studies survey found that 81% of those between the ages of 18
and 34 today don't believe Social Security will exist when it
comes time for them to retire.
As a result, these young people expect most of their
retirement to be self-funded, resulting in 70% of them already
saving for retirement. With the retirement of the baby boomers,
the decline in traditional pensions, stagnant wages that make
it even harder for Americans to save and Social Security
impending inability to pay full benefits, Americans face a
challenging retirement security landscape.
Bottom line, Americans want, need, and deserve a Social
Security program they can count on. But just as important, a
program they can understand.
For instance, older workers getting ready to retire are
trying to determine when they should retire, and what benefits
they should apply for, yet deciding when to take Social
Security benefits isn't just a question of how old you are.
Workers have to answer questions like ``How long am I going to
live? Do I want to keep working? How much will my spouse
receive from Social Security?''
As we will hear today, taking benefits at the wrong time
can cost thousands of dollars. While Social Security has some
tools to help, sometimes these tools aren't all that helpful.
So what happens when well-meaning programs become so complex
that Americans need paid help to figure out what their benefits
are? Americans pay.
In the disability program many pay lawyers to help them
receive disability benefits, while others pay financial
planners to help them figure out retirement benefits. Worse,
those who can't afford the help pay with fewer or lower
benefits than they deserve. And that is just wrong. There has
to be a better way.
Today's hearing isn't just about ensuring that Social
Security will be there for current and future generations, but
starting a much needed conversation about what workers need to
know about Social Security as they plan for their retirement.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and I look forward to hearing your testimony. And I now
recognize ranking member, Mr. Becerra for his opening
statement.

[[Page 5]]

Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, before I begin my opening
statement, I want to again, register my concern that we will be
discussing the Social Security Trustees report which was
released yesterday without hearing from the author of and the
foremost expert on that report. That's the Social Security
Chief Actuary, Stephen Goss. I would like to insert into the
record the letter that I sent to you registering the Democrats'
concern that Chief Actuary Goss was not invited to testify at
our hearing to provide a neutral, nonpartisan explanation of
the facts before we are presented with partisan policy
recommendations. I'd like to submit that into the record Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. You could have invited him. You know.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, we had one witness out of five
or six----
Chairman JOHNSON [continuing]. You could have invited him--
--
Mr. BECERRA [continuing]. And we chose to invite someone as
well an official witness is usually invited.
Chairman JOHNSON. Does anybody object to having it put in
the record? Okay.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For most Americans
Mr. Chairman, Social Security is the heart of retirement
security. Six out of ten seniors rely on Social Security for
more than half of their income. For almost half of Americans
over 80, nearly all of their income comes from Social Security.
Without Social Security nearly half of women over the age of 65
would be poor. Americans have earned that vital retirement
security. Over 160,000,000 Americans today pay into Social
Security with their paycheck tax contributions every week in
exchange for economic security for themselves and their
families.
Over its lifetime, Social Security has raised through those
tax contributions 17.2 trillion dollars and paid out 14.4
trillion dollars; thereby, accumulating a surplus of 2.8
trillion dollars for future benefit payments.
Now, only the highest income earners, 25% of retirees,
receive any significant income from something other than Social
Security, like an IRA or work-based retirement plan. And that's
even despite the substantial subsidies that are provided for
retirement savings through the Tax Code.
So, Mr. Chairman, the best way for Congress to improve
retirement security for all Americans is by protecting Social
Security from benefit cuts and making sure it is as strong for
future generations as it was for their parents and
grandparents.
I am deeply concerned about the proposal several of our
witnesses have put forth to cut Social Security's annual cost
of living adjustments for current seniors. The so called
chained CPI would result in deep benefit cuts for those who
need them the most.
I also disagree with the proposals four of our witnesses
have made in the past to privatize Social Security, cutting its
guaranteed benefits.
Mr. Chairman, I know I've said this before, in fact I said
it at our hearing on the Social Security Trustees report back
on June of 2011. The biggest challenge facing Social Security
right now is Republican budget cuts in the House of
Representatives.

[[Page 8]]

At our hearing in 2011, I and other Democrats on the
subcommittee asked you to hold hearings to find out how
Americans were affected by a $622,000,000 cut to the Social
Security Administration's budget.
We never had that hearing, even though prior to 2011, our
committee had a bipartisan tradition of holding oversight
hearings on SSA's budget and its ability to serve the American
public. The cuts continued.
Since the beginning of 2011 the number of Americans
receiving Social Security has actually grown by almost 4
million people, but the Social Security Administration budget
is still lower today than it was four years ago in 2010.
We now know some of the ways the cuts are affecting
Americans who rely on Social Security. Social Security has lost
11,000 employees as a result of these cuts, almost 15% of its
workforce. Some local Social Security offices are operating
with staff shortages of more than 25%.
Budget cuts forced Social Security to reduce the number of
hours their offices are open to the public by one fifth,
including closing offices completely on Wednesday afternoons.
Disabled workers today are waiting longer and longer to
receive their earned benefits. 14% of Americans who try to call
Social Security's 800 number get a busy signal and those who
get through are usually put on hold. Seniors who need help are
waiting in long lines that stretch out the door of the Social
Security office sometimes in the heat or icy cold.
Mr. Chairman, I again urge you to schedule a hearing on the
Social Security Administration's budget so that we can examine
these budget cuts and make sure Social Security can continue
its long tradition of providing Americans with the services
they paid for.
Let me enter into the record Mr. Chairman, a letter that
the Democrats on the subcommittee sent to you today,
reiterating our concerns, and requesting that we act now before
the situation gets worse.
The best thing that we can do if we do really care about
Social Security and we care about those Americans who have
contributed every month through their paychecks a tax
contribution to the Social Security system, is to make sure we
don't undermine the ability of the Social Security
Administration to dispense the services these Americans have
paid for.
The money is there. We have challenges policy-wise to
Social Security that are long term. Today we face operating
budget deficits in the billions, but Social Security has a
surplus in the trillions.
And so, we have an opportunity to work together
bipartisanly to try to resolve these issues. But, Mr. Chairman,
I urge you and I submit this letter to the record that again
urges this subcommittee to do its oversight responsibility
under the Constitution. To hold the hearing on the SSA's budget
so we don't find ourselves falling into situations where Social
Security fails to provides the benefits that it always has, on
time and in full.
With that Mr. Chairman, I request Mr. Chairman to submit
this letter into the record. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman JOHNSON. Are there any objections? There's none.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. You know on the issue of Social Security
Administration needing more money, I'd like to make two points.
One, in the last decade, Social Security received a 34%
increase in budget since GOP control. And all but one budget
has been bipartisan and all were signed by President Obama,
your president. Just last----
Mr. BECERRA. Our President. Our President.
Chairman JOHNSON [continuing]. Just last week we learned
Social Security spent $300,000,000 on failed implementation of
a new computer system for the State Disability Determination
Services. That's $300,000,000 that was wasted. We need to watch
out for----
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman----
Chairman JOHNSON [continuing]. That, too
Mr. BECERRA. I'm intrigued, query. I understand the
Chairman has a prerogative to make additional remarks. We are
working outside the regular order. I just want to make sure
that if the Chairman is going to make some remarks, we have an
opportunity to have an opportunity do the same as well.
Chairman has always been gracious in allowing that, I just want
to point that out.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, as is customary any member is
welcome to submit a statement for the hearing record and as we
move to testimony today, I want to remind our witnesses to
please limit

[[Page 11]]

your oral statements to five minutes. However, without
objections all the written testimony will be made a part of the
hearing record.
We have one witness panel today, and seated at the table
are: Charles P. Blahous, III, Ph.D., he is a public trustee,
Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees. Welcome
aboard.
Sylvester Schieber, independent consultant.
C. Eugene Steuerle, Ph.D., Institute Fellow and Richard B.
Fischer Chair, Urban Institute.
Joan Entmacher, is that correct? Vice President, Family
Economic Security, National Women's Law Center.
Andrew G. Biggs, Ph.D., Resident Scholar, American
Enterprise Institute.
And Laurence J. Kotlikoff, is that correct? Ph.D., William
Fairfield Warren Professor, Boston University, Boston
Massachusetts.
Welcome and thank you all for being here.
Dr. Blahous, please go ahead with your testimony.
Mr. BLAHOUS. Thank you Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
and all the Members of the Subcommittee. It's a great honor to
appear before you today again to discuss the recently released
projections of the Trustees and the implications for workers'
retirement planning.----
Chairman JOHNSON. Turn on your microphone.
Mr. BLAHOUS. The light says it's on,
*The CLERK. It was on, just bring it closer.
Mr. BLAHOUS. Okay.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES P. BLAHOUS, III, Ph.D., PUBLIC TRUSTEE,
SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE BOARDS OF TRUSTEES

Mr. BLAHOUS. With your permission, my written testimony has
a longer analysis, but I'd like to use my oral remarks to
simply make four quick points.
The first point is simply that Social Security faces a
substantial financing shortfall and as of yesterday we
reconfirmed that part of that shortfall has become an immediate
problem.
In our latest projections released yesterday we projected
that the Disability Insurance Trust Fund will be depleted in
the 4th quarter of 2016. What is important to remember about
that is that this is not an indication that we only have a
problem on the Disability side. In fact what we found was that
the long term shortfall in the Old Age and Survivors Insurance
Trust Fund is actually larger than it is on the Disability
side.
The reason it is showing up first on the Disability side is
primarily, not solely, but primarily, because the baby boomers
move through their ages of peak disability incidence before
they hit retirement age.
So rather than interpreting this as a problem that is
solely confined to DI I would urge the interpretation that it
is basically the first manifestation, the first element of
financial crisis associated with problems that are afflicting
the program as a whole.
The second point I would make is that uncertainty as to how
the shortfall is going to be resolved is a threat to workers'
retirement security for a number of reasons. One is that as
long as workers

[[Page 12]]

don't know how we are going to resolve it, the means of
resolution is unknown, workers can't make their plans, they
don't know what is going to be required in terms of additional
tax contributions, they don't know what their benefits are
going to be. And also, the longer we delay, the larger the
relative sacrifice that we require from each birth cohort,
because we have fewer birth cohorts that can contribute to the
solution.
Another very important factor in my judgment is that the
closer we come to say, 2033, the greater the uncertainty
becomes that we are going to be able to repair the shortfall at
all within the historical financing structure of Social
Security.
Just for purposes of illustration, consider that if we
wanted do a solution today, and we wanted to not raise taxes
and we wanted not to cut benefits for people now in retirement,
we'd have to, reduce the benefits of people newly coming onto
the rolls by 21%. But if we wanted to employ that same strategy
in 2033, even cutting off the entirety of their benefits would
not solve the problem then.
So clearly, by 2033, our opportunity has long passed. And
there's a point between now and then that our opportunity to
close the shortfall within the historical financing structure
disappears. And that's a problem, because if we can't maintain
Social Security finances under the historical financing
structure, then we'd have to find a different means of doing it
and programs financed for example from the General Fund tend to
be more changeable than Social Security, they tend to be more
subject to sudden eligibility changes, benefit changes, means
tests, that sort of things, things that Social Security has
generally escaped in the past.
The third point I'd make is that the costs of Social
Security are rising faster than our economic output. That
wouldn't be a problem if it reflected a greater national
capacity to finance these benefits. But because Social Security
is not a savings program but rather an income transfer program,
basically, any benefit gains that come to one group have to
come at the cost of a different group, at least from a
financial perspective. So what is happening is we're increasing
our commitments to paying higher benefits without increasing
our national capacity to finance them. And that's an issue.
The final point I would make, Mr. Chairman, is that this
may seem paradoxical, but there certain ways in which we could
actually enhance retirement security by slowing the growth of
costs. You have to remember that retirement security is not
only a function of annual income and assets, but is also a
function of the number of years over which you have to stretch
your retirement resources.
And there is a lot of evidence that the current design of
Social Security is causing people to withdraw prematurely from
the workforce and run greater risk of outliving their savings.
If we could possibly repair some of the inducements and
incentives in the course of slowing the growth of costs, we
could simultaneously put the program on a sounder financial
footing and increase retirement security at the same time.
We also have a problem in the sense that the rising cost of
financing the current benefit formula is depressing the
relationship between workers' pre-retirement earnings and their
post-retirement benefits, and that is an issue as well.

[[Page 13]]

That is particularly an issue for low income people because
you have many people who are in the situation now where they
actually expect better standards of living in retirement than
they have as workers. And this has terrible implications for
their ability to put aside savings, their labor force
attachment and other problems. We see the results of that in
the paucity of savings that a lot of groups have outside of
Social Security.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the financing shortfall facing
Social Security, creates substantial income risks for Americans
who are planning for retirement. We can minimize this risk by
enacting financing reforms that preserve historical financing
structure or reducing cost growth to rates that can be financed
within a stable tax rate. Retirement income security would also
be enhanced by reforms that increase labor force attachment and
remove disincentives to saving.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blahous follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Dr. Schieber, welcome. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF SYLVESTER J. SCHIEBER, INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT

Mr. SCHIEBER. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Becerra. Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today. In the
opening section of my submitted testimony, I discussed the
major ap

[[Page 22]]

proaches to assessing how workers are doing in the retirement
preparations. Life cycle and similar models are good tools to
facilitate policy makers' and analysts' understanding of how
the retirement system is working, but beyond the grasp or the
interest of most workers.
Plan sponsors and administrators who are at the nexus of
workers' retirement savings will generally depend on earnings
replacement rate models for plan design and communications for
broad participant population, because broad rule of thumb
direction is often the best that can be offered to the large
group of workers participating in these plans.
Indeed, the Social Security Administration introduces its
own retirement planner on its official website, discussing
retirement planning in terms of target earning replacement
rates. In the early 20th Century, plan sponsors focused on
retirees having income that would allow them to maintain their
career standard of living. Over the last 40 years or so,
replacement rates have been used explicitly in plan design and
communication by plan sponsors.
Conventional replacement rate targets have been estimated
to allow workers to have spendable income in retirement that is
equivalent to that achieved toward the end of the career. For
most plan designers and retirement counselors, the pre-
retirement earnings measure used in defining replacement rate
targets is a salary-level retirement or average earnings over
the last five years of the career.
For researchers, price index career average earnings or
price index earnings a few years prior to retirement are often
used because earning patterns toward the end of the career tend
to decline. So using the final years gives you a misimpression
of what is going on.
Social security earnings replacement rates presented by the
trustees are not equivalent to the conventional replacement
rate measures. I understand they have been taken out of this
year's prestige report, but they have been in prior reports.
And there was a doctoral note released yesterday regarding
these.
They are based on career average wage indexed earnings for
which most workers, especially lower earners, are significantly
higher than the career average real earnings. The Social
Security actuaries did publish a note on this yesterday. But
let us consider the hypothetical median workers retiring at age
65. Using their assumptions from last year's trustees report,
this worker earned $22,295 in 1990, the equivalent of $39,811
in today's dollars, because of CPI indexing.
But they counted the earnings at $47,740 in calculating
this worker's replacement rate. Now, when workers go to the
grocery store, the auto repair shop, or wherever, they do not
spend wage index dollars. They spend the real dollars they have
in their pocket. And so it is not clear why we want to treat
these standards of living they never achieved during their
working career as the standard of living against which we are
judging benefits.
In table one of my submitted remarks, you can see the
conventional measures of Social Security replacement earnings
result in replacement rates that are higher than those
presented by the trustees for full-career workers retiring at
normal retirement age.

[[Page 23]]

I understand that benefits are developed using career average
wage indexed earnings, but have found that even economists that
have studied Social Security for years often do not understand
that the trustees' replacement rates are calculated using a
different base year than the index used to determine their
benefits.
Some analysts even apply wage indexing to all pre-
retirement income and retirement income targets, suggesting
that workers should be saving beyond what is needed to maintain
their pre-retirement standard of living. Our retirement system
should not expect workers to become slaves to financing
retirement living standards they never achieved while working.
My analysis of the 31 and 38 birth cohorts of Social Security
beneficiaries summarized in table two suggests this problem may
become accentuated over time as average age indexed earnings
rise more rapidly than real wages for workers. Replacement of
real earnings is increasing under this system.
One reason for the widely perceived inadequacy of workers'
savings for retirement outside of Social Security today is a
series of reports published by the Social Security
Administration summarizing survey data gathered by the Census
Bureau in its current population survey. We heard a summary of
this in the opening remarks this morning.
Comparison of the reported income provided by pension
annuity plans and IRAs to Social Security from IRS tax filings
shown in table three of my submitted remarks proves that as
much of the pension and IRA income paid to Social Security
beneficiaries is not being captured by the current population
survey. This is a problem the Census Bureau and Social Security
has known about for twenty years.
If the full income being paid to Social Security
beneficiaries by supplemental retirement plans was being
reported, it would be roughly equivalent to Social Security
benefits instead of less than half of that amount, and it would
be above Social Security benefits for the top half of the
income distribution of retirees. These benefits distribute much
more broadly down the income distribution than Social Security
reporting indicates. It is impossible to clearly understand who
is doing well and who is doing poorly under the current
arrangements if the official government reports on the income
status of retirees ignores hundreds of billions of dollars of
their income.
I have a formal analysis of this issue that was published
in the Journal of Retirement earlier this year that I would be
happy to submit to the committee if you are so interested.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schieber follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Please do. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Dr. Steuerle, please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF C. EUGENE STEUERLE, INSTITUTE FELLOW AND RICHARD
B. FISCHER CHAIR, URBAN INSTITUTE

Mr. STEUERLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Becerra. It is
an honor to be here with you again. And also the Members of the
Subcommittee. Contrary to the popular argument that we live in
an age of austerity, I would like to suggest that we live in an
age of extraordinary opportunity. Yet, as I argue in a book,
Dead Men Ruling, that I sent to each member of this
Subcommittee, we block Congress by constantly re-fighting
yesterday's battles.
As only one reflection, in 2009, every dollar of revenue
had been committed before that new Congress walked through the
Capitol doors. Looking to Social Security after three quarters
of a century

[[Page 51]]

of continual growth, it has largely succeeded in providing
basic protections to most, though not all, older people. Now,
as psychologist Laura Carstensen suggests, we should be
redesigning our institutions around the new possibilities that
improved health care and long lives provide.
But the eternal automatic growth of Social Security is not
conditioned on any assessment of society's opportunities or
needs. Not making the best use of the talents of people of all
ages, not child or elderly poverty, not educational failures or
the incidence of Alzheimer's or Autism. Let me focus on three
problems caused by this past, rather than future focus.
And I should point out that these are problems that apply
regardless of whether one is a progressive or a conservative,
because neither conservative principles would allow these types
of problems to persist. The first is the ways that Social
Security provides unequal justice to many. The second is the
consequence of providing ever larger shares of Social Security
resources to the middle aged. And the last is how each year
that reform is delayed adds to the burden passed on to younger
generations.
First to unequal justice. Social Security redistributes in
many ways, both progressive and regressive. And many fail to
provide equal justice. Among the most outrageous, working
single parents, often abandoned mothers, are forced to pay for
spousal and survivor benefits they cannot receive, often
receiving at least $100,000 fewer lifetime benefits than some
who do not work, do not pay Social Security tax, and raise no
children.
Similarly, the system discriminates against younger
couples, against spouses who divorce before ten years of
marriage, against long term workers, and those who beget or
bear children before age 40.
To the second point, middle aged retirement. People today
retire about a decade longer than they did when Social Security
first started paying benefits. Let me be clear. The biggest
winners of this multi-decade policy have been people like the
witnesses at this table and the members of Congress who, if
married, now get about $300,000 in additional lifetime
benefits. This is not a way to redistribute to people in need
or people with shorter life expectancies.
But there are other consequences. A decline in employment
rate, as reflected in Congressional Budget Office reports, a
decline in the rate of growth of GDP and of personal income, as
well as lower Social Security benefits for the truly old, when
they start receiving benefits so much earlier in their lives.
Meanwhile, within a couple decades, close to one third of the
adult population will be on Social Security for one third or
more of their adult lives.
There is no financial system, public or private, that can
provide so many years or retirement for such a large share of
the population without severe repercussions, both for the
individuals' well-being in retirement and for the workers upon
whose backs the system relies.
Finally, the impact on the young. Today's lifetime Social
Security and Medicare benefits approximate about $1 million for
a couple with average incomes throughout their working lives.
That large number comes about largely because of the number of
years of support. Rising by about $18,000 a year, benefits for
a couple in 2030

[[Page 52]]

are scheduled to grow to about one and a third million dollars.
Meanwhile, the rate of return on contributions falls
continually for each generation.
Each year of delayed reform shifts more burdens to younger
generations from older ones, with the largest impact on groups
like blacks and Hispanics, in part because they comprise a
larger share of those future generations who are scheduled to
get lower returns than current generations retiring.
In summary, each of year of delay in reforming Social
Security continues a pattern of unequal justice under the law,
threatens the well-being of the truly old, increases the share
of benefits going to the middle aged, leads government to spend
ever less on education and other investments, contributes to
higher non-employment, lower personal income and revenues, not
just in Social Security but throughout the system, and
increases the burden that is shifted to the young and to people
of color. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Steuerle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Entmacher, welcome. Please proceed.

[[Page 63]]

STATEMENT OF JOAN ENTMACHER, VICE PRESIDENT FOR FAMILY ECONOMIC
SECURITY, NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER

Ms. ENTMACHER. Thank you Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for giving
me this opportunity to testify today on behalf of the National
Women's Law Center. For a large majority of Americans, Social
Security is not only their major source of retirement income
but the most secure and predictable. Benefits are modest but
incredibly important. The average Social Security benefit for
women 65 and older is about $13,000 a year. It is about $17,000
for older men. As Mr. Becerra said, without Social Security,
half of women 65 and older would be poor.
And for two thirds of seniors, Social Security provides at
least half of their retirement income. It is virtually the only
source of income for over one third of seniors. These data are
from the Current Population Survey. While Mr. Schieber has
criticized this survey for not fully reflecting income
distributions from retirement accounts, other surveys confirm
that most seniors cannot expect much support from their
retirement savings. The Federal Reserve Board Survey of
Consumer Finance shows that half of households between ages 65
and 74 had no assets in retirement accounts.
Two thirds of those over 75 had no retirement assets.
Younger generations are not doing much better. 45 percent of
all working age families and 40 percent of families near
retirement have nothing in retirement accounts. These data show
that today's workers will also be heavily reliant on Social
Security. They cannot afford benefit cuts, whether it is part
of privatization plans that would replace secure benefits with
risky private accounts, a lower and less accurate cost of
living adjustment, or further increases in the retirement age.
We do need to increase retirement savings for average
Americans, and the surest and most effective way to do it is to
protect and enhance Social Security. Social Security is already
virtually universal and provides lifelong benefits that are
adjusted for inflation. In addition, it provides life and
disability insurance for workers and their families, imposes
few responsibilities on employers, and is highly efficient.
There are several reforms that would improve the adequacy
and equity of Social Security, as Mr. Steuerle has testified,
and which I mentioned in my written testimony. What I want to
emphasize is that they are affordable. The report of the Social
Security trustees shows that there is a long term shortfall.
But Social Security is fundamentally sound. On a combined
basis, it can pay promised benefits in full until 2033, and 77
percent of benefits after that. It would be irresponsible for
Congress to wait until the trust funds are within six months of
exhaustion, as it did in 1983 before taking action to
strengthen Social Security. But two decades provides time for
Congress to enact reforms that raise revenue and improve
benefits.
Polls show that a large majority of Americans favor this
approach. However, there are two issues that require immediate
attention. Congress should prevent cuts to disability benefits
in 2016 and reassure all workers that if they are seriously
injured and can

[[Page 64]]

no longer work, that Social Security will be there for them. It
can do this through the simple and routine step of reallocating
payroll taxes to rebalance Social Security's two trust funds.
Congress has done this 11 times in the past and in both
directions.
Second, Congress needs to restore adequate funding to the
Social Security Administration. Cuts in services are already
jeopardizing timely access to the benefits Americans have
earned, and fall especially hard on the most vulnerable people.
Moreover, at least in part for budgetary reasons, Social
Security plans to rely even more on conducting its work through
online interactions. But this strategy has its limits, even for
those who are internet savvy. The Social Security website touts
how quick and easy it is to sign up for benefits online.
But deciding when to take benefits is a major financial
decision and applicants should be able to consult with well-
trained staff to get help understanding their options and their
consequences. In addition, access to and ability to use online
services is more limited among the population of elderly people
and people with disabilities that Social Security serves. And
even people that have no problem applying for benefits online
at 66 may not be able at age 90 to go online to correct an
erroneous deduction for Medicare premiums.
In announcing this hearing, Chairman Johnson, you said
Americans want, need, and deserve a Social Security program
they can count on and understand. I could not agree more and I
thank you again for inviting me.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Entmacher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Dr. Biggs, welcome.

[[Page 74]]

STATEMENT OF ANDREW G. BIGGS, PH.D., RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. BIGGS. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Becerra, and Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you very much for inviting me to
speak to you this morning. Much of what Americans need to know
about Social Security and retirement is difficult to
understand. Worse, much of what we think we know turns out not
to be true. I would start by saying we should not panic and we
should not pass far-reaching policy changes in haste. For
instance, some have proposed substantial expansions to the
Social Security program, with others arguing that these
expansions should be financed by reducing tax advantages for
private retirement savings plans such as IRAs and 401Ks.
This would be a mistake. The state of retirement security
in the U.S. is substantially better than you probably think.
While some studies claim that Americans face a so-called
retirement crisis, these articles make a number of
methodological choices that, in my view, are unsupportable.
They overestimate what Americans need for retirement,
understate what Americans have saved, and misunderstand how
family structures and health costs affect the amount that one
must save for retirement.
Other high quality research, including projections from the
Social Security Administration itself, show a much more
positive view of Americans' retirement saving. For instance,
the Social Security Administration's office of retirement
disability policy maintains what is surely the most
comprehensive model of retirement income in the country. This
model simulates on a person by person, year by year basis,
employment, pension offerings and participation, individual
investment decisions, and of course the accrual of Social
Security benefits.
The SSA model estimates that Americans who were born in the
depression had a total retirement income at age 67 equal to 109
percent of their career average earnings indexed for inflation.
We cannot judge for ourselves whether that amount is enough.
What is significant in this context, though, is SSA does not
forecast a large decline in retirement going forward.
For instance, fast forward to the Generation X'ers, who are
widely assumed to be dramatically under saving for retirement.
The SSA model projects that the median Gen X'er will, at age
67, have a retirement income equal to 110 percent of his career
average earnings adjusted for inflation. Retirement income will
come from different sources, from defined contribution plans
rather than defined benefit plans, but the SSA model, which I
believe is the best in the business, does not produce numbers
that scream out, retirement crisis.
But there is much more than we can do to provide
individuals with better information about the retirement
savings decisions they make. As my testimony details, the
benefit estimates provided in the annual Social Security
statement are expressed in a form, so called wage index dollars
which are essentially meaningless from a retirement planning
point of view and which almost no users of the statement could
possibly understand.
The figures published by the SSA, which include both the
benefit estimates published in the statement and replacement
rate calcula

[[Page 75]]

tions, which Dr. Schieber discussed in his testimony, are
potentially very useful in retirement planning, but are current
calculated in a way that is simply incorrect. For instance, for
a 30 year old worker today, the benefit estimate he will
receive on his Social Security statement understates the true
inflation index value of that future benefit by around 35
percent.
The agency needs to get these figures right. But the
biggest problem with retirement security today is not America's
savers. It is America's legislators, who literally for decades
have ignored the need to fix Social Security's finances.
According to Social Security's trustees, the programs 75 year
deficit has risen by 66 percent since 2008. The Congressional
Budget Office's figures are even worse. According to the CBO,
Social Security's long term deficit has nearly quadrupled in
the past 6 years. While the CBO once projected that Social
Security would be solvent until mid-century, today both CBO and
SSA project insolvency in the early 2030's.
In other words, the insolvency date for Social Security,
according to CBO, at least, has moved forward by nearly two
decades just in the past six years. How much worse does this
problem have to get before both political parties step up to
the plate and fix Social Security? Saving for retirement is our
job as individuals. Fixing retirement programs is your job as
members of Congress, and I respectfully suggest that we all get
down to business. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Biggs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. We appreciate your
comments.
Dr. Kotlikoff, you are now recognized.

[[Page 87]]

STATEMENT OF LAURENCE J. KOTLIKOFF, PH.D., WILLIAM FAIRFIELD
WARREN PROFESSOR, BOSTON UNIVERSITY, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. KOTLIKOFF. It is a great honor, Chairman Johnson and
Mr. Becerra, and other distinguished Members of the Committee,
to be with you. I guess I am on the left side of this table,
because I am facing a Republican. I might be viewed as a
Republican because I was probably invited by the Republican
members.
Chairman JOHNSON. You are on our right.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Okay. Well, let me just tell you, I have
been voting on the left for my entire adult career. I voted for
every Democratic president, including our current president. So
I just want the Democratic members to realize, and also the
Republican members, that I am speaking here today not as a
political person. I am an academic. I am an economist and I am
here to tell you that I am here to tell you things that you
have not heard so far and you may not hear from anybody else
about Social Security solvency and about its complexity and
inequities. Although some of these I have heard mentioned.
I think the first thing I want you to realize is that we
have issues of generational inequity, unfairness, and we also
have issues of intragenerational inequity and unfairness. And I
think these things keep getting kind of confused. The
Democrats, I sense, are very concerned about fairness within a
generation, with the rich who are the same age being treated
unfairly relative to the poor, and that is an important issue.
But I want you to set aside that and assume that everybody
within a cohort is exactly the same. So Mr. Becerra, suppose
everybody your age was exactly the same and looked just like
you. And everybody who was a year younger was the same and
looked just like that person. And so we have old people and
young people, and there are no differences within the cohort.
So, would we want to leave enormous bills for our children and
future generations? Wouldn't we want to engage in social
insurance policies, other kinds of policies, that may do
enormous good and may be very important because insurance
markets are not operated very well? There are good economic
arguments.
But then the question is, getting the government involved
to fix some of these problems is one thing. Another thing is
leaving future generations to pay for those fixes. To pay the
bills for future generations. And we have, really, a
generational crisis here of enormous proportions. And the way
economists look at this is we look at the fiscal gap. We look
at, over the entire future of the economy, how much are the
projected expenditures compared to the projected taxes measured
in present value? What is the gap? What is the fiscal gap?
This is what economists measure. The fiscal gap in the U.S.
is current $210 trillion. That is according to the CBO's
alternative fiscal scenario data released last week. That is 58
percent of the present value of revenue. So this country is 58
percent underfinanced. Detroit is about 20 percent
underfinanced. Social Security by itself is 33 percent
underfinanced. If you look at table F61 in the trustees' report
released yesterday, you will see that there is a $24.9 trillion
unfunded liability over the infinite horizon. It is not

[[Page 88]]

over 75 years. Nothing in economics tells us to look at 75
years and ignore the future.
I have children. I am sure many of you do as well. I
started a little bit late, so I have young children who will be
alive in 75 years. We cannot ignore the commitments to them and
there is nothing in economics that allows us to do that, in
economic theory. So we have to measure things correctly. And
economic theory is very clear that we should be measuring
infinite horizon fiscal gap. The trustees' report is burying
that number. They have been calculating it since 2002. The
trustees don't even mention it in their summary statement.
We just heard a statement that says Social Security is
fundamentally sound. A system that is in worse shape than
Detroit's pension systems is not fundamentally sound. A system
that is 58 percent underfinanced, according to the trustees'
report, that's the entire country. The Social Security system
is 33 percent underfinanced. This stuff is not fundamentally
sound.
We have to start thinking about things from a generational
perspective, and that does not mean that you should not also
focus on intragenerational equity. I am all for that. Okay? I
have been a lifelong Democrat in terms of voting. I am with
you. And we have to look at that, too. We have to look at
fairness within and across generations. But we cannot keep
confusing these things. We cannot in the name of
intragenerational equity ignore what we are doing to all the
children, poor and rich alike.
So what I am going to do is show you Social Security's
formula for the benefits of a spouse. Ten mathematical
functions. This is the first time anybody has actually
expressed this in math. Ten functions. One is in four
dimensions. One is a maximum function. There is also side
conditions that are very complicated. Many, many functions to
determine the side conditions and the variables that go in
here. One of those side conditions is a maximum of a min
function.
It could not be complex. People are making all kinds of
crazy mistakes, and Social Security people in the offices are
providing all kinds of bad advice because the thing is just
crazily complex. We need a new system that is not going to go
broke.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kotlikoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
As is customary for each round of questions, I will limit
my time to five minutes and ask my colleagues to also limit
their questioning time to five minutes, as well. Dr. Blahous,
according to this year's report, if Congress doesn't act, come
2033, everybody receiving benefits will face a 23 percent cut.
Worse, in just two years, everybody receiving disability
insurance will face a 19 percent cut in benefits. Some of my
friends on the other side like to say that 2033 is way off in
the future, and that Congress has plenty of time. Social
Security is well and good right now.
First, based on the trustees' report, would it be right to
say that Social Security is in crisis right now?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well, we certain face a crisis on the
disability side. And I would certainly say that we face a
shortfall that is bigger than we have ever successfully
corrected before. And so yes, I think it is a very pressing and
urgent policy concern.

[[Page 98]]

Chairman JOHNSON. Well, is it fair to say, then, that we
are already facing the largest shortfall Social Security has
ever faced, and can you explain that in simple terms? How big
is this Social Security shortfall right now?
Mr. BLAHOUS. I have discovered in my public life that I am
terrible at this, making complex issues as simple as that. But
I would say, I think Dr. Kotlikoff did it pretty well. You can
think of it in terms of the fraction of current benefit
obligations that are unfinanced. When you go out to 2033, you
are talking a quarter of the benefits that we are promising are
not financed. Or you could look at it another way. You could
say that people's tax revenues that they are paying are short
by a third of what they need to be to fund promised benefits.
So if you look at your tax return, the amount of payroll
taxes you are paying, and imagine yourself paying an additional
third on top of that, you get a sense of how big the problem
is.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yeah, I hear you. And something my
Democrat friends like to say. There is plenty of money in
Social Security, so we have nothing to worry about. Do you want
to address that?
Mr. BLAHOUS. I would say that the date of trust fund
depletion and the amount of money in the current trust fund
does not provide very useful information about how much time we
have. Because if you wait to the point where it is drawn down
and run out, it is too late to fix it.
Chairman JOHNSON. Right.
Mr. BLAHOUS. Because the gap is too big. So I would urge
that you think in terms of, how much longer is the problem
still at a soluble level. And when you think about it that way,
you realize that time is much shorter than the large trust fund
balance might suggest.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, what price will beneficiaries and
today's workers pay if it is not fixed before this president
leaves office?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well, let me give you a two part answer, if I
could. There is a part that I think most experts would give and
then I think there is a part that I would give that most
experts wouldn't. But I think most experts would say they are
going to pay a very high financial price for delay. That young
Americans entering the system are going to lose about 4 percent
of their lifetime wage income through the program as a net
income loss, even net of all the benefits they got.
But I would say there is another risk that they face. And I
think a lot of the policy community has been slow to recognize
this. Which is that they run the risk of having a Social
Security system that is not structured the way it has been in
the past. Historically, for better or for worse, there has been
pretty good bipartisan acceptance of the way we finance Social
Security. And so benefits have been relatively safe from sudden
changes because of the way we pay for Social Security out of
the payroll tax.
But if we go to a system that we cannot balance that way
and we have to subsidize it permanently from the general fund,
then all those bets are off. Then suddenly, people are subject
to much greater income insecurity because of the fact that
programs fi

[[Page 99]]

nanced from the general fund tend to be much more subject to
sudden benefit changes and means tests and things of that
nature than Social Security has been.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, I am not sure we can increase taxes
enough to cover it. Dr. Schieber and Dr. Biggs, is there
anything that you want to add to that statement?
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well, if you think about it, 4 percent of a
worker's earnings is kind of an abstract concept, unless you
are a worker facing 4 percent additional taxes on your earned
income each year. If you think about it, over a 40 or 45 year
career, someone starts working in their early 20s, they work
until 65, 66, 67, 45 years, we are talking about taking 2 more
years of their earnings to pay for a benefit that is
essentially the equivalent of the benefit we are paying to
people of my generation right now.
And that seems to be a very substantial levy against them,
knowing how hard it is for young people today to get a start in
life. There is no reason to expect that the kids matriculating
through high school and even the ones in grade school are
necessarily going to have that much easier time to start. So
there is a limit. I think there is an equity issue here that we
need to think about if we are going to talk about delay.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. My time has expired. Mr.
Becerra, you are recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
your testimony today. Where should we go? It is interesting.
Mr. Chairman, let me clarify something for you. Democrats do
not think that we should be hunky dory, going around town just
thinking that we should do nothing on Social Security. I think
Democrats have said for a long time, we should keep the most
successful program that has ever been devised in America to
help Americans have economic security stay strong moving into
the future.
And so we are prepared to meet the challenge that faces
Social Security. And there is a challenge. We have heard it
discussed here. In about 20 years, we are going to be hitting
the challenge. I would not call it a crisis. I would call it a
crisis what happened to all of Enron's employees who put money
into their pensions and found out when they woke up one day
that Enron no longer had any of their money that they were
counting on for retirement. That is a crisis.
I call it a crisis that we go to war in Iraq, never pay a
dime of it with real money, using the government credit card.
Spend over $1 trillion. Still have not paid for it. And if you
want to talk about infinite horizons, the so called projection
into the future of however, I don't know how you do that. But
apparently some folks think you can project infinitely into the
horizon. What is the cost of never having paid for a trillion
dollar war and what will that cost be in infinity?
The issue is this. It is, how do you make sure you give
Americans that security? Ms. Entmacher made a really good
point. The average benefit is about $1200 a month under Social
Security. No one is going to get rich off of that. And I know
we use euphemisms. Mr. Blahous, you used the euphemism of
slowing the growth of cost. That is another way of saying
cutting benefits. So yeah, you can slow the growth of cost in
Social Security, which means cutting a

[[Page 100]]

Social Security recipient's $1200 benefit. You want to talk
about a crisis, talk about someone who depends almost
exclusively on Social Security, about cutting their benefits.
And that is a crisis.
Especially for women in America, who as Ms. Entmacher
pointed out, earn less than men do when they retire. Because
they have done their business of helping raise the next
generation. And they get penalized for not being able to stay
in the workforce as long as men do. Those are the crises that
we have to address. But Social Security? With $2.8 trillion in
reserves? Is that a crisis today? No, I would call a federal
budget operating deficit in the hundreds of billions as
something that we have to tackle today. I think we have time to
deal with Social Security on a bipartisan basis. But we should
not try to panic Americans, especially young Americans, who
today do not know where they are going to have their retirement
savings. Because now these defined contribution plans could be
like Enron. Where poof, it is gone if that company does not
make good investment decisions.
And so I think we should be careful about how we discuss
Social Security. Because I do not think anyone can name me a
private sector program that works as a retirement benefit,
disability insurance, and a life insurance policy all at the
same time and over 78 years, never having once failed to pay on
time and in full. So I can name a lot of Enrons in the private
sector. We can talk about the crisis in the Veteran's
Administration. Social Security is not one of those. But the
important thing is, we should not let Social Security become
one of those failures by underfunding it with its budget.
It is growing in the number of people that it has to serve.
Yet its budget is smaller today than it was 4 years ago. And
Mr. Chairman, whether our Republican majority in the House of
Representatives wishes to hold a hearing, as it should because
of our oversight responsibilities under the Constitution, to
determine how the Social Security Administration is doing, this
will come back to haunt anyone who wishes to hide under the
rocks about this budget for Social Security.
Ms. Entmacher, women have a tougher time in retirement
because they live longer than men and they earn less in
retirement, whether it is through a private pension plan or
through Social Security. What would happen to that population
of women, who are going to continue to outlive men, if we were
to cut benefits by, say, doing the chained CPI and also
continue to see the budget for the Social Security
Administration be well under what it needs to be able to
provide sufficient services to those Americans?
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired, so
please be brief.
Ms. ENTMACHER. I will. The chained CPI is a way of
computing the annual cost of living adjustment that is lower,
and I would say less accurate, than the current rate is
computed. That adds up every single year you live. It is kind
of like compound interest in reverse. And we calculated that
for a single elderly woman receiving the median benefit, by age
80, her benefit would be cut by $54 a month. Which may not
sound like a lot, but it is the equivalent of one week's worth
of food every single month that she can no longer afford.

[[Page 101]]

So that is a severe cut in benefits. Of course, the service
cuts mean that it may be more difficult to access the Social
Security benefits that you have earned if there is a problem,
that you are receiving accurate benefits, if you need to change
your bank account, it is just that much harder to get hold of
someone to get it straightened out and make sure that you
continue to get your benefits that you count on on time and in
full.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am. Mr. Tiberi, you are
recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today. I had a former governor in Ohio, a friend of
mine, also a U.S. Senator, George Warner, when he became
governor, said, ``We need to do more with less.'' That does not
mean we need to do less with less. We need to do more with
less. And he succeeded in doing that. Let me share with you,
because the budget has been talked about, these are numbers
from the Social Security Administration. This makes a lot of
sense. A higher number than ever, customers, Social Security
recipients, use the Social Security online tools more than
ever.
Which, there is obviously a cost savings. 50.9% in fiscal
year 2013. Another great statistic. This is a survey. This is
an annual survey, fiscal year 2013, from again, Social Security
customers. 80.2 percent said that the Social Security office
that they worked with provided services of excellent, very
good, or good in 2013. 80.2 percent.
And I know that is true in the office near my hometown of
Worthington, Ohio, just outside Columbus. So I think those are
good things to remember as we talk about the Social Security
budget. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record,
two articles from the Columbus Dispatch. The first title,
Democrats' Plan Won't Save Social Security, Congress's
Budgeters Say, written on Thursday, July 17th by Jack Torre.
In that article, it says that a Senate plan that is
designed to both preserve Social Security and expand its
benefits for some by raising payroll taxes on the wealthy. The
report by the Congressional Budget Office concludes that to
make the Social Security solvent for the next 75 years, payroll
taxes would need to be raised on all working Americans who pay
Social Security taxes.
And in response to that, Mr. Chairman, a Tuesday, July 22nd
editorial in the same newspaper, Stop Ignoring Good Advice: CBO
Report Renews Calls For Leaders To Fix Financial Fundamentals.
And in the text of the editorial, it says, ``Promising people
more benefits at no cost isn't new, especially in an election
year. The Democrat-backed plan that purports to expand Social
Security payments at no additional cost to most Americans
simply isn't realistic, a fact backed by the Congressional
Budget Office report last week that also provided a sobering
reminder for the need to get serious about entitlement reform
overall.
``Senate Democrats recently backed a plan that they said
would preserve Social Security and expand benefits for many.
They said that the increase would be paid for by payroll taxes
on those making more than $117,000 per year, the current
threshold above that Social Security taxes aren't levied.
Unfortunately for the CBO, the math doesn't add up. The non-
partisan research arm of Congress

[[Page 102]]

said to simply keep Social Security solvent for the next 75
years, payroll taxes would need to be raised on all working
Americans.''
And it goes on. I'd like to submit both of those for the
record, without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. TIBERI. Which brings me to a point I am going to make,
and maybe Dr. Biggs, you can help me. Because in your
testimony, you kind of touched on this. Some say, well, the
crisis is not here. I have a 47 year old sister. She is a
woman. She is my sister. She retires, her full retirement is in
20 years. Coincidentally, that is the same year that the report
that you all provided, the CBO provided, said that the jig is
up if we don't do anything.

[[Page 105]]

Now, my sister does not have a whole lot of confidence, my
47 year old sister, as she is planning for her retirement today
with two kids, that she is going to be taken care of. My even
younger sister, who is 40, has less enthusiasm, to your point,
about fixing the current system for what she is thinking about
in terms of retirement. Let alone my four daughters, 5 through
11, in what this report means to them.
And so the Senate Democrat plan, I don't know if you have
seen it, which the article and the editorial take issue with.
If we are to expand benefits, raising payroll taxes on
wealthier Americans to do it, wouldn't we be right back where
we are today? Kicking the can down the road and impacting my
four daughters? Since we are concerned about the wages of
women?
Mr. BIGGS. Thank you for your question. In a sense, you
wouldn't be right back where you were. You would be worse off.
And the reason is this. I am not in favor of fixing Social
Security by raising or eliminating the so called tax max on
payroll taxes. I think that cap was put in place by Franklin
Roosevelt for a reason so the system does not look like a
welfare plan, so it is something that everybody pays and
everybody receives out in reasonable measure. That it is not
just a take from the rich, give to the poor kind of thing. And
I think Roosevelt said this is for political reasons, to make
it supportable.
On the sort of economics side, I do not think it is a
particularly good idea, because eliminating the tax max
effectively raises the top marginal tax rate by 12 percentage
point, so you are going from, say, 43 percent today to
somewhere in the mid 50's. I just think that is too high. But
raising the tax max or eliminating the payroll tax ceiling in
order to increase benefits actually makes things worse off.
Because you are taking off the table one of the options that
could have been used to make the system solvent. In other
words, you cannot raise or eliminate the tax max twice.
So if you do that in order to raise benefits, then we have
to come back and address solvency. And one of those options
that was on the table is no longer on the table. And so then
the folks who are sponsoring these plans have to say, okay, now
that we have taken that off the table, what are we going to do
to fix the system so that your sister or, by the way, me can
have that when we retire. So I think that you really have to
think, first, how do we pay for what we have promised? To
promise additional benefits before you have paid for what you
have already promised, it just confirms all the stereotypes
people have about politicians. No offense.
Chairman JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Doggett, you are recognized.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
to each of our witnesses for your testimony.
My feeling is that Social Security is one of the most
effective programs that we have ever approved in this Congress.
I think one would be hard-pressed to find a family across
America that has not had a family member who has obtained
dignity in retirement as a result of Social Security; and, if
they look back in the past, who suffered greatly when Social
Security was not there.
Many of these families have a neighbor who is able to
survive after a serious injury or a disability, because of
Social Security dis

[[Page 106]]

ability; or, a child who would never have completed high school
without the survivor benefits of Social Security.
Vital programs, and yes there are improvements that need to
be made. I believe you have outlined what some of them may be.
I'm willing to work as I believe my democratic colleagues, for
the most part, are willing to work to make constructive changes
to improve Social Security and be sure that it is there--not
just for grandparents, but for our grandchildren.
There are some obstacles to doing that, and one of those
obstacles is the fact that while we are told today that there
is a broken piggy bank in the trust fund, there are always
those who are out there who see that trust fund and the assets
in it as an incredible profit center for privatizing Social
Security. And right through the last round of elections we're
advocating that the only solution to this impending crisis as
it has been described is to privatize the Social Security
system and break the bond that some were opposing in 1935--and
have ever since--about an effective social insurance program.
And then there are those who suggest that Social Security
has an impending crisis; and, therefore, the only solution is
to cut everyone's benefits. If the only issues at stake are how
much can we cut and how much should we turn these public
assets, these benefits paid into the social insurance system to
Wall Street, we will never get the changes that are necessary.
I think some of them are modest. Some are more controversial
and politically difficult to undertake, but we will never get
the changes needed to ensure that we have longer term solvency
for Social Security.
The suggestion has been made that the Social Security
system is just so complex that it can't be fully understood and
utilized. There are some changes that are necessary that relate
to some of those complexities. I think the complexity mainly
affects people at the other end of the income scale for whom
Social Security is probably not the principal source of
retirement security.
I think that for most Americans, like the women that Ms.
Entmacher was talking about earlier, it's all pretty simple.
You work hard. You pay in to the Social Security system. When
you retire, when you become disabled or you lose a spouse or
parent, you get Social Security benefits; and, relative to the
complexities, we have Social Security offices around the
country staffed with people--as my Republican colleague was
just saying--who seem to be doing a pretty good job at 1200
local offices in explaining, based on their expertise, how the
Social Security system works. And we have an 800 number that
people can call if they're close by a Social Security system.
That means though that over the past four years that cuts
have occurred in the Social Security budget that we have lost
about one in 10 of the people who answer the phones or who are
available to answer the questions. One in 10 of the people who
answer the phones or who are available to answer the questions,
and that's why the request that Mr. Becerra has made about the
need for us to exercise our oversight responsibilities and look
at the budget of the Social Security system is so very
important.
As far as the complexities of this, Ms. Entmacher, you are
an expert on how our Social Security policy affects older
women, nearly

[[Page 107]]

half of whom would live in poverty without Social Security. Is
the main problem that these women are having with Social
Security's complexity, is that the real barrier that they face,
that it's just too confusing and complex to make the right
choices?
Ms. ENTMACHER. No. It is not. I mean the main problem that
women have with retirement security is lower wages throughout
their working life, caregiving responsibilities, the high cost
of child care which often means that they can't really afford
to work, because the wages that they get barely pays for child
care.
And, yet, that means time out of the work force and less
opportunity to build up Social Security benefits or retirement
savings. It's just many women struggle to make ends meet
throughout the working life, and Social Security is what they
have to count on. And that's the main problem. And,
unfortunately, many women work in very demanding jobs.
You know, people don't think of retail work as physically
tough, but people are on their feet for many hours. People who
are nurses' aides, that's an incredibly hard job, and they
simply can't--even if they know that they can get more by
waiting until their full retirement age to claim benefits, they
just can't make it. And, of course, for both older women and
men who have lost jobs in the recession, it takes much longer
to find another job. And so many people, if they can't get
reemployed, they have to claim at 62, because they have no
other income. I think those are the major challenges that many
people face.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Renacci, you are
recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. First, I want to thank the chairman for
holding this hearing. I want to thank the witnesses for their
testimony. I am glad that we are here to discuss the role
Social Security plays in Americans' retirement security. I
think this is a very important topic, considering the solvency
of the program and the rate at which older workers are
retiring. According to the trustees' report, Social Security's
present value of unfunded liabilities over the next 75 years
equals 10.6 trillion, which is one trillion more than last
year.
I have to be honest. I am shocked to hear our friends
across the aisle when they say there is no cause for immediate
action. Instead of addressing the issue we continue to kick the
can down the road for future generations. This unfortunate
reality is that government officials and American people do not
have a good grasp of really our dire financial situation. Our
country is more than 17 trillion in debt and digging our way
out is not as simple as cashing in on Treasury securities.
If the Social Security obligations were added to our debt,
our true liabilities could be well over 50 trillion. As a CPA
and former businessman, I came to Washington to really bring
business perspective to an institution that sorely lacks it. We
cannot continue to jump from budget crisis to budget crisis,
and as many of the witnesses have talked about--Mr. Kotlikoff
and Mr. Biggs--we really have to start addressing some of these
problems.
To help us really get on the right track, I introduced the
Federal Financial Statement Transparency Act, which is a
bipartisan bill that will lead to a more honest depiction of
our nation's finances.

[[Page 108]]

The Federal Government--think about this--requires public
companies to have an honest depiction of their finances to sell
securities, and the Federal Government should be able to meet
those same standards and really show what our true liabilities
are.
Mr. Blahous, what would the impact be on the Social
Security trust fund if all unfunded liabilities needed to be
paid out; and, is there cause for concern?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well there absolutely is cause for concern and
I think a point that was made here earlier today, although we
do report the 75-year, what we call, the open group obligation,
which is the $10.6 trillion obligation, I think the actual
amount of unfunded obligations within the Social Security
system is actually substantially higher than that.
The reason for that is that the excess or the shortfall is
not something that actually sort of plays out gradually over
time. It is actually something that is on the books now. There
is an excess of benefit obligations over contributions for
people who are already in the system, and that is actually
about $24 trillion, and that is about 4.4 percent of future
wages going forward. And that is a number we report in the
Social Security trustees' report. So if you were to take this--
what some people call the closed-group obligation and add that
to the books now, you would add about $24 trillion to our
current liabilities.
Mr. RENACCI. So will Social Security taxes this year be
adequate to fund benefit obligations, current benefit
obligations?
Mr. BLAHOUS. They will not.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. How far short will they come this year?
Mr. BLAHOUS. About $80 billion.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. So where will that money come from to
make up the difference?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well when the payroll taxes fall short of
benefit obligations, the difference has to be made with
payments from the general fund. Right now, they would be in the
form of interest payments from the general fund to the trust
fund; and, a large share of those interest payments would go
out the door immediately to pay beneficiaries.
Mr. RENACCI. So you are saying that the money flows from
the Government's general fund to the trust fund?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI. Does that portion of Social Security spending
add to the federal deficit?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Yes, it does.
Mr. RENACCI. So 80 billion is added to the federal deficit
this year?
Mr. BLAHOUS. That's right.
Mr. RENACCI. Why doesn't that get highlighted more in the
trustees' report?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Um, well, there are a lot of different
perspectives that the trustees' report takes, and a lot of the
trustees' report is just devoted to diagnosing the actuarial
status of the trust funds irrespective of the effect on the
overall federal budget. Now there are certainly those of us who
believe that we as trustees have a duty to put before lawmakers
the implications of honoring Social Security obligations for
the Government's general fund; but that is

[[Page 109]]

obviously something that if there was a feeling that we need to
do more of that, that is something I can take back to the other
trustees.
Mr. RENACCI. So we have 17 trillion in debt. We have
potentially 10 to 20 trillion in unfunded liabilities. We could
have over 50 trillion total liabilities just in those two
areas; and we have 80 billion each year, at least this year,
that is going to exceed what comes in. I would somewhat believe
we have a current problem that we need to fix and it is
something we can't kick down the road, as I continue to hear.
This is an issue that we need to start looking into. And, Mr.
Kotlikoff, I know you have mentioned some of those issues too.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yeah. Well you are an accountant, so we have
a kindred interest here. More than 1,000 economists, including
17 Nobel Prize winners, have endorsed something called the
Inform Act. If you go to the InformAct.org, you will see that
they have an endorsed bill, which is a bipartisan bill called
H.R. 2967, and that bill requires Infinite Horizon Fiscal GAAP
Accounting by the CBO, the GAO and the OMB on an ongoing basis.
And what we are seeing here is the entire economics profession,
with the exception of people like Paul Krugman on one extreme
and Art Laffer on another extreme.
If you look at the names of these people, they are on the
right and the left. You have got people like Glenn Hubbard and
Jeff Sachs agreeing to do Infinite Horizon Fiscal GAAP. So the
economics profession is not confused about how to do the right
accounting. The trustees of the Social Security Administration
are hiding the right accounting.
In their Appendix, they have actually moved it back this
year to Table F-61 in the Appendix used to be not in the
Appendix. Now it is buried in the Appendix. And that says what
is really going on is that the end funded liability of Social
Security is actually 60 percent larger than the 75-year number
you are focused on. So this system is actually in far worse
shape, and it is part of the country's fiscal policy that is in
far worse shape.
And, yes, Mr. Becerra, it is absolutely true that when you
run a trillion-dollar war, okay, over 10 years, and you get
nothing out of it for real in terms of any real success, that
adds a trillion. And if you don't pay for it, that adds a
trillion dollars burden to your kids and my kids and everybody
else's kids. So we have to understand that we are engaged in
take as you go policy. It is not pay as you go, but take as you
go policies on a wide-scale basis.
We have been changing the tax structure to lower taxes on
asset income that shifts, and more on wage income that shifts
taxes away from older people towards younger people. We are
doing a lot of things that are burdening everybody's children.
So there is the issue of generational equity. There is the
issue of intra-generational equity. We have to look at both of
these.
And if you go to the PurplePlans.org, one of the websites
they send you to, you will see a set of plans that have been
endorsed by a lot of economists that I developed. Each one is
post-card length. It does involve the reform for Social
Security, for taxes, for healthcare, comprehensive for the
financial system. This is what economists would do to get rid
of our overall fiscal gap, and you

[[Page 110]]

guys could agree on it, because it is including blue and red
considerations here.
That's why it is called purple. And many, many economists,
including Nobel Prize winners, have endorsed these plans. So I
encourage you, A, to vote to pass the Inform Act. So we started
doing proper fiscal accounting, comprehensive fiscal
accounting, Infinite Horizon Fiscal Accounting, which is the
only proper thing that economic theory says to do, and then
also to adopt the Purple Plans, which will get rid of the
fiscal gap.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yeah. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Ms. Schwartz, you are recognized.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As Mr. Becerra here, like where do you start in the
conversation we are having. Let me first say that I don't think
this is a surprise to anyone. We have this recent report, but
we know that Social Security has issues going forward that
really is not a divide between Republicans and Democrats. It
really isn't. How we solve it is, which is why we keep having
hearings about what the problem is, rather than how we are
going to solve it.
That is really what we are dealing with, yet again today. I
can tell you the number of hearings I have been to that
describe the fact that whether it has actually gone with a
longer time. We have until 2033. That's a good thing to have
time to work it out. But no one disagrees that we should tackle
this issue. The issue is how do we tackle it. And we, as
Democrats, believe that Social Security has been a strength for
this country to be able to say to people as they age that you
will not die in poverty, and it has worked.
We start there, and we start with an understanding,
particularly having just gone through the recent recession,
that in fact converting it to a 401-K does not provide that
kind of security. And that's been suggested, to privatize it,
give people a right to invest it any way they might. You go
through another 2008, how many of you have lost money in your
401-Ks? I assume every one of you have one, and you all lost
money in it. Now, maybe you are young enough to be able to make
up for that, but if you were 70, maybe not so much.
So what we need to be focusing on, really, I am interested
that none of you are also offering solutions. I know you have
talked about two very important aspects that we have to take
into account here. One is the demographics of what is happening
for seniors. We have a lot more of them, 10,000 more a day, 40
million more seniors. You call Social Security, they tell you
that. They say there are 40 million seniors out there who are
calling us right now. So you might have to wait. And I don't
think they are all calling every minute, but sometimes many of
them are. And we don't have enough people to answer the lines,
but they do get back to you.
And that is a huge problem for the next 20-25 years, maybe
30 if medical science is really, really good, and we diet and
exercise. But we're not going to live forever. This is not a
problem for 75 years. It's a really important blip, which is
why we have a surplus in the Social Security trust fund. We
occasionally have to put it

[[Page 111]]

back in, because we borrow against it, but the fact is that
money is there. We raised it in 1983.
Congress realized that they needed to put some extra money
in for all those millions of extra seniors. So the fact is we
reasonably don't want to talk about the crisis because of what
some of you have been saying, is that we want young people, and
those approaching retirement, to understand that Social
Security will be there for them, because we are committed to
making sure it is.
Those benefits have been important to America. It keeps
seniors out of poverty, particularly women who get lower wages
and have less Social Security benefits. So we have work to do.
So one of the other things you have not mentioned in addition
to the issue about the demographics is income inequality and
wage inequality in this country. So you can talk about four
percent. Who said we have to add four percent wages?
The fact is that in the last two, three decades wage
disparity may be unpredicted by the great economists of this
nation, but certainly it was a deliberate result of
particularly tax cuts to the very wealthy and the way we treat
unearned income in this nation. So it is we have to understand
that there are few people earning money; but, we are now taking
out of Social Security, my staff tells me, 82.5 percent of
payroll is what we tax--America taxing a lot of payroll. You
all nod, say yes. Is that correct? You talked about that.
Ms. ENTMACHER. Yes.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. We have. That's right. So one of the ways to
look at this is are we being fair to the workers you have
talked about? Not just our children and grandchildren, but
right now are we being fair to workers if we are actually the
cap has not been growing as quickly as it might, given the wage
disparity and income disparity in this nation. So while you
keep talking about cutting benefits and making Social Security
a private system and other ways to do it, you have really not
talked about the fact that there is a lot of wealth and a lot
of income that we are not touching out there that could help
solve this problem.
And I would say to the Chairman I would love to see this
committee actually have a hearing about how we would solve this
problem. Because what we do by just talking about it as a
crisis is to scare people, and we scare people, we don't make
very good decisions. So while some of you said let's not rush
into it--I think you said that--let's not do it because you are
scaring people that Social Security won't be there for them. It
will be there for them if we actually make a commitment as a
Congress to protect Social Security benefits and the legacy
going to the future.
So it is hard to ask a question, because I am not sure that
you will answer it the way I wanted to given the balance----
Chairman JOHNSON. Well your time is expired.
Ms. SCHWARTZ [continuing]. but my time is expired. So the
question to each and every one of you is to really work on
solutions to this, not just the crisis, and to ask the Chairman
to actually focus on what will work to protect and secure
Social Security into the future. That's what we want to be
discussing today. And I yield back.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.

[[Page 112]]

Mr. Kelly you are recognized.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for having
the hearing. And thanks to all our panel for being there.
I sometimes get confused. I came out of the private sector.
And so when you start talking about who provides the revenue
for all these programs, I think sometimes it is the government.
And we all know that that is not true. These are based on wage
taxes or transfer from the general fund, which are based on
taxes that are levied onto every single hardworking American
taxpayer.
So as we put this back and forth, and while we don't want
to politicize, we absolutely do. Is there anybody that would
disagree with me that the only way, the only way to get this
fixed is to look at where the revenue streams come from and
understand that that flow has been interrupted with an economy
that just hasn't recovered in a nation that has unbelievable
assets. So we can go back and forth with this about Republican/
Democrat problem. This is not a Republican and Democrat. This
is an American problem.
Am I mistaken? I have signed pay checks for a long time.
6.2 percent of every person I signed a pay check for, I also
matched what I paid them. They put 6.2 percent in. The
dealership puts 6.2 percent in. It was 12.4 percent. So am I
misunderstanding where the revenues come from? Mr. Schieber, go
ahead.
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well most of the revenue does come out of
payroll taxes.
Mr. KELLY. Right.
Mr. SCHIEBER. Now, of course, there is interest being
accrued on the trust fund balance. Certainly, a portion of the
kind of immediate growth in the unfunded liabilities, the
immediate--the reduction in the period of benefits that are
going to be paid--is related to what's happened to the economy
over the last several years. But since 1994--we are actually
celebrating the 20th anniversary this week, I guess, with the
release the trustees' report--the trustees have been telling us
that there is a big demographic problem, that the system has to
be rebalanced. There is a demographic problem. So a major
portion of it is the demographics.
Mr. KELLY. No. I get it. It's like the navigator on the
Titanic saying, listen. There's an iceberg out there. Maybe you
ought to change where you are going and actually maybe scale it
back a little bit. And the captain saying, oh, the heck with
that. You don't understand. Not even God could sink this boat.
Now, having said that, because I'm worried about this--
workforce participation is at the lowest rate it has been in 36
years. Now, I'm looking at these taxpayers the same way.
There's an old adage about don't worry about the mule, just
load the wagon. The mule's about ready to unhitch himself and
say I can't pull this load. It's too heavy. Or that, add
another mule to help me pull it. When you have that many
people, when you have almost 92 million Americans opting out of
the labor force, do you think over the course of time that
could have effect on the revenues we need to run this country?
Is there anybody that disagrees with that? Because I am trying
to figure out, you know, we have all these willing hearts but
we have weak wallets. Where does the money come from? Is there
anybody out there? Forget about the

[[Page 113]]

government paying for this stuff. The government doesn't pay
for one red cent. American taxpayers do.
We have gone so far away from what this--how it works. It
just drives me nuts. We sit around here almost arguing how many
angels we can fit into the head of a pin, and the meanwhile we
have got a program that is a great program, but it is not
funded the right way. And we also, by the way, not everybody
deriving a benefit has put any money in. So let's not get to
out of whack on that.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, sir.
Mr. KELLY. Yeah, Mr. Kotlikoff?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, yeah. I think there is a resource
everybody here could use, which is economists. And I know we
don't have the greatest reputation in the world, but----
[Laughter.]
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. But, you know, if you do look at the
PurplePlans.org, you will see a fix for Social Security for the
tax system. We can do things on the tax system. We can do
things on the tax system that the Democrats would like, the
Republicans would like. You know, for example, that would
actually, I think, improve the progressivity of the system, but
in the process shift the corporate tax from the corporations
onto the households, the shareholders, in a way that would
bring more business back into the country, keep businesses from
leaving, get more jobs here. We have a very difficult
international competitive situation. We have a very difficult
problem with smart machines taking people's jobs.
But on the Social Security issue, Ms. Schwartz, the
solution--there is a solution that is different from just
maintaining the current system, which, if I actually sat down
with you for a day and went through the inequities and
mistreatment of low income people, high income people, middle
income people, this is like a random lottery, what you get out
of the system, because it is so complicated.
If you don't know--and you can't call the Social Security
system--whether they are well paid or not, whether they have
more people or not, they are giving the wrong answers
routinely. I know this because I have a little company that
does Social Security software. I also write a column every week
for PBS News Hour about Social Security. I get people e-mailing
me and writing me every day about the mistakes Social Security
is making. These are the people that are getting to the people
on the phone. It is too complicated.
So one idea on the Purple Social Security Plan--and this is
not privatization as you know it, but it is individualization--
but it is progressive--think about taking, freezing the old
system in place, paying off everything that is accrued, and by
putting zeroes in the earnings record, and then going to a new
system for Social Security where everybody contributes eight
percent of their pay to a single account, where they have their
own name on each account, but the contributions are divided 50-
50 between spouses and legal partners.
The government makes matching contributions on behalf of
the poor. It is all invested in one way--not by Wall Street,
but by a computer, a laptop, in a global market weighted index
fund with a floor. So the government would guarantee a zero
rate of return, so if we have a crash, but everybody gets the
same rate of return.

[[Page 114]]

And at the end of the accumulation phase, the government would
annuitize the account balances on a cohort basis.
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. That's okay.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. And I do want to apologize. I believe this
was Mr. Kelly's time. So you may want to be answering his
question. I apologize, Mr. Chairman. This was not my intention.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. No. I am trying to give you a solution.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. I am curious to know whether his plan
actually taxes people above the 170,000 cap that is now in your
system.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. One of these plans just eliminates the
ceiling on the payroll tax, if you look at the Purple Tax Plan.
So it is a set of plans.
Ms. SCHWARTZ. Well you may want to speak to Mr. Kelly about
this. He was saying everyone was treated exactly the same, and
people are not, because there is a cap on the income.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I guess what I am trying to say, really
quickly, is that we have a lot of----
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson, you are recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. I would hate to deprive you of the
opportunity to mention the Purple Plan a couple more times.
[Laughter.]
Mr. THOMPSON. I want to just comment on a couple of things
that have been said today. We are at the time of the hearing
where just about everything has been said. My friend from
Pennsylvania, I don't want you to think you are the only person
who has come out of the private sector. A lot of us have, and
some of us are still writing checks on our private sector
businesses. And we know well how things operate. Some things,
while the private sector is great, I wouldn't trade my business
for anything.
There are some things that need to be left to the
government, and I think everybody would agree with that to some
degree. And I don't know how far out that iceberg was when
whatever exchange happened between the captain and the
observer. We don't have black boxes back then. So probably we
will never know, but I doubt strongly if it was 19 years out.
And that is a point that I----
Mr. KELLY. Well we can get a different rate of speed than
the Titanic, though.
Mr. THOMPSON. I think that is a point that has to be
reiterated, because any failure to do that does put us in a
position where a number of people have mentioned it becomes an
issue of frightening people. And we should be ashamed of
ourselves if we are frightening senior citizens. And I don't
think my district is made up of people any different than
anybody else on this dais, but when the rhetoric gets ramped
up, I have people come to me all the time worried about whether
or not Social Security is broken, broke, bankrupt. The wheels
aren't falling off of this call for a while.
Now, granted, we do have problems that need to be worked on
as Ms. Schwartz said. That's what we should be doing is trying
to figure out how to solve these problems, not trying to figure
out how to whip up everybody into some fear position where it
benefits

[[Page 115]]

somebody politically. In regard to the Social Security, every
one of us in this room factors Social Security into our
retirement. Every constituent we represent factors Social
Security into the retirement. This is not something that we
only talk about in this hearing or in political ads, but I can
tell you that my constituents want a Social Security office
that is open. So if they need something, they can go down
there. They can sit and talk to the people.
Ms. Entmacher mentioned the computer stuff. You know. I
have young Social Security recipients who feel better about
going in the office and sitting down with a human being rather
than trying to do a calculation online. And I think we do a
terrible disservice when we deprive folks of that opportunity.
I want to ask Mr. Blahous. You are talking about this
shortcome. Do you factor in the interest on the trust fund in
your calculations? Because your numbers are a nine-day
difference between the numbers that I got from our staff, and
we show a $19.3 billion surplus.
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well it depends on what you are asking.
Mr. THOMPSON. I know it always depends on how you figure.
Figures never lie, but----
Mr. BLAHOUS. Well I was asked the question as to what was
the relationship between payroll tax revenue and expenditures.
So that answer, of course, excluded the interest.
Mr. THOMPSON. So is it accurate that we have a $19.3
billion surplus factoring in the tax revenues of 883.4 billion,
interest of 99 billion, operating expenses of 5.7 billion?
Mr. BLAHOUS. It is accurate that the trust fund had an
increase in its balance. The amount of trust fund assets
increased. From a trust fund perspective, we had a surplus. If
you are asking me from an overall budget perspective did we
have surplus, the answer is no, because the interest payments
are from one government account to the other.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like unanimous
consent to put these accurate numbers into the record, because
I think it was very misleading to go down that road. And I'm
assuming staff can put a proper draft together for you, but
again it just feeds into the idea that we are going to frighten
people, and I don't think that is right. I think right would be
all of us sitting down and figuring out what sort of tweaks we
needed to make to make the system work. And could you just by a
show of hands, how many of you on the witness table believe we
should privatize Social Security?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. You need to define what you mean.
Mr. THOMPSON. No. No. I didn't ask for any commentary. So
nobody thinks we should privatize Social Security?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well I think we should individualize it. I
am not sure we should--I wouldn't privatize it the way
President Bush proposed.
Mr. THOMPSON. My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, it has. Thank you. And we will put
this in the record.
[The information follows:]

[[Page 116]]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. How about Mr. Griffin? Are you?
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it. It was
great to hear my colleagues say that they would never use
Medicare or Social Security to scare people. Make sure your
party leadership knows that. That will probably be a news
flash.
Mr. Blahous, I want to ask you from a practical standpoint,
let's say we get to the point where the trust fund does not
have the money to pay out. I think a lot of people, a lot of
Americans sort of feel like, yeah. Well, on paper that will
happen at some point, but maybe my benefits will never be
affected because we will just borrow it. Right? So I want you
to walk me through what the practical impact would be in terms
of where the money would come from if there are benefit cuts.
So I assume we would have to find in general revenue the money
to shore up the fund, the way sort of we have done with the
Highway Trust Fund.
That would come out of discretionary fund and we wouldn't
have that money, most likely. So that would be borrowed. Could
you sort of walk through what the practical implications of
that would be? Could we even borrow that much? How much money
are we talking about borrowing when we get to the point where
we don't have enough money to pay out? And all the bad things
that we have heard--you know, benefits being cut and all that?
What would we have to do if reforms do not occur? What would we
have to do to continue on the path that we are on?

[[Page 117]]

Mr. BLAHOUS. Right. At the point where the combined trust
funds, assuming we reallocate taxes between the trust funds and
then they are depleted in 2033, one of the common methods that
the trustees use to describe quantities within the Social
Security system as a percentage of the program's tax base. So,
for example, in 1983 when we had a shortfall to close, the long
term shortfall was described as 1.8 percent of the program's
tax base.
In order to fill that, they delayed the COLAs by six
months. They exposed benefits to taxation for the first time.
They brought in newly hired federal employees. They raised the
eligibility age, et cetera. They did all these things, and that
added up to about 1.8 percent of the tax base. And they did
about half of it on each side, half of it on the revenue side,
half of it on the benefit side.
If we wait until 2033, our shortfall, our annual shortfall
will be about 4.2 percent of taxable payroll. So we would have
to make changes. Again, heeding the admonition about not
wanting to scare people, but you may have to make changes over
twice as severe, about two and a half times as severe. And the
question is would our political system, would the people on the
right be over twice as willing to raise taxes as they have ever
been willing to do before. Would people on the left be over
twice as willing to cut benefits--both of them twice as
willing?
Mr. GRIFFIN. What about people who would say--and I am not
advocating this, but we would just borrow that money. How much
are we talking about here?
Mr. BLAHOUS. Right. Well, yeah, exactly. Again, it is in
dollar figures. It's going to be much, much bigger, because we
are looking way into the future. And so that is why we tend to
do it as a percentage of GDP or as a percent of taxable
payroll. But you would have to borrow--if you wanted to do it
through borrowing--you would have to borrow an amount that
equaled over four percent of what workers are earning, and that
is a tremendous amount of money.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Right. That is not an option is the point. Is
that what you are saying? In terms of getting that money,
borrowing that sort of money, adding that to the debt?
Mr. BLAHOUS. My personal view--and this is not necessarily
a consensus view among experts, my personal view is that at
that point it is a bridge too far to balance system finances.
And we wouldn't be able, politically----
Mr. GRIFFIN. Right.
Mr. BLAHOUS [continuing]. to sustain the system without
turning it into a program that is financed from the general
fund. And then we would lose a lot of the things that have made
Social Security a stable, reliable benefit over the years.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Well that is scary to me, and I am not a
senior yet. I hope I make that, but that is scary to me in and
of itself. Let me ask you real quickly. Could you talk a little
bit about our culture and the role that Social Security played
in the early days versus now in terms of whether people had in
the early days other sources of income for retirement versus
today? Has there been a movement? And I think I know the answer
to this. Has there been a movement over the years to rely
solely on Social Security for a

[[Page 118]]

bigger percentage of the population, or is it the same,
general--I'd like to know that. I see you shaking your head.
Mr. BLAHOUS. I think the first point I would make is that
if we still had the system that was left to us by FDR we
wouldn't have a financial shortfall right now. It is the
subsequent expansions that have put us in financial trouble.
You know. We added the disability component, later on. Perhaps
it was an appropriate thing to do. Then we added early
eligibility. People are now collecting at 62 more often than
any other age.
Originally, they could only collect at 65. So we are
collecting three years earlier and we are living a lot longer.
And then in the 1970s we expanded. We added a 20 percent
benefit increase and we started wage-indexing the benefits. And
so now we have cost issues that we didn't have under the
original design of Social Security. So when people talk about
sort of the historic legacy, I guess, of Social Security, it is
not the FDR legacy that is really in jeopardy. The program he
left to us is stable. It is the subsequent expansions that are
causing us the trouble.
Mr. GRIFFIN. I am out of time, Mr. Schieber, but the
Chairman in his mercy might allow you to respond.
Mr. SCHIEBER. In 2008 there were $532.87 billion paid in
Social Security benefits, that combined, IRA and pension
annuity benefits paid to Social Security beneficiaries was $568
billion. So the benefits paid out of pensions and IRAs was
actually larger than Social Security benefits. Last year we got
tax data on both of them, and none of these tax qualified
benefits existed or very minuscule amounts of them existed in
the 1930s.
So there is a much greater dependence, now, on these tax
qualified benefits, people's personal savings or personal
pensions than we have had in the past. Of course, we haven't
been reporting it. We have only been reporting 40 percent of
it. So in terms of what you are generally being told, you have
no idea what this other part of the retirement system is really
about. It would seem to me that might be important when you
think about retirement income security.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Ms. Entmacher, you look
fidgety. Did you want to say something?
Ms. ENTMACHER. I would. Thank you very much.
First of all, yes. It is not Franklin Roosevelt's
retirement program and that is a very good thing. I know that
many people have pointed to what a great job Social Security
has done in reducing elderly poverty since Franklin Roosevelt's
days. And what may be less understood is that most of that
decrease has come through the improvements that were made to
Social Security that were just discussed, particularly for
women, the automatic COLA, increased benefits for widows, those
have been incredibly important and valuable.
Second, what is causing the shortfall in Social Security is
not rising benefits. As has been indicated, benefits are
actually going down from what they would have been because of
the 1983 cuts. And in 1983 people tried to, and did for a
couple of years, establish solvency for 75 years. What has
created much of the shortfall is the growth in inequality, the
shrinking of wages for ordinary Ameri

[[Page 119]]

cans and the growth and wages at the top, which was not
foreseen by people in 1983.
And, lastly, because trillions of dollars are really
frightening, I would like to point out that the growth in
Social Security's cost is about 1.2 percent of GDP over the
next several decades and then levels off. 1.2 percent of GDP is
less than what we had to come up with when the baby boomers
were kids and public education was more expensive.
We spend about--I have the CBO estimates of tax
expenditures, the tax expenditure for giving preferential rates
on capital gains is one percent of GDP per year. We can afford
to cover the shortfall and make improvements in Social
Security. We shouldn't wait to do it, and we don't have to do
it all at one blow, but we can reassure people that Social
Security will be there.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you for your comments, ma'am.
And without objection I will insert into the record my
response to Mr. Becerra's letter which was inserted into the
record earlier.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. In closing, I want to thank all of you
for your testimony and thank our members who are still here for
being here.
Social Security is facing the biggest challenge since 1983,
and the longer we wait the harder it is going to be to fix. In
the meantime, workers can't be sure how to plan for their
retirement, because they don't know what to expect from Social
Security. We have got real work to do. Americans deserve a
Social Security program they can count on with benefit amounts
they can understand.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Chairman, I know we have just adjourned. I
would like to hear you.
I know somebody who still wanted to respond I would like to
stay and hear. I heard what you said, ma'am. I do not agree
with you. And I think there are a number that would not. So I
will stay and listen. I want to hear what you have to say. If
this isn't a crisis, we had better look up in the dictionary
what a crisis is.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. This is a huge crisis. The country is broke
and Social Security is broke too. It is not broke in 30 years.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, are we still in hearing?
Chairman JOHNSON. I will withdraw my adjournment. Go ahead.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Social Security is not broke in 30 years or
in 20 years or in 10 years. It's broke today. We need according
to the trustees' report Table F61, just go look at it. It's
buried, but you can find it. We need a 4.1 percent hike in the
payroll tax rate. That is a 33 percent hike in the payroll tax
rate for Social Security, starting today, immediately and
permanently, 33 percent tax hike.
That is in the trustees' report. This is what a thousand
economists at every top school--Stanford, Harvard, MIT,
Chicago, you name it, Princeton--17 Nobel Prize winners, and
they are not Republicans. They are not Democrats. They are
both. Okay? That is what they are saying to look at, guys. You
guys keep talking about the 75-year numbers. Economics doesn't
support that. It says you have to look at the Infinite Horizon.
Now, this does not mean the system is broke.

[[Page 122]]

Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, if we want to have more
discussion, I think that is fine. I think it is always
important as I think members have pointed out we want to get to
the solutions rather than just talking about the issues. And so
I think we can do that, but I think we have to do it in a way
that is organized and constructive.
If we are going to have every witness comment, we can do
that, but that is going to take more time. Mr. Chairman, so
long as we can just establish how you want to do this, do you
want to give them a chance?
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, what I would prefer to do is let
you all submit something for the record. If you would care to,
we will put it in.
And with that the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:50 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[[Page 123]]

Questions For The Record

Charles P. Blahous III, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 129]]

Sylvester J. Schieber, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 132]]

C. Eugene Steuerle, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 135]]

Andrew G. Biggs, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[[Page 138]]

Public Submission For The Record

Financial Planning Association

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
