- THE STATUS OF INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S REVIEW OF TAXPAYER TARGETING PRACTICES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATUS OF
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S
REVIEW OF TAXPAYER TARGETING PRACTICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 27, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-FC10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-121                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of June 27, 2013 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESS

Daniel Werfel, Principal Deputy Commissioner and Deputy
Commissioner for Services and Enforcement, Internal Revenue
Service........................................................     7

THE STATUS OF
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S
REVIEW OF TAXPAYER TARGETING PRACTICES

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 27, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Dave Camp [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.

[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

CONTACT: (202) 225-3625
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Thursday, June 20, 2013
No. FC-10

Chairman Camp Announces Hearing on

the Status of Internal Revenue Service's

Review of Taxpayer Targeting Practices

Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on the
Internal Revenue Service (``IRS'') and the agency's 30-day review of
the practice of discriminating against applicants for tax-exempt status
based on their personal beliefs. The hearing will take place on
Thursday, June 27, 2013, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office
Building, beginning at 10:00 a.m.

The Principal Deputy Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service,
Mr. Daniel Werfel, will be the only witness at the hearing. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

Since June 2011, the Committee on Ways and Means has been
investigating whether the IRS discriminated against taxpayers based on
their personal beliefs. On May 10, 2013, IRS acknowledged that the
agency had been targeting conservative-leaning political organizations.
Appointed by President Obama on May 16, 2013, Mr. Werfel serves as the
Principal Deputy Commissioner of the IRS and the Deputy Commissioner
for Services and Enforcement. The day after his appointment, Treasury
Secretary Jack Lew stated Mr. Werfel would ``within 30 days . . .
report to me and we will report to the President on actions taken.''
The Committee will receive testimony from Mr. Werfel regarding the
Agency's internal review of inappropriate practices, as well as any
remedial and disciplinary actions that have been implemented by the
IRS.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``At the close of
the Committee's first hearing into the IRS's targeting of
conservatives, I said this phase of the investigation was just
beginning. While the Committee continues a methodical investigation
that includes interviewing IRS officials, reviewing internal IRS
documents, and talking to those who were targeted, it is also important
that we hear from IRS leadership about what immediate steps the agency
has undertaken to address these actions. The hearing will ensure that
we have the IRS's perspective as Congress considers additional actions
that are necessary to address both this broken agency and the broken
Tax Code the agency used as a means to target and intimidate Americans
based on their political beliefs.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the Internal Revenue Service's 30-day
report on the practice of discriminating against applicants for tax-
exempt status based on their personal beliefs.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, https://
waysandmeans.house.gov (https://waysandmeans.house.gov), select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Thursday, July 11, 2013. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at:
http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/ (http://
www.waysandmeans.house.gov/).

Chairman CAMP. The Committee will come to order.
Good morning.
It has been 6 weeks since the IRS first revealed it was
purposefully targeting conservative-leaning organizations, and
this week additional IRS documents revealed that the term
``progressive,'' along with others, were also included on the
``Be on the Lookout'' list, or the BOLO.
And I want to make one thing clear. No taxpayer, regardless
of political affiliation, should be unfairly targeted. It is
wrong, and
this Committee is working to ensure that it will never happen ag
ain.
The Committee has welcomed all groups that feel they have
been targeted for extra scrutiny to come forward, and I urge
them to do so. So far, the evidence only shows conservatives
being systematically targeted by the IRS, not just flagged
through the BOLO, but actually targeted. These Americans
consistently had their applications delayed for nearly 3 years,
were asked intrusive and inappropriate questions, had their
donor information leaked, and were even threatened by the IRS
with additional taxes.
But, as I have long said, we are in the early stages of
this investigation, and, as we gather the facts, we will follow
those facts wherever they lead. Again, if there are any
additional groups of any political affiliation, we urge them to
come forward.
From what we have already learned, it is clear that the IRS
is a broken agency that needs to answer to the American people.
Mr. Werfel, in the interest of accountability and at the
discretion of Treasury Secretary Lew, you spearheaded a 30-day
review of the practice of discriminating against conservative
groups.
Unfortunately, while I am aware this is an initial report,
it fails to deliver the accountability the American people
deserve. This report doesn't answer even the most basic
significant questions: Who started this practice? Why has it
been allowed to continue for so long? How widespread was it? In
fact, this report suggests that you haven't even asked anyone
those questions.
Additionally, the report fails to address some of the most
egregious offenses by the IRS. I am specifically talking about
the intentional leaking of confidential taxpayer information
and the IRS threatening conservative donors with additional
taxes.
The review notes that it is important that the Inspector
General continues to identify inappropriate actions, but where
is the internal oversight? Where are the checks to prevent this
behavior in the first place? How will the IRS learn from these
inexcusable actions and provide the American taxpayer with real
proof and evidence that it will not happen again?
It will be necessary to provide concrete reforms and
assurances to begin rebuilding the trust this agency has lost
with the American people.
A glaring recommendation in this report is that Congress
fulfill the agency's budget request of an additional billion
dollars. And, frankly, it is insulting to taxpayers that the
IRS would ask for an additional billion dollars right after we
find out that the IRS was targeting taxpayers for their
beliefs, after they spent millions of taxpayer dollars on
frivolous conferences, produced completely useless videos, and
put expensive dinners and alcohol on IRS credit cards.
And, Mr. Werfel, let me be clear, until the IRS proves that
it can responsibly manage its current funds, the IRS will not
see one more dime in taxpayer funding.
We need real reforms, and they must be implemented so the
American people can have a restored faith that they have a
government that works for them, not against them. That begins
with instituting long-term and meaningful changes--changes to
both how the agency operates and to the Tax Code that the
agency is trying to enforce.
And, as I have stated before, I often hear from
constituents in Michigan about their fear of being audited by
the IRS. That fear used to stem from the fact that the Tax Code
was so complicated, nobody really knew what was in it or if
they had filed their taxes correctly. Even when people paid
someone else to do their taxes, they would sign their return
not really knowing what was in it and hoping the preparer got
it right. And that is something this Committee must and will
fix.
However, today, Americans fear an audit not just because
the Tax Code is too complex but because we have an agency that
is out of control. We have managers in Washington sitting on
cases for years, directing intrusive and inappropriate
questions to be asked.
And after a month-long internal review, what you tell this
Committee is that a few people have been removed from their old
jobs, but you cannot even assure us that they have been removed
from the agency. It is my understanding that they either
continue to be paid or are receiving full retirement benefits.
And, on top of those salaries and benefits, those employees
have received over a quarter of a million dollars in bonuses
over the last few years. And you have not identified any
structural changes within the IRS that would prevent these
abuses of power from happening again.
If there is anything this report shows, it is just how much
more work must be done. Congress will continue the
investigation into the IRS's actions and get to the bottom of
this so we can ensure that no American is targeted again.
And, with that, I yield to Mr. Levin for the purposes of
his opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Werfel.
I will go over my opening statement in just a moment. I
want to urge you--you have heard the opening statement of the
Chairman. I know you mostly have been kind of a technician all
your years in both the Bush Administration and in this
Administration. I hope, though, that you will, if I might
suggest, respond very vigorously when statements are made. I
hope you will actively report on what you have done during your
first 30 days.
Where mistakes have been made by the Internal Revenue
Service, we on the Democratic side have been very, very clear:
When inappropriate criteria were used, we were among the first
to say that those who were in charge in the IRS should be
relieved of their duties.
So I hope you will respond very actively and vigorously to
all the questions. I think we need to get the facts and not
innuendos. We are here today to learn about the corrective
action that the IRS has taken to address mismanagement and
processing of tax-exempt applications.
So, Mr. Werfel, welcome to the Ways and Means Committee. I
am not sure how warm it is, but welcome.
I am glad to see in your 30-day report that you have
instituted management changes that span the entire IRS
management chain. It is needed. I see from your report that
these changes reach into the Exempt Organization Division--
which, indeed, is necessary--and the team responsible for
determinations on applications for tax-exempt status.
We are also interested in your recommendations for
obtaining greater effectiveness within the IRS with respect to
better early warning systems and risk management. We look
forward to hearing your testimony on your new enterprise risk
management program, which I understand will improve IRS
accountability and responsiveness to stakeholders, including
this Congress.
As your report makes clear, there was clear mismanagement
on the part of the IRS Exempt Organizations Division in
processing these tax-exemption applications. The additional
assessment and plan of action appear to be a solid roadmap to
addressing the problems. And we encourage you, as I said at the
beginning, to actively, to vigorously, to completely pursue
this plan.
But for our Committee, which launched this investigation on
a bipartisan basis, the backdrop for today's hearing is the
troubling new information that has come to light about the
report issued by the Treasury Inspector General of Tax
Administration.
This week, we learned for the first time the three key
items: One, the screening list used by the IRS included the
term ``progressives''; two, progressive groups were among the
298 applications that TIGTA reviewed in their audit and that
received heightened scrutiny; and, three, the Inspector General
did not research how the term ``progressives'' was added to the
screening lists or how those cases were handled by a different
group of specialists in the IRS.
The failure of the I.G.'s audit to acknowledge these facts
is a fundamental flaw in the foundation of the investigation
and the public's perception of this issue. I wrote to the I.G.
and asked him to explain these omissions.
And all Committee Democrats have asked you, Mr. Chairman,
today that you ask Mr. George to return to the Committee to
provide the appropriate context for his report and answer
questions under oath regarding all of these matters. Our
Committee, in its oversight role, has an obligation to fully
understand the manner in which the I.G. conducted his audit and
at what direction.
Deeply troubling is that, when asked about the new
information that has come to light, the Treasury I.G. Office
initially said in media reports that ``our audit report
answered questions it was asked to address,'' and that the
House Oversight Committee Chairman, Darrell Issa, had
specifically requested that investigators ``narrowly focus on
Tea Party organizations.'' We asked TIGTA about this in the
letter, and it responded that ``many of the press reports are
not accurate.''
If these or some of the reports were accurate, TIGTA's
initial explanation of the scope of the audit is inconsistent
with the description of the I.G.'s audit work in the 2013 audit
plan and the stated objective on the first page of the May
14th, 2013, audit report. The stated objective was ``to
determine whether allegations were founded that the IRS, one,
targeted specific groups applying for tax-exempt status; two,
delayed processing of targeted groups' applications; and,
three, requested unnecessary information from targeted
groups.''
The I.G.'s failure to be forthcoming in the audit and at
congressional hearings, even when asked directly if there was a
screening list for ``progressive'' and whether progressive
groups were included among the 298 applications reviewed by
TIGTA, has contributed to the distortion of the entire
investigation, including use of innuendo and totally
unsubstantiated assertions of White House involvement.
Democrats have condemned the singling out of ``Tea Party''
by name. I hope our colleagues on the Republican side of the
aisle will now join us in condemning the use of the term
``progressives'' on the screening lists and the failure of the
I.G. to be forthcoming with this and other congressional
committees.
We have also been supportive of letting the facts lead
where they may. None of us, including the Acting IRS
Commissioner, can describe how an application was processed
once it was screened. I caution my colleagues from jumping to
conclusions until we know all the facts. Searching for the
facts is the only way we are going to get back on the course
that I hope is our mutual goal: The fixing of the problems, all
of the problems, at the IRS and restoring the trust of the
American people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Now I would like to introduce our witness, Mr. Daniel
Werfel, Principal Deputy Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner
for Services and Enforcement of the Internal Revenue Service.
Thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being with us today. The
Committee has received your report, and it will be made part of
the formal hearing record. You will have 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.
You are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL WERFEL, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY COMMISSIONER AND
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER FOR SERVICES AND ENFORCEMENT, INTERNAL
REVENUE SERVICE

Mr. WERFEL. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss the progress we have made
thus far in charting a path forward for the IRS and what we
hope to accomplish in the future.
The report we released on Monday describes a number of
important findings, aggressive actions, and next steps for the
IRS. The problems with the 501(c)(4) application process that
were uncovered by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration have created significant concerns for taxpayers,
and it is incumbent upon us to take swift action to ensure
accountability, fix the problems that occurred, and thoroughly
examine other aspects of IRS operations.
Over the past month, an ongoing review of the events
described in the TIGTA report has shed further light on the
management failures that occurred within the IRS and the causes
of those failures. There was insufficient action by IRS leaders
to identify, prevent, address, and disclose the problems that
emerged with the review of applications for tax-exempt status.
Our report outlines management deficiencies and the steps that
must be taken to correct them.
Importantly, the report does not provide a complete and
final set of answers. Instead, it offers an initial set of
conclusions and action steps, along with an explanation of the
additional reviews and investigations under way.
While fact-gathering is still ongoing, we have not found
evidence of intentional wrongdoing by anyone at the IRS or
involvement in these matters by anyone outside of the IRS.
Furthermore, there is no current evidence of the use of
inappropriate screeners or other types of criteria in other IRS
operations beyond those discussed in the I.G. report.
We recognize, however, that there is public concern
regarding the criteria used for applications for tax-exempt
status, and more needs to be done to evaluate our screening
criteria and procedures. We will therefore establish a review
process by which screening criteria and procedures across the
IRS will be periodically assessed to safeguard against any
risks of inappropriate criteria.
In addition to this important review, I also want to
briefly mention some of the actions that we have taken and will
take to address the problems we have found.
First, we have installed new leadership at all five levels
of the IRS senior executive managerial chain that had
responsibility over the activities identified in the I.G.
report. In addition, we have empaneled an Accountability Review
Board to provide recommendations within 60 days, and later if
needed, on additional personnel actions that should be taken.
Next, immediately upon learning that ``Be on the Lookout,''
or BOLO, lists with inappropriate criteria were still in use,
we suspended the use of any such lists in the application
process for tax-exempt status.
Next, we have established a new voluntary process for
certain taxpayers who have been in our backlog for more than
120 days to gain expedited approval to operate as a 501(c)(4)
tax-exempt entity. This is a self-certification process which
allows them a streamlined path to tax-exempt status if they
agree they will operate within defined limits and thresholds of
political and social welfare activities.
Next, we will establish an enterprise risk management
program across the IRS to provide a common framework for
capturing, reporting, and addressing risk. This is intended to
ensure that such information is brought to the attention of the
IRS Commissioner and other IRS leaders and external
stakeholders in a timelier manner.
Next, we will initiate additional internal and external
education and outreach about the role of the national taxpayer
advocate in assisting taxpayers in resolving problems with the
IRS.
I also want to point out that our pursuit of broad-based
reforms in the IRS does not mean that we believe the specific
challenges and concerns identified in the I.G. report on
501(c)(4)s are necessarily present in other parts of the
organization. In fact, I believe that any comprehensive review
of IRS operations must recognize the many critical successes
that the IRS has had in carrying out its mission over the last
several years.
The IRS is committed to correcting its mistakes, holding
individuals accountable as appropriate, and establishing
control elements that will help us mitigate the risks we face.
The employees of the IRS are committed to our mission and to
operating with integrity and fairness to all.
The IRS serves a vital purpose for this country, and we
need to earn and maintain the trust of the American people in
order to accomplish our mission. We are firmly moving in that
direction. And we will continue to report on our progress on a
regular basis as we fulfill our commitments.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Levin, that concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Werfel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Werfel.
For the purposes of preparing your report, did you speak to
former Commissioner Doug Shulman?
Mr. WERFEL. I did not.
Chairman CAMP. Did you speak to former Acting Commissioner
Steve Miller?
Mr. WERFEL. I did not.
Chairman CAMP. Did you talk with Joseph Grant, the former
Deputy Commissioner for TEGE?
Mr. WERFEL. No, I did not.
Chairman CAMP. Did you talk with Chief Counsel William
Wilkins?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Chairman CAMP. What were the basic summaries of those
conversations?
Mr. WERFEL. As a first matter, there were three things I
set out to do, which are in the report: First, understand where
the wrongdoing was so I could hold people accountable; second,
understand where the management failures and process mistakes
were in the Exempt Organizations Unit so we could fix them;
and, third, gain a broader understanding of IRS risks and
operations.
And I spoke to many people within the IRS. In fact, my
whole senior leadership team engaged in an ongoing series of
discussions. And Bill Wilkins is one of the senior leaders
within IRS.
Chairman CAMP. Did you talk to Sarah Hall Ingram, the
former Deputy Commissioner?
Mr. WERFEL. I have spoken to Sarah Hall Ingram, yes.
Chairman CAMP. As you prepared the report?
Mr. WERFEL. I----
Chairman CAMP. For the purposes of preparing the report,
did you speak to her?
Mr. WERFEL. I am not sure how to answer that question. I
spoke to her as part of my overall understanding of the
situation on the ground with the IRS. So, yes, I guess they all
connect.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. And did you speak with Lois Lerner,
the former Director of Exempt Organizations?
Mr. WERFEL. I did not.
Chairman CAMP. Well, I would say that your initial
conclusion that the IRS found no evidence of intentional
wrongdoing by IRS personnel, given the number of key players
that you did not talk to, I think is not necessarily an initial
conclusion, but an incomplete one. And I really don't see how
you were able to reach that.
But we know from our investigation that in the summer of
2011 Lois Lerner directed the Cincinnati office to change the
``Tea Party'' label to ``advocacy groups.'' Do you think this
was an intentional attempt to cover up the targeting?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't know--I don't know the answer to that
question. I think more work needs to be done to evaluate the
circumstances.
Chairman CAMP. Again, I find it difficult, then, to make
the conclusion that no evidence of intentional wrongdoing by
IRS personnel was done. But----
Mr. WERFEL. What I am suggesting is there is no evidence in
the record to suggest that there was an intentional coverup of
any kind.
Chairman CAMP. But you didn't even speak to her, so----
Mr. WERFEL. But each time that I have made the point, each
time that I have made----
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Werfel, I control the time. And my
question is, after she directed this change, Cincinnati
intentionally went back to targeting Tea Party groups. Do you
know who was responsible for this?
Mr. WERFEL. Do I know who was--well, I challenge the
premise of your question.
Chairman CAMP. After the change was made to ``advocacy
groups,'' the Cincinnati office went back to targeting Tea
Party groups. Do you know who was responsible for that activity
beginning again?
Mr. WERFEL. We are looking into the facts and circumstances
that arose. There are a lot of questions to be asked and
answered that haven't been asked and answered yet. And I am not
going to reach a definitive conclusion before the investigation
is complete.
Chairman CAMP. If you don't know, it is fine to say you
don't know.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Chairman CAMP. I think the answer is you don't know.
Do you know who in Washington, D.C., directed the lawyers
at the Exempt Organizations Technical Office to hold up the Tea
Party applications?
Mr. WERFEL. I do not know the answer to that question.
Chairman CAMP. Is the IRS interviewing employees who were
directly involved with the Tea Party discrimination at this
point?
Mr. WERFEL. Right now, the IRS is relying on the Justice
Department and the Inspector General to conduct those
interviews. We are working closely with them. But it is
critical that, because there is an ongoing criminal
investigation, we do not step in front of the Justice
Department and the I.G. at this time.
Chairman CAMP. Is the IRS conducting any internal document
review outside of complying with the requests that Congress has
been sending the agency?
Mr. WERFEL. We are conducting a very thorough document
review at this time.
Chairman CAMP. Your report also states that there is no
evidence of the use of inappropriate criteria in other IRS
business unit operations. And how did you reach that
conclusion? Are you interviewing employees in these units and
requesting information, or is there----
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, there is--the major divisions that are
involved in these types of activities of dealing directly with
taxpayer issues are our small business section; our large
business section; TEGE, which is the subject of the audit
report; and Wage and Investment.
I have met with the leaders of those operating divisions.
We have talked about the issues in the I.G. report that dealt
with the Exempt Organizations Unit. I have asked them to look
internally and do their own assessments of any specific
evidence they may have of similar problems or challenges in
their areas. They have determined that there are not--there is
some good reason for that.
And, in particular, I think it is important to point out
that in this area of tax-exempt review, it is one of the very
few areas within the IRS where the nature of political activity
is relevant to any determination that we would make on
eligibility or review. And so the other areas of the IRS
normally don't involve themselves in political activity.
All this said, we understand and mean no--I am, like all of
you, very concerned about what is in this I.G. report. It is a
very significant concern. We are hearing from taxpayers that
they are concerned. And that is why, out of an abundance of
caution and because it is important to reassure the taxpayers,
we are going to review all of our criteria across the entire
IRS and report back to you on our findings.
Chairman CAMP. So I think this leads into the statement in
the report that the IRS is digging deeper into the evidence
``to determine if there are instances of wrongdoing or
inappropriate conduct beyond the mismanagement identified in
the report.''
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely.
Chairman CAMP. So that is beyond the Exempt Organizations
Division. In that process, are you reviewing documents
requested by Congress, or is there some other internal review
in addition to that?
Mr. WERFEL. I think there is a lot of overlap, Mr.
Chairman. You have asked, this Committee and other committees
have asked for an enormous footprint of documents, which is
very justifiable. And we are in the process of producing them
and have produced a lot of documents for this Committee and
others.
We, as part of our efforts to get to the bottom of this,
are looking at a very similar footprint of documents in order
to make sure that we understand the causes of these
circumstances so that we can take the appropriate
accountability steps and corrective action.
Chairman CAMP. Well, I would note we are just beginning to
get emails. And so it is not as if we have all the documents at
our disposal yet that we are going to need to review.
But I have another line of questioning. You acknowledged
and your report acknowledges that the IRS inappropriately
targeted Tea Party groups. And since then, there have been
questions raised about whether the IRS was inappropriately
targeting progressive groups.
And I would like to read to you the Treasury Inspector
General's answer to this question, which the Minority was kind
enough to share with me this morning. ``We reviewed all cases
that the IRS identified as potential political cases and did
not limit our audit to allegations related to the Tea Party.''
So I would like to repeat that. TIGTA did not limit its audit
to just the Tea Party.
And let me just read another excerpt from their answer,
their written answer. ``From our audit work, we did not find
evidence that progressives were used by the IRS to select
potential political cases during the 2010 to 2012 timeframe. We
found no indication in any materials that `progressives' was a
term used to refer cases for scrutiny for political campaign
intervention.''
So we have conducted interviews with some of the key
Cincinnati IRS employees, and they have confirmed that to be
true. Does any part of your 30-day report contradict that
recent letter and finding by the Inspector General?
Mr. WERFEL. No, I don't think any part of our report
contradicts it. What our report determines is that there is
diversity in the types of political organizations that were
accounted for in the BOLO list. And that is all that is in our
report.
Chairman CAMP. And the BOLO list is a flagging. And only
the conservative Tea Party groups were referred for extra
scrutiny, isn't that correct, at this point? That is what we
know so far?
Mr. WERFEL. I think that is what the evidence points to so
far. But, as you have mentioned in your opening remarks, we are
in the early stages of this, and there is more investigation
that needs to be done to answer that very question.
Chairman CAMP. Yes. And the Inspector General is doing a
more thorough investigation. But at least in the recent letter
he sent us, he said he found no evidence to date. And your
report, as you have responded, doesn't contradict that.
And thank you. I yield to Mr. Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. You know, to try to set the stage for some
bipartisanship, just quickly, where did you start your
government service?
Mr. WERFEL. I started my government service in the Office
of Management and Budget. I was at the Justice Department for
some time. But at the time that this Administration came, I was
a senior leader in OMB and serving under President Bush.
Mr. LEVIN. Your report states, ``We have not found
involvement in these matters,'' talking about the criteria,
``by anyone outside of the IRS.'' Is that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct.
Mr. LEVIN. And you stand by that?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I stand by it. I think the statement in
the report is appropriately caveated with the point that there
are ongoing reviews and investigations that are necessary. But,
at this time, taxpayers and the public have questions, and the
answer to the question, have you found any evidence of
intentional wrongdoing, our answer is, no, we have not.
Mr. LEVIN. Your report also says--let me just ask you, in
terms of the involvement outside of the IRS, have you found any
involvement by anybody in the White House?
Mr. WERFEL. No, we have not.
Mr. LEVIN. There has been reference here to the I.G.'s
investigation. And I want everybody to understand, in the
letter that was sent there was use--there was a BOLO that had
the word ``progressives'' on it. Is that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. LEVIN. And you have asked that that BOLO and all others
no longer be used?
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct. We suspended the use of all
BOLO lists.
Mr. LEVIN. The I.G. letter also indicates--and all of this
was indicated for the first time--that there was a number of
groups, progressives, involved in the BOLO that were sent to a
different group within the IRS, and the I.G. did not talk with
anybody regarding what happened to those. So the notion that
the selecting out was only as to ``Tea Party'' and was not as
to ``progressives'' is simply incorrect.
And when the I.G. was sitting in your chair, he failed to
indicate who the others were. And when asked specifically if it
included progressive groups in another committee or
subcommittee hearing, he wasn't forthright. So I think he
should come back and talk to us and answer some questions.
Because, in terms of the selecting-out process, clearly it
involved progressive groups as well as Tea Party groups. That
was clear from the pie chart in his report, but he never
delineated who the others were, even as later asked. And if he
had come forth with that information, I think it would have
undercut a lot of the wild innuendos, that talk about a White
House enemies list, that talk about a culture of cover-up.
So we want him back. I hope, Mr. Chairman, you will have
him back.
And I think, Mr. Werfel, we know that you will encourage
the digging out of all the facts as fully as possible as you
proceed. Do you give us that pledge?
Mr. WERFEL. I do give you that pledge, absolutely.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Mr. WERFEL. Actually, Mr. Chairman, there is a question
that I answered from you that I think warrants further
clarification----
Chairman CAMP. Fine.
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. If that is okay?
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. WERFEL. And I don't remember your exact question, but I
want to make sure that I get out early in this hearing so that
we have that basis of information to guide the questions, is
that where we are right now in our fact-gathering--and, as you
said, it is early--we have evidence, obviously, of diversity of
political labels used in the BOLO lists.
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. WERFEL. We have also--as another example of where we
have diversity of political labels, this week we are sending
out letters to taxpayers that have been in our backlog for more
than 120 days to offer them this option, this fast-track
option.
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. WERFEL. There is diversity of political labels in the
groups that are getting this letter.
And, also, it is our understanding, as we review the facts,
that there is a diversity of political labels in those
organizations that were put in through process for further
review.
The challenge that I have in going deeper than that is as
follows. To go deeper into those facts could end up with
sensitive taxpayer information under 6103. The other challenge
is that, in looking at the diversity of groups, it is not
always clear where they stand on the political spectrum, and,
frankly, I don't want to know where they stand on the political
spectrum. I want the IRS to be in the business of just
detecting, because we have to under the law and regulation, the
extent of political activity, not knowing the type of politics.
But going back to your earlier question, I didn't want to
leave the Committee with the impression that we are not seeing
diversity of political labels across the spectrum. What I am
suggesting is more analysis, significantly more analysis, is
needed before we reach more conclusions about what that means
in terms of an IRS failure or an IRS issue.
Chairman CAMP. Well, that is why I find it perplexing that
you would conclude there is no evidence of intentional
wrongdoing by the IRS, when the Inspector General says that he
reviewed not only just Tea Party cases but others and, in his
letter dated June 26th, says that only Tea Party cases at this
point were flagged and sent to another review. There were no
progressive cases sent to another review.
Mr. LEVIN. To a different review.
Chairman CAMP. Please don't interrupt me, Mr. Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. To a different review.
Chairman CAMP. And so I think that is an important point.
And that is why we need the full Inspector General letter in
the record.
And I think that you might have called these ``initial
conclusions,'' and I think ``initial'' probably should be
emphasized. I would call them incomplete, given that we still
have more information to review.
With that, I will recognize Mr. Johnson.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, the American people want, need, and deserve to
know the truth, and I hope we get it.
Mr. Werfel, back in my district, it appears the Allen Area
Patriots have also been a target of the IRS. The bottom line is
that the IRS has been used as a political weapon. And that is
just outrageous.
Mr. Werfel, instead of targeting Americans because of their
belief, why doesn't the IRS target fraud and abuse that is
costing hardworking, law-abiding American taxpayers billions of
dollars?
Mr. Werfel, I would like to play a short video clip on an
issue that I have been working on for some time now. The clip
is from a WTHR TV investigative report. And this isn't a single
case.
[Video shown.]
Over the years, the I.G. has sounded the alarm about fraud
and abuse with the $1,000 refundable Child Tax Credit. Do you
agree this is a problem, yes or no?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I certainly agree that our----
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. That is good.
Isn't it true that one of the rules to claim the Child Tax
Credit is that the child has to live with the tax filer for
more than half of the year, yes or no?
Mr. WERFEL. That is difficult to confirm, that eligibility
point, I agree.
Mr. JOHNSON. Why, then, isn't the IRS enforcing this
residency rule? Mr. Werfel, I hope you will work with us to
address this. I have a bill that would help put a stop to this.
In fact, the bill would save taxpayers $24 billion.
I want to also ask you about another scandal, and that is
the IRS management of the Individual Taxpayer Identification
Number program, or ITIN. Again, why doesn't the IRS target
fraud and abuse instead of Americans for their beliefs?
Last summer, the I.G. issued a damning report in which it
found that IRS management discouraged IRS workers from
detecting fraudulent applications. The I.G.'s report led me to
call on the then-Commissioner Shulman to resign.
On the screen, I have Figure 6 from the 2012 I.G. report
showing most frequently used addresses for ITIN tax refunds. As
you can see, nearly 24,000 tax refunds, totaling $46.4 million,
were issued to the same address in Atlanta, Georgia. Bottom
line, these ITINs are costing taxpayers dearly because they can
be used to fraudulently get tax refunds.
And, last month, the I.G. issued another report that makes
it clear the IRS could be doing a better job protecting
taxpayer dollars. Just look at the figure on the screen. Over
1,000 ITINs were assigned to individuals using the same address
in Atlanta, Georgia.
Do you agree there is still a problem or not, yes or no?
Mr. WERFEL. I do agree there is still a problem, yes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Also, the I.G. found the IRS workers handling
the ITIN applications remained concerned that management will
basically pressure them to rubber-stamp applications instead of
ensuring that only qualified individuals receive.
Can you give us assurance that the IRS management won't do
this anymore?
Mr. WERFEL. I need to look further into that allegation.
But, on its face, it sounds like something that is
inappropriate, and I will work with the team. I----
Mr. JOHNSON. Let me just say in closing, your own report
acknowledges the Tax Code is nearly impossible to administer
because it is so complex. And, based on the billions in
improper payments being made with refundable credits, I will
just say your agency is proving you right every day. And it is
time for the IRS to stop targeting Americans and start
targeting fraud.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Welcome to the Committee.
You have said there is diversity in the BOLO lists, and you
admit that conservative groups were on the BOLO lists. Why is
it that we don't know whether or not there were progressive
groups on the BOLO lists?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, we do know that the word ``progressive''
did appear on a set of BOLO lists. We do know that.
When I was articulating the point about diversity, I was
trying to capture that the types of political organizations
that are on these BOLO lists are wide-ranging. But they do
include progressives.
Mr. RANGEL. But, you know, we seem to know what a
conservative is, but people--how come ``progressive'' now
becomes ``diversity'' instead of what it is? It is groups that
are considered to be liberal as opposed to the Tea Party that
is considered to be conservative. Is that correct, fair?
Mr. WERFEL. I think it is fair. I think----
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. As long as it is fair, why are you having
a problem with the Chairman? Couldn't you say that, in
determining whether there was abuse of the provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code, the staff were looking for signals for
organizations, whether they were liberal or whether they were
conservative, and the methods they used were not appropriate?
Is that a fair statement?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't want to jump to a particular
conclusion. I want----
Mr. RANGEL. Well, what part of that statement gives you a
problem?
Mr. WERFEL. Because where we are right now in our review is
we understand that these political labels of varying types were
on the BOLO lists, and we understand----
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. ``Tea Party'' is a type, right?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. RANGEL. Can you give me a type of name that would
describe a progressive, Democratic, liberal organization?
Mr. WERFEL. That is where--I mean, the word--and this is
where I reach my conclusion that there is a broad range or
diversity in the political groups, because there are some more
on the obvious side of the spectrum like the ``Tea Party'' and
then----
Mr. RANGEL. That is good enough for me. You are saying that
there are groups that you can say are progressive groups.
Mr. WERFEL. I would put them in three categories. There are
ones that are clearly on the conservative end of the spectrum,
some that are clearly on the liberal end of the spectrum, and
then there is a set of groups where it is difficult to
determine on the facts where they would land on that spectrum.
And maybe they don't land anywhere on that. Maybe they land
right in the middle.
Mr. RANGEL. Well, that just makes so much sense. And, so
far, even though you don't like the technique that was used,
you don't find that there was any deliberate political attacks
made. It was just that they were trying--based on what you know
now, they were trying to do their job, and they didn't do it in
the right way.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, my position is that the way in which this
should be structured, it should be looking generically at
political activity and not using labels that point toward
particular political persuasions, because that is inconsistent
with the IRS mission statement for how we are supposed to do
our work.
Mr. RANGEL. Do you think it is possible that the White
House would be supporting a targeting of progressive
organizations that supported his candidacy?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't even want to speculate on that. From my
short time at the IRS, I have seen no interaction between the
White House and the IRS that would extend to that level. I
personally have had no contact with the White House other than
to brief the President on this report.
Mr. RANGEL. And could you produce to us the type of names
that are on the BOLO lists so that we can make determinations
as to whether we think they are from the left or the right?
Could you help us out with that?
Mr. WERFEL. That has been provided to the Chairman, given
the taxpayer-sensitive nature of the information protected by
Section 6103 of the Code.
Mr. RANGEL. So you are saying the Chairman has a list of
organizations that were considered to be progressive that were
targeted.
Mr. WERFEL. What I am saying is the Chairman has been
delivered the unredacted version of the BOLO lists.
Mr. RANGEL. And that list that is unredacted includes
organizations that are considered to be progressive.
Mr. WERFEL. It includes taxpayer-sensitive information
across a broad spectrum of political organizations.
Mr. RANGEL. So the Chairman knows, or should know, that the
targeting concerned liberal as well as conservative
organizations.
Mr. WERFEL. That is not a question I feel appropriate to
answer.
Mr. RANGEL. But that information was delivered to the
Chairman.
Mr. WERFEL. We have delivered both the redacted and
unredacted version of all the BOLO lists to this Committee.
Mr. RANGEL. And the unredacted includes progressive
organizations.
Mr. WERFEL. It does, because it is on both the redacted and
the unredacted, yes.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
And, Mr. Rangel, I do want to note for the record that that
information was also provided to the Senate Finance Chairman,
Mr. Baucus.
And you should know that I have also delegated 6103 status
to Mr. Levin, so any 6103 information I have Mr. Levin also
has.
Mr. RANGEL. Are progressive organizations on that?
Chairman CAMP. Yes. So we are working in a bipartisan way
in terms of the sharing of 6103 information.
Mr. RANGEL. You don't know how glad I am to hear that, Mr.
Chairman. There appeared to be so much confusion before, but at
least we know that the abuse was to both types of
organizations, conservative as well as so-called progressives.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. And never wanting to comment too much on the
Senate, I believe Mr. Baucus has also shared this information
with Mr. Hatch, Senator Hatch.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. So now I will recognize Mr. Brady.
Mr. BRADY. Mr. Werfel, who initiated the targeting of
conservative organizations for extra scrutiny based on their
political beliefs?
Mr. WERFEL. That question is still subject to further
investigation.
Mr. BRADY. Who have you interviewed in the IRS on that
matter?
Mr. WERFEL. There are a variety of different employees
being interviewed----
Mr. BRADY. No----
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. By the Inspector General, the
Justice Department.
I know you are going to make the point that I have not
personally interviewed the----
Mr. BRADY. Or----
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. Employees. I understand that.
Mr. BRADY. Because you just testified you have not----
Mr. WERFEL. I have not.
Mr. BRADY [continuing]. Interviewed anyone within your
agency.
Mr. WERFEL. Right. And if it is helpful to the Committee, I
can explain the structure of my review----
Mr. BRADY. Sure.
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. And how we are----
Mr. BRADY. Let's go to the----
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. Uncovering every fact----
Mr. BRADY. Let's go to the key questions.
Mr. WERFEL. Please.
Mr. BRADY. You don't know who initiated the--who initiated
the targeting of donors to conservative organizations who
improperly apply the gift tax to their donations?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, the types of questions that were raised
to donors----
Mr. BRADY. Who, I guess is my question?
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. Are still subject to further
investigation. I am just taking issue with the ``targeting of
donors.'' I want to make sure that there is no supposition of--
--
Mr. BRADY. Commissioner, please. At this point, you haven't
interviewed them yet, so you can't honestly know, correct?
Mr. WERFEL. We----
Mr. BRADY. That is not a crime.
Mr. WERFEL. No, no, no. It is not a question of that we
haven't interviewed.
Mr. BRADY. Okay.
Mr. WERFEL. It is a question of that the investigation is
ongoing.
Mr. BRADY. Who leaked private taxpayer information,
including donors to the National Organization for Marriage, to
the Huffington Post and the Human Rights Campaign? Do you know?
Mr. WERFEL. I do not have that information.
Mr. BRADY. Who leaked private taxpayer information for 31
conservative groups to the media, specifically ProPublica? Do
you know?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't have that information. I will point out
that the I.G. reviewed those circumstances and found those
releases of information to be not intentional.
Mr. BRADY. But you don't know who leaked it.
Mr. WERFEL. I don't have that information at my fingertips.
Mr. BRADY. Who leaked private tax information to
participants of the President's Economic Recovery Advisory
Board?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, I have to learn more about the
circumstances of each issue that you are identifying----
Mr. BRADY. Who at the agency in Washington or within the
White House was involved in the targeting, delay, and
intimidation of applicants on the ``Be on the Lookout'' list?
Do you know?
Mr. WERFEL. I can answer some of the questions. I will say
this. I am not aware of anyone at the White House, the Treasury
Department, or otherwise that was involved in this. As I have
said, all the evidence that we have points to the involvement
of individuals within the IRS. And I am happy to talk through--
--
Mr. BRADY. Right.
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. That with you.
Mr. BRADY. Let's do--let's talk through this.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay.
Mr. BRADY. In regard to the targeting delays of the King
Street Tea Party/True the Vote application, who, at the time
IRS shared private taxpayer information to other Federal
agencies, such as the FBI, ATF, and OSHA, do you believe was
involved?
Mr. WERFEL. I believe, based on the question you have just
asked me, it is a question about a specific taxpayer, and I
can't answer that question.
Mr. BRADY. Finally, who at the IRS was involved in covering
up this pattern of abuse within the agency and concealing it
from the public and Congress for the past 2 years?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, I don't know that I would be comfortable
with the characterizations in the question. But I am happy to
walk through the managerial chain with you and the events as I
understand them.
Mr. BRADY. I guess my point is, you are not conducting
interviews. You don't know answers to the key questions. Yet,
in your report, you declare, ``There is no evidence of
intentional wrongdoing or misconduct on the part of IRS
personnel''--there is no evidence of intentional wrongdoing.
Mr. Werfel, this report is a sham. I would call it a
whitewash, but it is too thin and unsubstantial to even meet
that description.
And my point to you is that you don't work for the IRS; you
work for the American people. Your job isn't to cover up, it is
to open up this agency. Because what we are seeing, these
patterns of abuse and intimidation, the only goal appears to be
to silence the voice of people whose views you don't like. And
so getting to the truth is critical.
So my question is, I am told you are a decent person, so
are you serious about getting to the truth?
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. BRADY. Are you serious about----
Mr. WERFEL. And I am serious about----
Mr. BRADY [continuing]. Restoring the integrity of the IRS?
Mr. WERFEL. I am serious about getting to the truth, and I
am serious about doing it consistent with the rule of law and
procedure. And many of the criticisms that you are levying in
your set of questions, in order for me to overcome those
criticisms, in many cases I would have to violate that rule of
law and procedure.
Mr. BRADY. Let's do this.
Mr. WERFEL. So if----
Mr. BRADY. Let's do this.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay. Go ahead.
Mr. BRADY. Since you are serious, will you commit to
returning to the Committee in 30 days with more complete
answers to the key questions before us?
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely. As these answers become available,
I am ready to submit them.
But I think it is very important to understand that, in
gathering these answers, we have to follow the rule of law and
procedure. So the point----
Mr. BRADY. You know, wouldn't it have been great if the
IRS----
Mr. LEVIN. Could the witness finish? Point of order.
Mr. BRADY. If I can finish?
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Brady controls the time.
Mr. LEVIN. But let the witness answer the questions.
Chairman CAMP. It is up to Mr. Brady to conduct his
questioning as he sees fit.
Mr. BRADY. Wouldn't it have been terrific if the IRS had
followed the rule of law and procedure when targeting these
conservative groups and donors, leaking their private taxpayer
information, concealing it from the public, and then misleading
Congress?
You need to understand one thing. The Ways and Means
Committee is going to get to the truth, good or bad. We are not
going to stop until we learn the whole truth. And we are going
to reveal who initiated these abuses, who participated, who
encouraged them, and who concealed them. We are going to hold
them accountable, including you if you hinder this
investigation. And then we are going to make sure the IRS never
does this again to average taxpayers.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Time has expired.
Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, thank you for being willing to be the Director
of the IRS. After that last set of questions, I think it is
important to thank you. You have been at the center of a
firestorm, as has the whole agency. And the IRS has made
attempts to address the criticisms and meet the challenges that
face us.
I said it before in this Committee, but it bears repeating:
The IRS has a difficult and almost impossible and thankless
job. It is the agency easiest to dislike and easiest to throw
under the bus. You go back to the Bible, who do they pick out
to talk about? Tax collectors. Remember Zacchaeus? These are
the people who are at the bottom of the society. And that is
the way we are treating IRS people, and I don't believe it is
fair. You are hardworking, dedicated civil servants who do your
very best to administer the law.
Now, I am going to stop my--what I was going to say, except
to say one thing. I don't think BOLO lists should be thrown
out. Every time I get on a United Airlines flight to go home to
Seattle, before it leaves the ground the first officer leaves
the cockpit and goes down a BOLO list. He is on the lookout for
a lot of things on that plane. You use it to organize your
thinking.
The American College of Surgeons has just adopted BOLO
lists. Before they take somebody into surgery, there is a whole
long checklist of things that they look at in anticipation
before they put you under anesthesia and do surgery.
We think that is the way you organize your thinking. And it
is clear to me that a ``Be on the Lookout'' list is a good
idea. So don't say you are going to throw them away, because we
know that--otherwise, you become the DMV in Seattle, where you
go in to get your driver's license, you take a number, and you
wait, and you will have a long line of people because they are
not organized. They are taking them one at a time. And if you
take 292 or 298 one at a time and don't organize your thinking,
it doesn't make any sense. So I want you to be careful about
how you reorganize.
But I would like you to take the rest of my time to answer
the questions that Mr. Brady kept interrupting you on.
Mr. WERFEL. I appreciate that, Congressman.
The point I was trying to make in response to Mr. Brady's
questions was that there are certain procedures that need to be
followed in getting the answers that this Committee is looking
for and the American people are looking for.
As an example, clearly, the employees involved need to be
interviewed. And I am helping to make sure that those employees
are interviewed. The issue is that I have been asked by the
Justice Department and the Inspector General to enable them to
do the interviews, to ask all the thorough questions to get to
the bottom of this, because that will make sure that if there
is a prosecutorial action that needs to be taken, that it will
be clean and the evidence chain will be clean. These are very
specific instructions coming from the Justice Department and
the Inspector General.
So the notion that no witnesses are being interviewed is
not accurate. The accurate answer is that witnesses are being
interviewed. Whether I am personally sitting across the table
or not from interviewing--I would love to be able to. But the
reality is I am going to follow the process and the rule of law
in getting to the bottom of it. And one of the constraints that
I have is that I have to let professional investigators do the
interviewing. And that is a constraint that I am willing to
live with, because I trust that these professional
investigators will be able to get to the bottom of it.
One more point that I want to make is about the rule of law
and procedure around accountability. There is going to be a lot
of questions and implications that the accountability is not
real because people are still at the IRS and they are still
getting a paycheck.
The reality is that when you take personnel action for
discipline against a civil servant, there are rules of
procedure that need to be followed. And if I went off and cut
out those rules of procedure and fired people and suspended
them without pay, then I personally would be violating those
rules of law and procedure.
And they are put in place for a reason. Those due-process
protections are put in place so that, in the event that an
employee is unfairly selected for discipline, they have an
opportunity to defend themselves. There is a good reason for
them.
So when we see things that bother us in government, in
particular in the IRS, and we want people held accountable,
what we need to focus on is making sure that we are following a
very diligent and expedient process in holding those
individuals accountable. And that is what we are doing right
now. We are pursuing the correct set of disciplinary actions,
but we are doing it consistent with the laws and regulations
that govern our operations.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Time has expired.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Ryan is recognized.
Mr. RYAN. Thank you.
Mr. Werfel, Secretary Lew asked you to put this report
together to make sure that nothing like this ever happens
again. I look at page 35, and I see basically a case made for a
budget increase. Your budget asks for over a billion dollars in
more spending for your agency, and you are asking us to hire
another 4,572 employees.
Let me read to you what we have already learned in just 2
months. In just 2 months, we have a conference in Atlanta which
a celebrity chef, Wolfgang Puck, catered, costing $2.4 million;
we have a conference in Anaheim, California, $4.1 million; a
conference in Philadelphia, $2.9 million; a conference in San
Diego, $4.1 million.
At one of these conferences, you spent $135,000 for 15
speakers. That is about $9,000 per speaker. The IRS paid for
the Deputy Commissioner to stay 5 nights in the presidential
suite at the Hilton hotel during one of these conferences. You
paid $17,000 to a speaker to create paintings of Bono, Michael
Jordan, Abraham Lincoln, and others.
We hear of a report of crony contracting between an--
improper relationship between an IRS contractor and a person
whose business had less than $250,000 in income the prior year,
getting awarded a $500 million contract.
Between 2010 and 2012, you had 225 conferences, costing $49
million.
Let me see if I can put this in perspective for you. I
represent the town of Sturtevant, Wisconsin. A little less than
7,000 people live there. It is a great village. The village of
Sturtevant is basically a blue-collar town. People work at the
Case tractor factory. They work at the S.C. Johnson factory. It
is surrounded by cornfields and bean fields and lots of small
businesses.
It took more than 100 percent of the Federal taxes paid by
the working families of the Village of Sturtevant, Wisconsin,
to pay for the 225 conferences you arranged for at the IRS from
2010 to 2012. That is the way you need to think of this. People
are working hard, they are living paycheck to paycheck, they
are paying their taxes, and this is what you are spending their
taxpayer dollars on?
And now you come here asking us for a billion dollars,
about a 10 percent increase. You are asking us to hire another
4,500 people.
I represent Rock County, that is my home. The population of
Rock County, all the families of Rock County, their taxes
wouldn't even cover the billion-dollar increase that you are
asking for.
You are here representing the President. You are asking us
for this increase. I know you are new to the IRS, you come from
the Office of Management and Budget, and you have a great
reputation. So you are a budget cruncher. How on earth do you
think you have the moral authority to ask for this? Why would
we, representing the taxpayers we represent, give you all this
extra money you are asking for if this is what the IRS is doing
with hard-earned taxpayer dollars? We are seeing just in 2
months waste, fraud, abuse, and taxpayer targeting, and you are
saying give us another billion dollars. Why should we do that?
Mr. WERFEL. Congressman, you are asking very important
questions and I would love the opportunity to address them.
First, I agree that the costs that you are referring to are
excessive and in many cases inappropriate and should not have
happened. The reports that are coming out that are identifying
these are covering events that occurred 2 and 3 years ago. And
my concern is great, but my concern would be even greater if I
saw that those patterns of spending are continuing through
today.
In many cases they are not. We are looking at a 68 percent
cut in training travel, we are looking at a 45 percent cut in
other travel in the IRS. We have cut our printing by 30
percent, we have cut our professional and technical services by
25 percent. There are deep cuts going on----
Mr. RYAN. Okay.
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. In a lot of these activities.
Now----
Mr. RYAN. Okay. Here is my suggestion. Let's have these
cuts take place and then have you come back to us in a year or
2 and let's see if you are running this place well, then we
will consider a budget increase. How does that sound?
Mr. WERFEL. I will say that it is a fair point. I will say
this, that there are more cuts to be made. And I think in this
report, in section three, and in subsequent testimony that I
will give to this Committee, I will furnish for you additional
cuts so that
we can go even deeper so that every penny is watched even more
closely----
Mr. RYAN. Great. So it sounds like you don't need a budget
increase.
Mr. WERFEL. No, I am not saying that, because I think there
is a broader macro point. It goes, I think, back to some of the
questions that Congressman Johnson was asking. We still have an
indispensable mission to enforce the Tax Code, to go after
fraud. The cuts that we are seeing dwarf any kind of conference
expenditures that we have. The materiality difference is much
different. And we just have to look at this and say, okay, has
the IRS done enough to get its shop in order to cut those
excessive costs? I will make the case to you that we are going
in the right direction. But I will also make the case to you
that if we underfund other critical priorities that lead to
improved taxpayer service and improved enforcement of the Tax
Code then we are leaving dollars on the table for the American
people because every dollar spent by the IRS has a positive----
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. RYAN. Just don't forget, you work for the taxpayer, it
is not the other way around.
Mr. WERFEL. I understand that.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Commissioner, for being here.
Could you tell us how long you have been on the job?
Mr. WERFEL. I started----
Mr. LEWIS. How many days?
Mr. WERFEL. It has been about 34 days.
Mr. LEWIS. So all of this stuff, all of this stuff just
evaporated into air? It didn't happen on your watch?
Mr. WERFEL. No, I arrived in late May and am doing my best
to identify the problems and fix them.
Mr. LEWIS. Could you tell us something about your
background, your last job?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes. I think you know, and I have talked about
this before in other hearings, the reason why I was chosen for
this job is a couple of different reasons. And I appreciate
Congressman Ryan's comment that I have a strong reputation. I
served in leadership positions in both the Bush and Obama
Administrations. I consider myself to be nonpartisan. The
issues that I have worked on across my career have been very
nonpartisan. It is all about better government management,
reducing fraud, reducing error, reducing improper payments,
improving the way the government manages its real estate, just
very nuts and bolts.
I think Ranking Member Levin referred to me as a
technocrat, and I have developed an expertise in public sector
management over a 16-year career as a civil servant. Most
recently in my role at OMB I developed a reputation and
experience in tackling some of government's toughest
challenges. For example, back in 2009, 2010 I was the
Administration's lead on implementing the Recovery Act, which
was a very large and complex law that involved a lot of
different technical complexities that needed to be done, and I
was the point guard for it and developed a reputation of doing
it effectively.
More recently I have been involved in helping the
government prepare for a government shutdown, helping us deal
with the sequester. These are tough public sector management
challenges, and I was able to distinguish myself to the
Administration leadership as someone who can handle a situation
like this effectively.
So when you combine those factors I think the bottom line
is, and when I was presented with this opportunity I basically
said, I will do this. I am going to do it because I am going to
have this guiding principle that I am always going to work to
find the right answer to every challenge that I am confronted
with. I am doing what is in the best interest of the taxpayer,
I am doing this in the best interests of the IRS. And I think
if I can hold to those guiding principles then I am going to be
able to go to sleep every night knowing that it was a smart
decision to take this job and take the IRS forward.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Commissioner, I want to thank you for your
willingness to serve, to put yourself in the way and make a
contribution to getting the IRS in order.
How do you feel about the IRS' future in processing tax-
exempt organizations' applications?
Mr. WERFEL. When I arrived in late May we had a very broken
process, clearly. The IG report points to both management and
process failures that were going on in that area. There is new
leadership in place, I have a lot of trust in those new
leaders. In particular, an individual named Ken Corbin is now
running the Exempt Organizations Unit. He is a process expert.
He is already inspiring in me a lot of confidence that he is in
there working the issue, reengineering, and redesigning the
process, and making the appropriate fixes.
We have agreed to all nine IG recommendations for how to
fix the Exempt Organizations Unit. We are making good progress
on that and that progress is outlined in this report. We are
taking steps above and beyond what the IG recommended, because
we think there is even more to be done to make sure that we are
extremely robust in our fixes. Those are also outlined in the
report and we are making good progress there.
It is a challenging environment. What I have learned is
reviewing these applications for tax-exempt status is difficult
because you are on a foundation of ambiguous laws and
regulations. And as I said, in very few other areas within the
IRS is a determination on the nature and extent of political
activity a relevant factor to consider. So this part of the IRS
has this kind of unique set of requirements. And, clearly, when
you combine that unique set of requirements and management
weakness and leadership weakness, we had a failure. But I am
optimistic that we have the right people in place right now,
specifically in the Exempt Organizations Unit, in services and
enforcement, to lead us to get this problem corrected.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you very much, and I look forward to
working with you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Reichert.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, isn't it true that 100 percent of Tea Party
applications were flagged for extra scrutiny?
Mr. WERFEL. It is my understanding the way the process
worked is if there was Tea Party in the application it was
automatically moved into this area of further review, yes.
Mr. REICHERT. Okay. And do you know how many progressive
groups were flagged?
Mr. WERFEL. I do not have that number.
Mr. REICHERT. I do.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay.
Mr. REICHERT. Our investigation shows that there were seven
flagged. Do you know how many were approved?
Mr. WERFEL. I do not have that number at my fingertips.
Mr. REICHERT. All of those applications were approved.
I want to follow up on some questioning that occurred a
little earlier in the hearing regarding intent. I am an old
cop, 33 years. Most of that time I was a homicide investigator.
So we dealt a lot with criminal intent. And so when you use the
word intentional or unintentional it sort of is a flag for me
to inquire a little bit further.
So are you talking about criminal intent? Are you finding
that there is no criminal intent? Or are you saying that there
is no intent to what?
Mr. WERFEL. The questions that are being asked by
investigators deal with both criminal intent and other types of
intent, which, for example, could mean political bias, but no
criminal intent. There is gradations here. I am not a legal
expert on them. But I know that part of the ongoing review is
to understand the nature and circumstances of this.
Mr. REICHERT. I also know that there are two investigations
that occur, just like there were in the sheriff's office when I
was the sheriff in Seattle. You have the criminal investigation
that is ongoing and then you have an internal investigation.
Sometimes we know the internal investigation is put to the side
while the criminal investigation continues on.
Are you in contact with those that are conducting the
criminal investigation? Are they making you aware of the
information that they are finding as far as any possible
criminal allegations with any of the employees within the
Internal Revenue Service?
Mr. WERFEL. My main point of contact in this effort is
Russell George, the Inspector General, and his team. He is
working directly with the Justice Department. They give us
periodic updates on their progress.
Mr. REICHERT. Do you have any information that there may be
some criminal----
Mr. WERFEL. No such evidence has been shared with me at
this time.
Mr. REICHERT. So to get back to the intent part, your
report states that some applicants were subjected to overly
burdensome, intrusive questions, questionnaires, and data
requests that went way beyond the acceptable level of
factfinding. Yet at the same time it says that none of the
actions taken by the IRS employees were intentional. I don't
understand that, how you can ask those questions, provide those
questionnaires, asking for certain data, but yet be
unintentional in conducting that sort of activity.
Tea Party members had--a donor had been threatened, some
donors have been threatened. They had confidential information
that had been leaked. They were sent inappropriate and
intrusive questions, unintentionally threatening donors. I
don't understand unintentional in that light either.
And so I am falling in line with what Mr. Brady said, that
the report--I understand your desire to be a public servant,
you want to do the right thing, but in order for you to do
that, Mr. Werfel, and for the American public to have trust in
you and the IRS again, you can't be vague and misleading in
your statement that you have given to this Committee. You say
that even after senior IRS leadership was informed of the
inappropriate activities in question it failed both to
effectively put an end to the activity and to inform the proper
committees in Congress in a timely fashion despite requests
from Congress on this topic.
So I don't understand how your leadership could be found to
be unintentional and why they are not reporting to Congress.
Mr. Miller sat here and conveniently lost his memory during his
questioning. So could you explain to me unintentional?
Mr. WERFEL. I can.
Mr. REICHERT. It makes no sense to me and I am sure it
makes no sense to the American public.
Mr. WERFEL. Let me offer my best explanation.
First, I want to go back to the point where we are hearing
questions from taxpayers, they want to know if there was
intentional wrongdoing here. We are answering that question
very carefully and saying there is more work that needs to be
done but right now we don't have evidence.
Mr. REICHERT. But, Mr. Werfel, you really can't say that it
was unintentional is my point.
Mr. WERFEL. Let me address that.
Mr. REICHERT. You should not be saying--sir, you should not
be saying in your report that you found that this was
unintentional, because you don't know. You don't know.
Mr. WERFEL. And that is basically what we are saying, there
is no evidence.
Mr. REICHERT. Is that true, you don't know?
Mr. WERFEL. But let me make the point about----
Mr. REICHERT. Why did you say it was unintentional?
Mr. WERFEL. Let me offer----
Mr. REICHERT. No, why did you say it was unintentional when
you don't know? You just said you don't know.
Mr. WERFEL. I did not say that it was unintentional.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired. Mr. Werfel, why don't you
answer briefly and then we will go on.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay. First of all let me clarify what I said.
I said very clearly in the report that more work needs to be
done to review documents, to interview folks, but at this point
we don't have any evidence of intentional wrongdoing.
And what we meant by that is that it is a different
situation if a manager thinks and an employee thinks this is
the right thing to do, this is how I am supposed to conduct my
business. And they could be mistaken, and they could be
incompetent, and it could be total mismanagement in how they
think they are appropriately carrying out their duties, which
is different than them saying, I know this is wrong, but I am
going to do it anyway because I have a particular agenda in
mind. And that is the difference that we are trying to
distinguish.
Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you. Time has expired.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, do you need 2 more minutes of my time.
Mr. WERFEL. No--thank you for the offer, though. Thank you.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Werfel, clarify something. The IG letter
states that there are at least two groups of specialists within
the IRS that used the BOLOs. The first is the specialists that
are dealt with in 298 cases flagged for political campaign
intervention. The second, it is the team of specialists in the
Touch and Go unit. We know that some of the progressive group
applications went to the 298 teams of specialists. The
Inspector General did not investigate how the progressives were
handled by the Touch and Go unit. Have you looked into this?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, we are in the process of looking into it.
When the report says that we start with the audit report and
all the various materials that the Inspector General provided
us in support of the audit report we are going deeper than that
and broader than that. That is, for example, how we found the
BOLO lists with the inappropriate criteria because we were
going beyond the Inspector General footprint. And, of course,
when we found them we put an immediate suspension to them
because we were very concerned about them.
And when you go deeper and broader into this issue you see
other categories. You mentioned Touch and Go. And so we are
looking into it and trying to understand, how were these lists
used, what were the circumstances that caused these
inappropriate political labels to occur? How were they used?
What impact did it have on taxpayers?
These were all questions that we are asking in real time,
and like everyone on this Committee I want answers to them, but
I am going to follow an expedient and fair and thorough process
to get those answers. And I will be back here to answer those
questions in the future.
Mr. NEAL. You are congratulated by Members on the other
side for the vigor with which you have taken up the task of
pursuing these different questions and then you are accused of
not doing followup. I mean, there is an element of
inconsistency to that as you try to figure out how to pursue
new information and data as you come across it.
Now, the issue really here for all of us is the following.
Citizens United caused the IRS to be flooded with applications
from groups seeking 501(c)(4) status, and why was that? In
large part it is because Super PACs must disclose their donors
while 501(c)(4)s do not. That is really what happened here.
And as we have tried to unearth some of these questions
where Members on the Democratic side have been equally vigilant
in pursuing what we might deem to be egregious moments with IRS
pursuit, it is obvious as well that you haven't finished your
work and you need to be given some time and opportunity to
pursue these cases.
We all need to be outraged. The American people shouldn't
be afraid of the IRS, we have all established that. But I think
the simple point is you would argue you need more time. Is that
correct?
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely we need more time. And my hope
today, and in this report, and in every communication I have
with the public or the Committee, is that there is transparency
into the process that we are following. And I want to be clear
that the process that we are following has certain legal and
process constraints, procedural constraints, but we are moving
as expeditiously as we can. We are getting documents to the
Committee, witnesses are being interviewed, materials are being
furnished to the Congress. A lot of the questions orient around
materials that we provided as part of this growing
investigation of information that we provided earlier this
week.
So absolutely, there are more questions to answer. And I
think the track record we are demonstrating here is a diligence
to answer them, but also a caution to make sure that we are
following the rule of law and procedure in doing so. It is a
tough balance because, as I said, I want these answers as
quickly as possible. But it is absolutely essential that I
follow appropriate due process procedures in running this
investigation. I think any investigation across a broad
spectrum of organizations and leaders and legal investigations
would follow those same principles.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Chairman, we are all better off if we have an
accurate portrayal of precisely what happened as opposed to the
accusatory tone that is being suggested. And you can see,
incidentally, that the argument has already shifted here. We
have moved to the conferences, which is a legitimate criticism,
away from the focal point of this hearing, and that is whether
or not political groups were targeted by the IRS. So it occurs
to me that perhaps some of the argument is weakening on the
other side.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Dr. Boustany.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Werfel.
Mr. WERFEL. Thank you.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I agree it is going to take time to get to
the bottom of this, but one disagreement I have with you at
this point in time with the 30-day report, Mr. Werfel, is I
don't see a sense of urgency. The big picture here is that you
have an obligation on your shoulders to restore the trust in
this entity, the IRS, to restore the trust with the American
people and with this Congress.
Now, in your report you have a section titled
``Transparency with Critical Oversight Organizations'' where
you talk about the IRS' failure to properly inform Congress
about the issues that were occurring, even after congressional
committees specifically began asking questions, and we started
asking questions years ago on this. But let me get this
straight, in Acting Commissioner Miller's June 15th letter to
me after we had gone back and forth--and I had meetings with
Shulman, meetings with Miller, hearings with both of them, and
letters. I have a June 15th letter here and the only response
essentially that we received was that EO took steps to
coordinate the handling of these cases to ensure consistency.
Now, Mr. Brady asked questions earlier and you told Mr.
Brady that you disagreed with the characterization that IRS
employees engaged in a coverup. But if you know the truth on
this, I mean if you know that there were folks in senior
positions at IRS who were misleading, evasive, essentially
covering up what was going on with targeting, if you know this
and you are not coming forward with this, is that a coverup?
Mr. WERFEL. No. And what I said to the Congressman earlier
was that I am not ready to draw a conclusion. He was asking a
question in a way that if I answered it, it could imply that I
was agreeing with the premise of his questions. Your question
is, is there a coverup? I don't know the answer to that
question. I think the key is that we make sure that we do the
thorough investigation. I think the Justice Department and the
IG are doing that.
Mr. BOUSTANY. But we know that Commissioner Shulman and we
know that Acting Commissioner Miller were informed of these
things and yet they continued to basically evade our
questioning, they were misleading with us. This has been
determined so far in the investigation, it certainly had been
determined by the TIGTA audit. We need you to have a sense of
urgency to come clean. You have an obligation to the American
taxpayer and to this Congress to follow through with our
oversight function and with transparency in front of the
American people.
Mr. WERFEL. So the commitments that I am making today are,
one, to explore all the facts, including questions about intent
or concern that you have with respect to why answers weren't
questioned more quickly. I am not going to draw a conclusion
now and say we have definitely decided.
But let me make one more point. One of the important things
in this report is an important point that I think is going to
be very helpful to this Committee. I am suggesting that what
the IRS needs to do is more readily share information on
emerging risk areas and emerging operational issues within the
IRS with this Committee sooner rather than later.
Mr. BOUSTANY. No, I get that, I get that.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I want to shift gears for a moment and talk
about the bonuses that have been distributed. It has gotten a
lot of press.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, yes.
Mr. BOUSTANY. And included in these bonuses during the time
that targeting was occurring, we know that a quarter of a
million dollars were paid out to just four employees at the
IRS, all of whom resigned or are on administrative leave at
this point due to their involvement in the Tea Party
discrimination issue.
One individual, the first to resign, received more than
$83,000 in bonuses on top of his salary of $177,000. And we
also know that others have received bonuses who were involved
in this tax exempt issue targeting Tea Party entities.
Now, in light of all this, are you going to take any steps
to put a freeze on this? Is there going to be an attempt to
recoup some of that bonus money?
Mr. WERFEL. Let me answer the question in a couple of
different ways. First, I agree when you look at the
juxtaposition of individual management and judgment failures
that went on in this situation and you juxtapose that against
the bonuses received, it is very troubling. It is part of my
larger conclusion here that the IRS leadership did not have
timely enough understanding of what was going on with these
particular activities to make informed judgments about
compensation through bonuses.
Second, I mentioned earlier to Congressman Ryan about me
coming back to this Committee with additional ways in which we
can cut costs even further, and I think bonuses is an
opportunity.
Mr. BOUSTANY. You can put a freeze on it now. Put a freeze
on these bonuses.
Mr. WERFEL. I am glad you asked the question, because there
has been some public misunderstanding about where we stand with
our bonuses for this year and if I could clarify it.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Yeah, but the trust with the American people
has been broken. I understand contracts and union contracts----
Mr. WERFEL. Well, if I can explain it----
Mr. BOUSTANY [continuing]. And those kinds of things.
Mr. WERFEL. If I can explain it, here is the situation with
our bonuses. When I was in OMB I signed out a policy that froze
bonuses across the government in light of the sequester. It was
one of our methods of dealing with the sequester cuts, a bonus
freeze. But that guidance also said it was subject to legal
constraint. So if the bonuses had to be legally paid out we had
to look into that issue.
What is going on----
Mr. BOUSTANY. But the trust has been broken.
Mr. WERFEL. Right. What is going on at IRS now is that we
have a union and we have a bargaining unit and an agreement
that we will bargain on the question of bonuses with that
union. And my answer on bonuses is that no decision has been
made. Going back to my point about following the rules of law
and procedure, I have an obligation before I freeze the bonuses
for IRS, if that is the decision that is ultimately made. I
don't know at this time. The first step is my legal requirement
to bargain that issue with the unions, and that takes time. We
are going through that process right now.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Mr. Chairman, we need a sense of urgency with
this and leadership to put a freeze on these bonuses.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. Becerra.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Werfel, thank you very much for being with
us, and I look forward to having you come back. I think you
have mentioned that everything you have stated in your reports
and everything that the IRS has done so far to investigate this
matter is not yet complete. Is that accurate?
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct.
Mr. BECERRA. So when you say at this point you have found
no evidence of wrongdoing, it is as of this point.
Mr. WERFEL. If that is the question we are getting raised,
then I feel compelled to give the most honest answer I can,
which is exactly the point. More analysis is needed, but at
this point in time, if you are asking me have we found evidence
of intentional wrongdoing, we have not. And I understand the
confusion around the word intentional because these actions
still happen. I tried to explain it is the difference between
whether someone knows they are actually doing something wrong
or if it is a question of management incompetence or neglect of
duty.
We certainly have evidence of neglect of duty. What we
don't have evidence yet of is that someone knowingly did
something wrong based on political animus or criminal intent.
That evidence just hasn't materialized yet.
Mr. BECERRA. And you use, I think, the operative word, the
evidence. So to date there is no evidence of wrongdoing.
Mr. WERFEL. There is no evidence of intentional wrongdoing.
There is evidence of managerial wrongdoing.
Mr. BECERRA. And to date there is no evidence linking
anything that occurred at the IRS to the White House.
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct.
Mr. BECERRA. Okay. And as of today you are in the process
of investigating.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, there are more people to talk to, and in
many cases under oath, and there are more documents to review.
Mr. BECERRA. And, as I think you have tried to make clear
but have been interrupted as you tried to provide the answer,
the reason you haven't spoken to some of the folks that are
principal to this investigation is because others have the
principal responsibility to do the investigation.
Mr. WERFEL. I have two thoughts to this question because it
keeps coming up. One is the legal, the rule of law. The legal
process prohibits me from talking to these employees. The
Justice Department and the Inspector General are the
appropriate officials.
Second, even if there was no constraint, we also have
professional investigators on the scene that are very skilled
in talking to witnesses, and ultimately we might make a
decision that those individuals are the ones who should be
interviewing the witnesses and providing that information to
me.
Mr. BECERRA. Well, we want you to be able to continue with
that investigation the right way, and we hope that you are able
to come back and answer the questions that you can given the
work that you are doing and the jurisdiction you have to
provide the answers.
But I would say at this stage what we are hearing from you,
in fact I think what we heard from Mr. George, the Inspector
General, is that there is an investigation that is ongoing. In
fact the Chairman of the Committee in his opening statement
said that we are still in the early stages of this
investigation, that the Inspector General is doing a more
thorough investigation. Mr. Brady, my colleague on the
Republican side, said we are not going to stop until we learn
the whole truth. So we still need to find out the facts.
At this stage we have an investigation ongoing. It is a
half-baked investigation. And to reach any conclusions would
mean we have reached half-baked conclusions. And so whether it
is your conclusion or my Republican colleagues' conclusion, for
anyone to make accusations at this stage it is with only part
of the information.
Mr. WERFEL. And there comes the distinction. To answer
``this is exactly how it happened'' is not a question that we
can answer yet. But I think we can answer, is there any
evidence that any of this has materialized, that is a question
we can answer because we are in the process. And I can
comment----
Mr. BECERRA. Good point.
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. On whether the evidence has
materialized in any way.
Mr. BECERRA. Good point. So far what the evidence tells you
is what you are responding to and we appreciate that.
I would say I, too, would like to have you back. I hope
every one of my colleagues on this panel would agree that we
have to have Inspector General George back because he has, as
Ricky Ricardo would tell Lucille Ball, he has some 'splaining
to do. There is a lot that he has not yet answered. In fact,
there are some things that he answered that may not have been
forthcoming.
I would like to finish with one last point. Now, this whole
investigation centers around the issue of 501(c)(4)
organizations. Now, as you know, 501(c)(4) organizations are
social welfare organizations. Under the law 501(c)(4) applies
to organizations that are not organized for profit, but
operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare.
I am not sure if you are aware, Mr. Werfel, but those same
501(c)(4) social welfare organizations spent $256 million on
political expenditures in 2012. Did you know that that is more
money spent by these social welfare organizations, nonprofits,
than the two political parties combined, which spent $255
million?
So that is the crux of the problem here, is that we have
so-called social welfare organizations that spend more money
than the two political parties combined. And so when IRS is
concerned that there may be some organizations that are trying
to game the system at taxpayer expense, that is why we have to
have these investigations. So we hope to have you back.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you.
Mr. Werfel, my constituents are afraid of guys like you.
They look at this hearing, they listen to you--and I accept at
face value that you have a good reputation from the past--but
they look at you and they are afraid. They are afraid of the
power that you have, they are afraid of your clinical and
somewhat dispassionate approach on this. And I want to walk you
through this to recognize the fear that they have because of
the power that you have.
And my prediction is that our country is at a tipping point
right now, and the tipping point is there is an awakening
amongst the governed about authority that they have delegated
to Congress and that Congress has delegated in this place to
the IRS, and that authority has been abused.
You used language earlier, things like, I am serious, I
cling to the rule of law, you know what I mean, those types of
things. And, frankly, I would expect you to say things like
that and I would be discouraged not to hear you say things like
that. But you are familiar with the Taxpayer Bill of Rights of
1998, I assume, as a general document, it is a statute. And in
the Taxpayer Bill of Rights it is very clear that the Internal
Revenue Service is prohibited under the law from willful misuse
of provisions of section 6103 for the purpose of concealing
information from a congressional inquiry. You are familiar with
that, aren't you?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. ROSKAM. This is a congressional inquiry, clearly. There
has been a request by this Committee of documents to be
forthcoming from the Internal Revenue Service. And here is an
example of two of them. They have been redacted to the point of
absurdity.
Now, we have knowledge that there is information in these
two documents that is not subject to 6103 protection, and so
the entire section 6103 question should be set aside. And what
I am suggesting is the fear that animates the hearts of my
constituents when they look at you is they say, we are not
getting the straight answer, we are seeing bureaucratic
doubletalk, we are seeing a bunch of nonsense, how can we
possibly pierce through this?
And so the level of anxiety and the concern that you hear
from Committee Members is the recognition of an abuse of power,
but it is a gratuitous abuse of power. Now even when the
investigation comes up, the Committee, based on lawful
requests, is not getting the type of answers it requires.
So can you assure us that this type of nonsense, where I
know beyond a shadow of a doubt that there is information in
these documents that should not be subject to 6103--that the
IRS is claiming to an absurd, Kafkaesque level, that somehow
this needs to be protected--can you assure us, based on your 30
days on the job, that this nonsense will stop?
Mr. WERFEL. Let me give you several assurances that you can
give to your constituents to clarify. The first assurance I
would give is that the information that you are holding in your
hand is not being held just by the IRS. We have submitted all
the information, minus all those black lines and those
redactions, to the Chairman of this Committee. So the notion
and the implication that that information is being held just by
the IRS is incorrect.
Mr. ROSKAM. But, Mr. Werfel, you know the law, you know
that when it is cloaked in 6103 we are prohibited under the law
from revealing that. So you have to release this information so
that it can be publicly discussed. That is exactly what the
statute speaks to.
Mr. WERFEL. Let me get to my second point, because I want
to address each of those points. I just wanted to make sure
that the public understood that that information resides with
this Committee and the Senate Finance Committee. The second
reassurance is that there is a tension here. We have a----
Mr. ROSKAM. But you didn't answer the question as it
relates to the cloaking of 6103.
Mr. WERFEL. I will answer the question.
Mr. ROSKAM. You are not releasing the information pursuant
to 6103.
Mr. WERFEL. I can answer these questions if you enable me.
Mr. ROSKAM. Go ahead.
Mr. WERFEL. I want to make sure that people understand,
your constituents understand the tension that exists, that we
also have a solemn responsibility to protect the
confidentiality of their taxpayer information. And these
procedures are set up so that we redact this information,
although we sent all of it to the chairmen of the Ways and
Means and Senate Finance Committee so it is outside the IRS.
And to the extent that there is a notion and a concern that
there is over-redaction, that is something that we need----
Mr. ROSKAM. This is junk. This is junk. This has no
meaning.
Mr. WERFEL. It might be junk, but it might be sensitive
taxpayer information.
Mr. ROSKAM. It is not, we know it isn't. And you are hiding
behind it. And I am telling you, I am putting you on notice,
this Committee intends to uphold the 1998 Act and we are going
to follow through on it to make sure that the IRS is
forthcoming and not creating a bunch of nonsense hiding behind
bureaucratic doubletalk.
Mr. WERFEL. If there is a particular instance----
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay.
Chairman CAMP. I know at the staff level, Mr. Werfel, we
have raised the issue of over-redaction. What it does is limits
the ability of the Committee to use it. And so I do think this
is an issue that is appropriate that Mr. Roskam has raised, and
it is something that we probably need to pursue further.
Mr. WERFEL. I think so. And I think one thing that should
be clarified given Congressman Roskam's comments, it is my
understanding, you can correct me if I am wrong, it is my
understanding that as the Chairman of the Ways and Means
Committee you can release information if you think that it is
not 6103 sensitive.
Chairman CAMP. I cannot unless it is to the full House. And
clearly this is an area where we really have to have the
experts involved.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I agree with that.
Chairman CAMP. In the context of the final report, which
clearly we are not there yet, I can release the information
ultimately to the full House, but I can't be the single arbiter
of what is 6103 sensitive and what isn't, because obviously
Senator Baucus and Senator Hatch received this as well. But we
do have concerns that at a staff level there is an over-
redaction that limits the ability of the Committee to use the
information. So we have been trying to work through that.
Mr. WERFEL. As I have always said, if there are concerns we
want to work with you to explore that. But I just wanted to
clarify that this information is not just residing within the
IRS. That was my main point.
Chairman CAMP. No, it isn't. And we do receive the
unredacted versions. But, again, those aren't shared other than
with Mr. Levin at this level.
The next person is Mr. Kind--no, Mr. Pascrell. Oh, Mr. Kind
is here, I am sorry.
Mr. KIND. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I was being blocked by
my esteemed colleague here from Connecticut.
Mr. Werfel, thank you so much, and thank you for your
willingness to assume this very tough duty. I mean, you are,
obviously from today's hearing, stepping into the lion's den.
And I really appreciate that. You have a much larger duty of
restoring faith and trust and confidence in the IRS than just
the spending that went on with conferences or bonus payments or
even the issue before us today, the exempt organizations.
Let me steer back to a troubling issue that I have been
wrestling with. Obviously, you have many organizations,
especially after the Citizens United case, that are applying
for (c)(4) tax-exempt status. The Inspector General looked into
it and recommended to the IRS certain steps and procedures in
how to review that and how to filter it out, and you probably
have some additional ideas.
But the point here is that these groups aren't
automatically entitled to tax-exempt status, they have to meet
certain qualifications, certain criteria in order to qualify
for it. And every time there is an organization out there that
does qualify for tax-exempt status that increases the relative
tax burden on organizations that don't or individuals
throughout our country that don't need it.
And in applying for (c)(4), the rule has been they have to
be principally engaged in social welfare. We have gotten away
from the more definitive definition of exclusively engaged in
social welfare. But how do we move forward now, today, of doing
a proper review of these organizations to ensure that they are
qualifying under the (c)(4) definition of social welfare
status, without being accused of them being picked on or that
political selection is taking place?
In other words, how do you institute a generically neutral
screening process now that is going to pass muster on both
sides of the aisle, yet still do the tough job of screening out
those organizations that really ought not be qualifying for
tax-exempt status because they are principally engaged in
political activity? And we know that is going on. I think
anyone here who is fooling themselves into thinking that a lot
of these (c)(4) applications are social welfare hasn't seen
what has happened over the last couple of years in the American
political system.
Mr. WERFEL. We have an approach that begins to answer that
question, but I think there needs to be a dialogue between us,
the IRS, this Committee, and others, and in particular the
Treasury Department I think plays an important role here,
because there is a policy question to be answered.
But in the report we outline the self-attestation or
certification program, and what we essentially take is our high
priority backlog, those advocacy cases that have been in our
backlog for more than 120 days, and we are offering them a more
objective review.
Essentially, if they attest that not more than 40 percent
of their expenditures or their voluntary person hours will go
to political campaign intervention, and at the same time they
also attest that more than 60 percent of their expenditures and
voluntary person hours will go to a social welfare purpose,
then they would receive an approval from the IRS and they would
go forward, with a responsibility to update us if the nature of
those activities change and an understanding, like every other
(c)(4) or (c)(3) organization, that they are potentially
subject to audit or examination at some point in time in the
future.
Mr. KIND. Well, I just hope we are not going on the road of
the IRS being subjected to this type of scrutiny every time
tough questions have to be asked in regards to how these
organizations are spending their money and what activities they
are ultimately engaged in. Because you understand you are going
to be set up for accusations from here on forth from any group
that is receiving more scrutiny or perhaps a denial. And that
is one of the more amazing things, is that perhaps there hasn't
been more denials of organizations applying for (c)(4) status
who are clearly engaged in political activity and that is their
main purpose for being.
So is the taxpayer advocate's office, do they have a role--
--
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely. And that is a big theme in the
report, is that we want to involve the taxpayer advocate more
clearly in all of these elements. In particular, one of the
main concerns that I have is that when you look at the
situation where we had taxpayers that were frustrated by the
length of time that they were not getting an answer from the
IRS, they were frustrated by the types of overly burdensome
questions they were getting from the IRS, they did have an
avenue. And in most cases they didn't exercise that avenue to
go to the National Taxpayer Advocate, to raise greater
awareness about the issue. The National Taxpayer Advocate has a
track record of helping the public resolve matters before the
IRS that the individual taxpayers are having trouble doing on
their own. We didn't see that connectivity here, and one of the
important recommendations in this report is to raise awareness
and effectiveness of this framework of the National Taxpayer
Advocate so we can solve those problems.
Mr. KIND. Mr. Werfel, you have a tough job as you go
forward and obviously we are going to be looking forward to
working with you very closely in your candid investigation and
the recommendations before this Committee. We, too, have a role
to play as far as clearing up, I think, a lack of a clear
definition as far as (c)(4) applications. I think the IRS would
be helped if there were brighter line rules for people to
institute and more objective criteria used. And we will look
forward to hearing your recommendations as we move forward on
that front.
Mr. WERFEL. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
And we will now be moving two to one, so Mr. Gerlach and
then Dr. Price.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being here today. My first
question is, would you agree that IRS officials disclosing
taxpayer information to outside groups or individuals is
improper and in fact illegal?
Mr. WERFEL. It is under section 6103, yes.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. What is the process if there is an
allegation that an IRS official did in fact leak taxpayer
information to an outside group or individual, what is the
internal process, if you can summarize it very quickly, for
handling the investigation of that?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes. We refer the information or the allegation
immediately to the Inspector General. The Inspector General
makes one of two conclusions: One, it was intentional, or two,
it was not. If it was not then the next step is to figure out
what process breakdown or control breakdown led to the
unintentional release. We have those situations emerge and we
make those process improvements. If the finding is that it was
intentional, then it is referred for further investigation,
which could be criminal or some other type of disciplinary
action.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Now, Mr. Brady raised the issue of the
National Organization for Marriage and the fact that its Form
990 information from 2008 was disclosed and passed on to the
Human Rights Campaign. Based upon the testimony that was given
at our last hearing here on the Committee by the representative
from the National Organization for Marriage, what do you know
about at this point the IRS passing that allegation to the
Inspector General's office and what is the status of that
investigation to the best of your knowledge?
Mr. WERFEL. I have two responses. One, I am not aware
specifically of that issue and I don't have that information at
my fingertips so that I can give you the exact process. Two, I
would be concerned, since you are mentioning a specific
taxpayer, that it may be more appropriate for me not to comment
in this setting given it is the implication----
Mr. GERLACH. Has in fact the IRS passed or referred the
matter to the Inspector General's office?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, I don't want to comment specifically on
this because I just don't have familiarity with that particular
issue at my fingertips.
Mr. GERLACH. So to the best of your knowledge you don't
know at this point whether it has or hasn't.
Mr. WERFEL. I just don't know. I will say that at any given
point in time there is a series of issues in this area that
have been passed on to the Inspector General which are either
in process for disciplinary action or in process where it was
inadvertent and we are doing process improvements. Where this
particular situation fits in, I don't know, but I can get that
information for you.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay, if you would respond as soon as you are
able to, that would be appreciated.
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely, I will.
Mr. GERLACH. I would also like to ask you, as a follow-up
to Mr. Johnson's questions with regard to the amount of money,
$46 million of child care tax credit checks that were sent just
to the one address in Texas. And in your comment you mentioned
that on the issue of why checks are being sent for this credit,
how do you verify the children in fact resided at that place of
residence for at least 6 months, which is one of the
requirements for that. You said it was hard to confirm that a
child in fact is there for at least 6 months.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, there is no national childhood residency
database, so it is one of the difficult aspects of enforcing
that particular eligibility criteria.
Mr. GERLACH. So if that is one of the eligibility criteria
and you cannot confirm that the child has lived there for at
least 6 months, why are you sending out a check?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, I didn't say it is impossible to confirm,
it is just challenging, and therefore we have a higher degree
of errors associated with that eligibility criteria.
Mr. GERLACH. So you acknowledge then the IRS has sent
checks to individuals that don't meet the eligibility criteria.
Mr. WERFEL. That happens, unfortunately. It is called an
improper payment. We have way too many of them in the IRS and
we need to work on that issue.
Mr. GERLACH. And so what disciplinary action have you taken
as an agency against the individuals that have continued that
practice?
Mr. WERFEL. I have not taken any--well, first of all,
again, I arrived in late May. I personally have not taken any
disciplinary actions. I am not sure disciplinary action would
be appropriate in all circumstances in that situation.
Mr. GERLACH. In other words, individuals within the IRS
that have the responsibility over the money that is released by
the IRS back to a taxpayer, who is sending checks out, in this
case $46 million just to one address, not making sure the
criteria for the eligibility for that check is confirmed and
still sending the money out, no disciplinary action has been
taken against that individual or individuals responsible for
that?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, we would have to look further into the
issue to see if a disciplinary action is warranted.
Look, we make----
Mr. GERLACH. Does any disciplinary action get taken in the
IRS for anything that is done wrong?
Mr. WERFEL. Absolutely. And unfortunately----
Mr. GERLACH. Can you share the number of disciplinary
actions taken against IRS officials and employees over the past
year for improper conduct?
Mr. WERFEL. In an aggregate way, yes. In a personal
specific way that is covered by the Privacy Act and I would
have to do that in another setting, but I can share that
information with you, just not with the public.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Well, if you can share that with the
Committee I am sure the Committee Members would be interested
to see when in fact a disciplinary action is taken and under
what circumstance.
Mr. WERFEL. And I would point out that although I have only
been at the IRS for a short time, I have already taken a number
of disciplinary actions within the IRS. So I know for a fact
they do go on and I have personally been involved in several of
them.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Werfel, I appreciate it.
Yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, this far down the panel it is hard to say
welcome, but welcome.
Mr. WERFEL. Thank you.
Mr. PRICE. You are 34 days into your challenge, and we
appreciate that. I think all this Committee is asking and all
the American people are asking is that you be honest and
forthcoming.
Mr. WERFEL. Always.
Mr. PRICE. In that light I would suspect you agree that the
IRS process has been broken, would you not?
Mr. WERFEL. I would agree with that.
Mr. PRICE. Would you agree that the trust with the American
people in the IRS has been violated?
Mr. WERFEL. I would agree with that.
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Werfel, the IRS has targeted groups, it has
leaked information on donors of groups, and then targeted those
donors for auditing. This is chilling stuff. As Mr. Roskam
said, this is the kind of thing that frightens his
constituents. It concerns and frightens my constituents as
well.
The Chairman asked you if you had spoken to a number of
people in the process of your investigation. Former IRS
Commissioner Shulman, you said no. Former Acting IRS
Commissioner Mr. Miller, you said no. And then Sarah Hall
Ingram, you said yes. Who is she?
Mr. WERFEL. Sarah Hall Ingram runs the Affordable Care Act
operations within the IRS and I speak to her on an ongoing
basis as part of my responsibility to engage with my senior
leadership team on the ongoing operations of the IRS.
Mr. PRICE. What was her role during this period of time,
during the period of time in the Tax Exempt----
Mr. WERFEL. It is a good question and that is one that we
are looking at, and I will do my best to explain it right now.
Ms. Ingram was the Commissioner of the Tax Exempt/Government
Entities organization leading into when these events occurred.
So the IG report starts to surface issues in and around early,
let's say, March 2010, when this fact pattern begins on the IG
timeline.
It is my understanding that Ms. Ingram served as the
Commissioner of the Tax Exempt/Government Entities
organization, which is a level above the Exempt Organizations
unit, and that organizational chart is in my report. And she
served in that capacity until somewhere around the spring or
summer of 2010.
Mr. PRICE. So there was an overlap.
Mr. WERFEL. There is an overlap. At that time she moved
over and was detailed to begin her work in running the
Affordable Care Act.
Mr. PRICE. Let me ask, why should the American people
believe that the trust that is required between the Internal
Revenue Service and the American people on the implementation
and enforcement of the Affordable Care Act by an individual who
was involved in the tax-exempt status entity of the IRS during
this time in question, why should they trust that individual?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, what I would ask the American people to
do is to trust in the process that we are going through to make
sure we are getting to the bottom of this. And with respect
to----
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Werfel, you understand that the process that
the IRS has gone through has violated that trust with the
American people already. And, candidly, my constituents and I
believe the vast majority of the American people want every
individual who was involved in this process to answer the
questions prior to being able to have any further trusting
situation in their capacity in the Internal Revenue Service. Is
that too much to ask?
Mr. WERFEL. I think it is valuable input. I would like to
share what we are doing, which is analyzing for any employee--
and Ms. Ingram is no different--we are analyzing what their
footprint of responsibility was. And with respect to this
individual there is some complexity in doing that evaluation
because she did move over to the Affordable Care Act early on.
But at the same time, just in the interest of full candor,
while she did move over to the Affordable Care Act within only
a few months after this fact pattern begins, her title didn't
change and there is some lack of clarity in terms of her
ongoing role within TEGE.
Mr. PRICE. And hence the concern that many of us have.
To that point----
Mr. WERFEL. We are looking into that question----
Mr. PRICE. To that point, the IRS is the enforcement arm
for the ACA. Have guidelines been promulgated for the
enforcement of the employer mandate in the IRS?
Mr. WERFEL. Not at this time. I think the schedule for the
proposed rules is this summer, if I understand your question
correctly.
Mr. PRICE. And employers have to comply with this beginning
this fall and January 1. Have rules been promulgated?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, the proposals will outline the timing for
employer responsibilities.
Mr. PRICE. Have rules been promulgated on part-time, full-
time employee distinction?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't know that I----
Mr. PRICE. Have rules been promulgated on the difference
between seasonal workers and part-time workers?
Mr. WERFEL. I will give you the full schedule of our ACA
rules footprint. I don't have it at my fingertips.
Mr. PRICE. Mr. Werfel, there is a huge lack of trust in the
IRS, and to have the IRS now the enforcement arm over the
Affordable Care Act is extremely concerning for those of us on
this panel and our constituents. I would urge you--urge you--to
get this information to individuals who will have to comply to
all of the rules that you promulgate and make certain that they
are true to the letter of your rules as soon as possible.
Mr. WERFEL. I understand.
Mr. PRICE. Yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Werfel, it appears after the time that you have been
here this morning that we are not past the point where Members
of Congress would be speculating about enemies lists, cultures
of corruption, and Nixonian conspiracy theories. I mean, if you
took the last set of questions to you--first of all, I wonder
why in God's name you took this job in the first place at this
point in your life. You have a distinguished past, a very
distinguished past.
But if I took the last series of questions, if you want to
talk about a conspiracy theory, the person, that young lady, is
not even in front of us to ask direct questions to. Now,
everything is open, ask questions about anything, I understand
that, and both sides of the aisle seem to be against, appear to
be against singling out any particular groups because of their
political thinking. This is what we are opposed to.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. This is what we are opposed to. So I commend
you for standing up, standing tall, and I wish you success in
your job. I think you are trying your best.
In your report you announce that in order to deal with the
backlog of applications for 501(c)(4) status the IRS will allow
the
option for groups to get preliminary approval if they self-
certify--
self-certify--that they devote more than 60 percent of their
spending and time on things related to social welfare, to go
with no more than 40 percent on political activities. Is there
any reason that this is not the existing standard for all
501(c)(4) organizations?
Mr. WERFEL. It potentially could be. What we thought would
be appropriate was we have a situation with an overdue backlog.
We have a situation in which we clearly have had struggles to
effectively implement the current regulation of primary. We
came up with this self-attestation program because we thought
that it would be less burdensome on the taxpayer and still
effective in meeting the underlying regulation of primary. But
we haven't broadly applied it across all 501(c)(4)----
Mr. PASCRELL. How did you arrive at the 40 percent in the
first place?
Mr. WERFEL. Keep in mind that the IRS' role here is to
implement the laws and regulations as clearly and as
effectively as possible. We have this word ``primary,'' and so
we sat down with it and we said, what is the most plain
language understanding of primary that we can defend? And we
came up with the conclusion that if you are north of 50
percent----
Mr. PASCRELL. Who came up with that?
Mr. WERFEL. The IRS. We sat down and we talked it through,
and we briefed committees and others on this before we issued
it in final, that if your activities are greater than 50
percent you are clearly not primary, okay, if your political
intervention is greater than 50 percent.
If you are less than 40 percent we would think that you are
in a comfortable safe zone of not being in that primary range.
Between 40 and 50 percent it gets tougher, and therefore if you
are a taxpayer and you believe that your expenditures are
somewhere between 40 and 50 percent you wouldn't attest, you
would go through the traditional review and we would take a
close look to make sure----
Mr. PASCRELL. And that is why people apply to you, in order
to obtain this status.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. And you determine from what they give you,
the information they give you as to whether or not they are
more than 40 percent involved in whatever political culture
there exists.
Mr. WERFEL. Essentially we are trying to figure out what
this primary means and what we are offering with the self-
attestation is some inherent structure as to how we can think
about----
Mr. PASCRELL. Now, once that organization receives
approval, will they be able to increase their political
activities beyond the 40 percent of their spending and time? Is
that part of the application?
Mr. WERFEL. If they do that then they are no longer
operating under an approval and they have to alert the IRS that
they have changed the nature and extent of their activities.
Mr. PASCRELL. But they are allowed to continue?
Mr. WERFEL. They are allowed to continue. And the reason
why they are allowed to continue is because one of the key
points here is that you can operate as a 501(c)(4) today
without an application. There are two different types of
entities that are operating as a 501(c)(4), those who have an
application approved and those that never applied but just file
the appropriate forms and operate as 501(c)(4).
If you exceed your 40 percent after attesting, you just
move yourself into that second category where you are operating
without an approved application and you are joining many other
501(c)(4) taxpayers that are doing that today.
Mr. PASCRELL. So the exemption is very important in terms
of revenue. The exemption is more important to decide whether
it is more than 40 percent or less than 40 percent. And if you
go over 40 percent, you simply have to file a form with the
IRS.
So there are, I can assume then in conclusion, other
organizations out there that are performing more than 40
percent or maybe more than 50 percent in the political area and
are being exempt from taxes.
Mr. WERFEL. I think----
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay.
Chairman CAMP. So just answer briefly.
Mr. WERFEL. I would say if they are performing more than 50
percent, then my hope would be that we would have an effective
exam and audit process that would identify that and work with
the taxpayer to correct it.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Buchanan.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also want to thank Mr. Werfel for being here today. I
want to recognize that you have been 34 days on the job and it
appears you have had a great background.
Let me ask you, because I think you were cut off, you were
going to mention, looking at your resume they put up here, you
manage an agency of 90,000 employees. Your budget is about $11
billion a year. And I think you are asking for additional
dollars. And part of the reason you wanted the additional money
from the taxpayers is you said a dollar invested in enforcement
gives you back such a return. What were the numbers you were
going to tell us about? Why do you need the additional money?
Mr. WERFEL. We have asked for an increase on our
enforcement budget of $412 million that would yield more than
$1.6 billion in annual enforcement revenue, which is a return
on investment of $6 for every $1 invested. And I understand the
concern about our excessive expenditures that occurred back in
2010 and 2011, and to the extent----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me go back, because we only get 5 minutes
each. For every dollar invested, you can get $6 back, is that
what you are saying, from the taxpayers?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, that is what I am saying.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Now, you have heard the saying a power to tax
is a power to destroy. And I can tell you that there seems to
be a culture, at least from what I have heard, I have been here
a little over 6 years, in the IRS there is a lot more money
being put in enforcement. And you can destroy people's lives. I
think you have to understand that, the power, the leverage, the
magnitude of the IRS, 90,000 employees, $11 billion in budget.
It is not even a level playing field for individuals. And I
look at a lot with small businesses.
What I am hearing from my constituents, when you want more
money to go after more Americans, they are very, very concerned
because it seems like that has been ramped up in this
environment. I am just telling you what I hear every day.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. In this environment of trillion-dollar
deficits, people are feeling like the IRS is a lot more
aggressive about coming after organizations, especially small
businesses and individuals, because at the end of the day you
can win every time. You can say, we will go to court. Well,
these small businesses and individuals need more CPAs and more
lawyers. They run out of money. You never run out of money or
resources.
Go ahead. Answer that, if you would.
Mr. WERFEL. Well, you are raising an important question.
And I will go back to the report, if I could. You know, it is a
question about taxpayer concerns. And we have heard those
taxpayer concerns. I think it is notable that in this report we
are candid about organizational and individual failures within
the IRS. We are not claiming that nothing went wrong here, we
are recognizing that there were significant problems. And we
are also recognizing that this represents an opportunity to
learn from that.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me go back, just because of our limited
time, I want to get another question out.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I understand.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me ask you, in terms of yourself, it says
you manage 90,000 employees. Is that a correct statement?
Mr. WERFEL. I lead an organization that has roughly 90,000
employees.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Who is responsible for the attitudes and the
culture and the environment at that organization?
Mr. WERFEL. It is a shared responsibility of the leadership
team at the IRS and the staff, but I place a lot of importance
on the leadership driving----
Mr. BUCHANAN. You are one of the leaders, right?
Mr. WERFEL. I am one of the leaders.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I am just saying, with 34 days, I recognize
that, I want to make sure that you have a balanced approach
going forward, that you don't create an attitude or a climate
in the IRS about going after Americans. I am very concerned
that it is more of a balanced approach.
There is a sense out there that that has been heightened,
not just in the last 3 months, but in the last 5 or 6 years.
And there is a sense that we have to make sure that if you are
looking for more money to go after more Americans, because you
get a 6-to-1 return, I will tell you, you are going to win at
every turn. They can't begin to compete with the IRS with the
leverage and the power that you have.
And that is why it is so important as a leader going
forward, and your team of leadership, to have something that
makes some sense, that we are not killing small businesses and
as a result killing jobs.
Mr. WERFEL. Let me make one final point. In this report
there is a direct commitment to address that question by doing
a review across all IRS of the appropriateness of our criteria
and our filters and our activities. Hold us accountable for the
thoroughness and objectivity of that review, and in the report
we are going to share the results of that with you and with the
American people so that we can answer the question.
Mr. BUCHANAN. But you understand it is not a level playing
field, right? You realize if you want to win at the end of the
day, you are going to win. They run out of money. They would
like to get their day in court or they would like to resolve
it, but they can't afford what it costs to get their day in
court. So I am just telling you as someone that has seen that
environment, and what I hear every day, you have to be very
careful on how you move forward in terms of going after
Americans.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the Commissioner today.
How long have 501(c)(4)s been around?
Mr. WERFEL. I am not exactly sure, but it is decades.
Mr. SMITH. So they have been around a while.
How long do you think an application should reasonably take
for approval?
Mr. WERFEL. We have a standard of 120 days.
Mr. SMITH. And, obviously, many of these cases exceed 120--
--
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, absolutely. And that was unfortunate and
needs to be fixed.
Mr. SMITH. And you have indicated that no intentional
wrongdoing has taken place to your knowledge?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, the evidence hasn't surfaced yet. But I
would caution that more analysis, review, and investigation is
needed.
Mr. SMITH. So that would be an inconclusive finding in
terms of the----
Mr. WERFEL. Right. In other words, if the taxpayer is going
to ask us has there been any evidence yet, we are going to say,
no, not yet, but more needs to be done. So that could be termed
inconclusive. I am not going to argue with that
characterization.
Mr. SMITH. And sifting through the many documents that we
have had over the last few weeks, we know that there have been
very exhaustive lists of questions asked of applicants. Is that
correct?
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct.
Mr. SMITH. And we are talking about requesting lists of
books read and reports associated, and requesting membership
lists, volunteer lists, whether or not an applicant intended to
run for office or a family member of theirs would run for
office. Would you agree that it took a vast number of resources
to even come up with those questions?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't know how many resources it took. But I
would agree that we needed to stop asking a great number of
questions that we were asking and revisit and change how we
approach our outreach to taxpayers.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. And I appreciate that. It just strikes me
as difficult to sort through all of this when, you know, we are
being asked for more resources for the IRS when it would seem
to me that there were some existing resources, perhaps, that
were misappropriated, certainly misapplied as it relates to the
overreach in terms of asking applicants the questions.
And so moving forward I would hope that we can accomplish
our objective of reducing the complexity of our Tax Code that I
think leads to this very situation in terms of the complexity
leading to the misapplication of resources.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Crowley.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being here today.
After the first hearing on the IRS which we had on this
Committee, the Chair highlighted ``a culture of intimidation.''
A culture of intimidation. At the time, I think he was
referring or hinting that this culture was coming from the
White House, a claim that I believe was made without merit or
evidence.
As the weeks have gone on, we have seen that there is a
culture of intimidation, not from the White House, but rather
from my Republican colleagues. We know for a fact that there
has been targeting of both Tea Party and progressive groups by
the IRS. But this was not divulged by the Treasury IG in his
audit of the IRS. The IG didn't even give us a hint that
progressive groups were targeted until committee Democrats dug
further and deeper into this investigation.
My fear is the IG, an appointee of George W. Bush, and a
former committee staffer of the Oversight Committee chaired by
Darrell Issa, drafted a report that suited Chairman Issa's
personal ideology and not the facts of the case.
We then saw Members of the Majority party make baseless
claims about a so-called White House enemies list and
ideological election year targeting. Again, all false. In fact,
we know Congressman Issa knew about the targeting investigation
in the summer of 2012, well before the national elections
occurred.
Does anyone think for a moment that if there was a White
House targeting of conservative groups before the 2012
elections that Chairman Issa wouldn't have said anything about
that, that he would have sat back and said nothing about that?
Then, as we see, progressive groups were targeted side by
side with their Tea Party counterpart groups. The Chairman of
this Committee excused that, in my opinion, both in public
releases as well as again here today in his opening statement.
There has been no outcry by the Chairman or my Republican
colleagues when progressive groups were also targeted over the
past 3 years.
I will point out in this May 21 testimony of Holly Paz, who
was interviewed by the Committee, both this Committee and the
Oversight Committee, when she was asked the question concerning
the Tea Party investigation and their being investigated: And
did it raise any questions with you? Her answer was, ``No. In
the office, you know, it is not uncommon for people to have a
shorthand reference to cases by name. And I was aware of, you
know, other cases at that time that were working their way
through the D.C. office that involved proposed denials of
exemption to liberal organizations that supported the
Democratic Party. So I had no indication that we were not being
balanced in what we were doing.''
Our Committee knew that testimony was given and yet there
was no outrage, just as there was no Republican outrage when
the Bush Administration targeted Christian churches and the
environmental groups and the NAACP between the years of 2002
and 2004 when they were being investigated by the IRS.
So, yes, I agree that there is a culture of intimidation
going on, but it is not by the White House, it is by my
Republican colleagues. That is why we demand that the IG be
summoned back to this Committee to answer questions once again
under oath. We also demand that the Republican culture of
intimidation stop so progressive groups will feel comfortable
testifying before us here. But right now they are not
comfortable coming before this Committee. And the Chairman's
continued silence or excusing of the abuse of progressive
groups makes it harder for these groups to come before us.
We need to be a committee of facts and not a witch hunt if
we plan to get to the bottom of the investigation and hopefully
be able to tackle other legislative issues that we have coming
before this Committee of great importance to the country. So I
demand that this Republican culture of intimidation against
progressive groups be stopped and that they be as outraged as
we were outraged, Democrats were outraged, and we expressed our
outrage when groups that we don't agree with politically or
ideologically were being attacked or being intimidated or being
investigated by the IRS. I would like to see a modicum of a
similar outrage by my Republican colleagues for what we held
when folks testified before this Committee----
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. CROWLEY [continuing]. That we didn't politically agree
with, but we stood by them and said, as Americans, they should
not be investigated.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired. And I
would just refer the gentleman to my opening statement where I
mentioned that progressives were on the Be On the Lookout list,
or the BOLO list.
Mr. CROWLEY. Will the Chairman yield?
Chairman CAMP. No, I will not yield.
Mr. CROWLEY. Where is the outrage, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman CAMP. I will not yield.
Mr. CROWLEY. Where is the outrage?
Chairman CAMP. I thought you were talking about the modicum
of this Committee, and yet the gentleman continues to interrupt
the Chair. You have had your 5 minutes. You referred to me by
name as the Chairman, and I am going to respond. And I would
refer the gentleman to my opening statement, where I mentioned
that progressives were on the Be On the Lookout list. And I
made one thing clear, that no taxpayer, regardless of political
affiliation, should be unfairly targeted.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Schock of Illinois.
Mr. CROWLEY. That is more like it.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin my
questioning, I think I would just say that I think the Chairman
has been more than accommodating, more than outreaching to the
other side. In fact, if the Chair would indulge, when we had
our first hearing where we invited witnesses who were victims
of targeting, the Chair asked for witnesses from the Minority,
and would the Chair remind us how many Minority witnesses were
submitted?
Chairman CAMP. There were none.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you.
Mr. Werfel, welcome.
Mr. WERFEL. Thank you.
Mr. SCHOCK. On page 14 of your report that you have
submitted to this Committee you outline a proposal to eliminate
the backlog of certain 501(c)(4) applicants that are currently
before the IRS. You specifically suggest that to eliminate this
backlog you ask for these 501(c)(4) applicants to certify under
penalty of perjury to the IRS that no more than 40 percent of
their expenditures and volunteer hours will go toward political
campaign activity and that the remaining 60 percent would go to
the promotion of social welfare. If that is certified by the
501(c)(4) applicant, it is your policy, then, that the
applicant would be approved in the next 2 weeks.
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct.
Mr. SCHOCK. I would like to bring your attention to a
specific case and ask for how that would fall under this
category. Specifically, the 60/40 rule that you are proposing.
Mr. WERFEL. Is this a hypothetical case?
Mr. SCHOCK. No. This is a real live, 48-hour-ago case.
Mr. WERFEL. Well, I might have difficulty in answering it
if it is about a specific----
Mr. SCHOCK. Well, let's try. On Tuesday, the President
unveiled his plan to cut greenhouse gas emissions. Within
hours, millions of emails were sent to his reelection campaign
supporters through BarackObama.com, the URL owned by Organizing
for Action, a 527 organization. Within the email, it asks all
its volunteers to ``call out via Twitter, email, letters,
Facebook, and so on, Members of Congress who are so-called
`climate change deniers.' '' The action item doesn't just
suggest they should educate, but rather that they should call
them out. It then links to 85-plus Members of Congress that
they would like to be targeted, all of whom are Republican,
many of whom are on this Committee.
Under that circumstance, I am wondering whether or not that
activity, those hours and that money, would be classified under
the political campaign activity or under the promoting social
welfare category.
Mr. WERFEL. It is a good question. You are getting into a
territory where I am not the legal expert. But I will do my
best to provide some clarity as far as I understand this and
the rule of law here.
It is my understanding that the political campaign
intervention has to do with--and I am answering these questions
as a broad matter because I don't want to get into 6103 issues
or the specific taxpayer. So I just want to qualify that my
answer is in the broad context of how we think about political
campaign intervention. And the key issue is, is the entity
seeking (c)(4) status attempting to influence the outcome of an
election by either supporting a particular candidate or
opposing a particular candidate. And the Federal Election
Commission has provided guidance to help us on that.
And when you have a situation in which, for example, an ad
mentions a candidate within 30 days of an election, they say,
well, there you go, at that point in time you have political
campaign intervention. But if they mention that candidate 120
days before an election, it is not as clear and more work needs
to be done.
So, to get to your question, I think as a broad matter one
of the first questions I would have in analyzing it, and I
think the lawyers who are experts in that would have as well,
was is there a candidate involved and is the activity intended
to influence the outcome of an election.
Mr. SCHOCK. Well, there were 85 Members of Congress
specifically targeted.
Mr. WERFEL. Again, now you are getting into--I don't want
to get too specific.
Mr. SCHOCK. Well, I understand you don't want to get too
specific. But the point I am attempting to make is that the
rule you are proposing requires the applicant to make a
determination.
Mr. WERFEL. Correct.
Mr. SCHOCK. So as the Commissioner of the IRS who is
proposing the rule, under not a hypothetical but a real case
situation, if you can't make a determination how can we then
ask a non-attorney, non-IRS Commissioner, non-IRS employee to
make that same determination under penalty of perjury to
classify their activity as either advocating for promoting
social welfare or political campaign activity if we are going
to limit it under a 60/40 rule?
Mr. WERFEL. Right. I was talking at a very general level.
There is specific guidance that we can provide in our
application and in the self-attestation that we ask the
taxpayer to look at and determine whether they are meeting the
criteria. You know, right now, me articulating it to the
taxpayer is actually done in much more specificity in the
materials that the taxpayer receives in terms of exactly how to
answer those questions.
The key issue is, are they attempting to influence the
outcome of an election. Now, you take it from there and do your
further analytics, and then the taxpayer can help determine
whether they believe their expenditures will go higher than 40
percent for those types of activities.
Mr. SCHOCK. I realize my time has expired. I would just
like, if I can, followup from the IRS on exactly how this new
rule would then be enforced, whether it be additional auditing,
whether it would require additional personnel to enforce, and
all that would be helpful.
Mr. WERFEL. And I can provide for the record the more
specific guidance that we give the taxpayer. It was just handed
to me. But it might not be in the best interest to read it out
loud.
Chairman CAMP. No. I think you can submit it to the
Committee and we will make it available.
Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, you opened your report with TIGTA's findings
that the IRS used inappropriate criteria that identified for
review Tea Party and other organizations applying for tax-
exempt status based on their names or policy positions.
I am going to ask you this question: Were some of the
organizations that were targeted for their personal beliefs,
were they asked for their donor lists?
Mr. WERFEL. It is my understanding that roughly 27 entities
were asked for their donor lists, yes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Do you know if these donor lists were used to
target individual donors in the IRS for audits?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't have precise information on exactly how
that information was used. I think that is part of the ongoing
review.
Mr. PAULSEN. Well, the reason I am asking this is because
part of the report, on page 31 of the enforcement section of
the report, it states that, ``All current indications are that
this sort of political activity analysis, ambiguity, and
subjective utilization of criteria does not occur elsewhere in
the IRS.'' It seems pretty definitive. I mean, how can you be
sure that is the case?
Mr. WERFEL. What I was referring to was, there are four
main operating divisions within the IRS that deal with tax
administration. The one that is the subject of this audit
report is the Tax Exempt/Government Entities organization. The
conclusion that is reached in the report is right now in areas,
for example, in our Wage and Investment Division, which deals
with individual taxpayers, small business and large business,
those areas, where we don't have current evidence that the
criteria in the screening criteria are inappropriate. We have
asked our leaders to look at it. We are going to run a thorough
review. And, as I said, one of the main reasons why we can be
more reassured in that conclusion is that it is very rare,
outside of this part of IRS, that political activity is
relevant to any determination.
Mr. PAULSEN. Well, I would assume that many of these issues
should be considered rare to occur in the first place. I know
that there is a publication, the Declaration of Taxpayer
Rights, which was also part of the report you submitted, that
states right up front, ``Protection of your rights. IRS
employees will explain and protect your rights as a taxpayer
throughout your contact with us. The IRS will not disclose to
anyone the information you give us except as authorized by
law.'' We know that that has already been violated and that
information has been leaked publicly.
``You have the right to know why we are asking you for the
information and how we will use it.'' We know that that also
has not been followed through because these organizations
testified before this Committee that they asked the IRS why
certain information was being asked for and there was no
response for followup.
And I will just tell you that I also have constituents,
many Minnesotans that are in my district, who are also very
fearful, who have come forward to me concerned that they also
have become targets because in recent years--of audits that
have been stepped up by their accountants, their finance
planners. They are concerned that it is happening because of
their political activity. This has all occurred over the last
couple of years. And other Members of Congress on this
Committee and in the entire body have expressed the same
concern.
Several have told me these personal stories of their
accountants telling them, we have never, ever in the history of
our experience--we keep the receipts, we keep the books clean,
we monitor your activities--we have never had this type of
systematic auditing on an individual at this level before.
And so we now know that information on individual donors
has been collected, we know that information has been leaked,
and we know that these audits have intensified on individuals.
And I think, from my perspective, the report before us has some
glaring omissions. There is going to have to be a followup
report coming down the road. And in the end what assurance can
you give the American people, can you give this Committee, to
making sure that individual taxpayer rights are being protected
and there is a plan in place to make sure that that will
happen?
Mr. WERFEL. I have two reactions. One, to the extent--I
probably should have said this earlier to this Committee and to
the Chairman--to the extent there are particular areas in the
report and questions that aren't answered, me, along with the
IRS would be very interested to have that feedback and would
commit to exploring those questions with this Committee and
figuring out the best way to get answers.
Our goal with this report was several things. First, to
recognize for the taxpayers, part of our reassurance and our
path forward is to recognize our failures upfront, to recognize
that we made fundamental mistakes. There are more questions to
be asked about the nature of how those mistakes occurred, but
we recognize those mistakes exist.
We want to show the American people in this report that we
recognize them and we are putting together and actively
implementing corrective actions to move forward. We have
brought in experts of public sector management to help lead the
IRS going forward on these new activities. And some of those
activities involve reviewing our current operations to ask the
very questions you are answering.
Mr. PAULSEN. So, Mr. Werfel, let me just ask you this, as
my time runs out. There are several employees, and you have
described how you have to go through appropriate procedures,
but are you seeking the removal right now of Ms. Lerner or any
other individuals? And does Congress need to have legislative
changes that would allow you to hold these employees
accountable so that we can make sure that the trust is restored
for the American people?
Chairman CAMP. And if you could just answer briefly.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I will answer in two ways. One, with
respect to a specific employee, I can inform you of our current
actions, I just have to do it in a nonpublic setting to protect
that employee's privacy rights.
Second, you know, as I said earlier, there are due process
procedures in place that are put in place for Federal employees
with respect to how their discipline or potential removal are
handled. I am not going to comment on whether they are good or
bad. I am saying right now that I am following the rule of law
and moving as aggressively as we can.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Ms. Sanchez is recognized.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, I want to state my appreciation for you being
here and answering these questions. I know you have been on the
job roughly a month. And I am sorry, but some of my colleagues
seem to be confusing you with the main decisionmaker at the
IRS. So just to clarify a little bit, you are not personally
responsible for things like tax refund abuses or conference
spending abuses or bonus abuses, that is not your position, is
it?
Mr. WERFEL. No. And I want to stand by my IRS colleagues. I
am here to make sure that any actions that occurred before I
got there that need correcting are getting corrected. That is
my role.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you. Because I just think you are an
easy target. Nobody really likes the IRS, and so it is easy to
throw a lot of different issues at you when we are specifically
here to talk about the tax-exempt applications and the process
that went on there.
Now, you are still investigating that matter, right? Your
initial 30-day report is not a final report. Is that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. Right. And there are several entities that have
ongoing investigations, yes. They are still underway.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Including potential criminal investigations,
is that not correct?
Mr. WERFEL. The Justice Department is actively looking at
that right now.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And I think you have stated numerous times,
and people have said that you have seemed a little
dispassionate, but there are rules that you need to follow as
you investigate these allegations, is that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't feel dispassionate. I feel very
concerned. And I think the report has some important language
about failures of leadership and management that are very
critical.
But, yes, that concern and that sense of urgency which I
certainly feel has to be balanced against these procedures that
need to take place because they are legally required. And I
can't reinforce mistakes that the IRS has made in the past with
new mistakes of not following appropriate procedures that are
required by law and regulation.
Ms. SANCHEZ. I appreciate that, because I have a legal
background. And maybe others on the Committee don't appreciate
that, but I would just like to point out that, you know, Wild
West vigilante justice was often swift, but it was not always
correct, nor was it always fair. I think that probably
compounding some of the potential failures at the IRS would be
mistakes in how the investigation is handled, and if it were to
be done hastily and not thoroughly I don't think that that
serves the American public.
Mr. WERFEL. I would be right back here before this
Committee answering tough questions of how we didn't handle the
investigation fairly. So we are going to do things by the rule
of law.
Ms. SANCHEZ. I appreciate that very much.
Now, your initial assessment in the preliminary report is
that perhaps some inappropriate criteria was used by a group of
IRS officials in selecting certain applications for further
review. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. WERFEL. Yeah. That is our finding, that there were
inappropriate criteria used. It is similar to what the IG
found.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And if during the course of your continued
investigation that assessment were to change, that would be in
an updated report, I am assuming.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes. My hope is that the type of information we
garner helps us understand better the nature and circumstances
that led to these inappropriate criteria being used.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you. And I very much appreciate in your
initial report the identification of certain areas of failures
at the IRS and also certain suggestions moving forward and ways
that you can make the process a fairer and sort of more
transparent one.
One of the things that I wanted to ask you about, because
it is something that perhaps is little known, your report
suggests that the Taxpayer Advocate's office could have helped
exempt organizations that were struggling to have their
applications processed by the IRS. Is that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. That is correct. The National Taxpayer Advocate
can play a very critical role helping a taxpayer who is having
trouble resolving their matter before the IRS. They do a very
effective job in many situations. I think, in looking at this
situation in particular, we noted a very small or de minimis
amount of contact between the taxpayers, the 501(c)(4)
applicants who were receiving unfair or burdensome requests and
all of the things they went through, and the National Taxpayer
Advocate. There is a lack of connectivity between the taxpayers
and the National Taxpayer Advocate. And that is a lesson
learned for us, and we want to try to educate taxpayers better
on the avenues they have for help when they are having trouble
resolving a matter with the IRS.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And do you think that a broad education
project to make people aware of the fact that there even is a
Taxpayer Advocate would be beneficial?
Mr. WERFEL. That is one of our recommendations in our
report. We are committed to it.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And now much has been made about the funding
and how the funding is spent at the IRS, and there has been a
request for additional funding for enforcement. But one thing
that I am hearing from my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle is, on the one hand, they want you to enforce these
people who are cheating on refunds, and they want you to, you
know, come down hard on people who are abusing the Tax Code,
but, by the same token, they don't want to pay for that. And
then, on the other hand, too much enforcement pits the little
guy against the IRS----
Chairman CAMP. A quick answer, please.
Mr. WERFEL. A very brief answer. What I want an opportunity
to do before this Committee and others, is demonstrate two
things. One, that the IRS is making real progress in
eliminating unnecessary expenses and cutting our budget in
areas like travel, conferences and others. And two, that if we
can increase our funding in other critical areas related to
enforcement and taxpayer service, that we are going to position
the IRS for success in the future.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, on one of your first days on the job I wrote a
letter addressed to you requesting that you find out the status
of a group in my district, the North East Tarrant County Tea
Party. Is it your representation that over the next week or 2
weeks that this organization will receive its determination?
Mr. WERFEL. Let me answer that question very carefully,
since you have named a particular taxpayer and I have to be
very cautious. I will lift up your question and say that all
taxpayers that are in our priority backlog who are in this
advocacy group that are in the backlog for more than 120 days
will receive a letter from the IRS this week explaining their
option to self-certify and get an expedited approval if they
are willing to self-certify.
Mr. MARCHANT. This particular group joined in a lawsuit
with the ACLJ. Will that lawsuit have any effect whatsoever on
the determination of that group or any group that is inside of
that----
Mr. WERFEL. Two responses. One, I definitively don't want
to comment on the lawsuit. Second, I will just repeat my
earlier point: If they are in the backlog, they are getting the
letter.
Mr. MARCHANT. So there will be no retribution for a group
that joined in that lawsuit?
Mr. WERFEL. It would certainly be the policy of the IRS to
not have any type of retribution in those situations. If there
is an
entity that is in the backlog, it is our intention to send them
this letter. And if they don't receive the letter, for whatever
reason, then they should immediately--and they can reach out to
you or this Committee or reach out to the National Taxpayer
Advocate, and we will look into it. But, again, our intention
is to try to get every entity within that backlog, to the
extent appropriate, a letter.
Mr. MARCHANT. On February the 11th, a subcommittee that I
serve on, chaired by Mr. Boustany, wrote the Acting
Commissioner a request to produce a ``Star Trek'' parity video
that contained no training content and was produced at taxpayer
expense. The subcommittee also asked for the cost of the ``Star
Trek'' video and any other video produced with IRS resources.
Two months later, and three letters later, we had the ``Star
Trek'' video and the cost estimate in hand. Turned out that
that video was produced as entertainment for the famous IRS
convention that is mentioned.
Imagine the Committee's surprise when late on Friday, May
31, I believe after you had taken over, in an effort to get
ahead of the TIGTA report expected the following week, about
the IRS' lavish spending at this conference, it turned out that
this video, depicting line dancing of IRS employees, was also
produced at the 2010 conference.
It was wrong for the IRS not to undertake a good faith
search in February for other responsive material, but that was
not on your watch. When was the second video brought to your
attention?
Mr. WERFEL. Very early in my term. I arrived on May 22, May
23. It was one of the earlier issues that was raised to me. It
was my understanding that this Committee had a request for our
videos and we were delivering that.
Mr. MARCHANT. Did you produce it immediately to the
Committee?
Mr. WERFEL. It is my recollection that once I became aware
of it and we had it in hand and it was requested by the
Committee we provided it. I think there may have been a need to
redact some of the names on it to protect personal privacy.
But, yes, I think we turned that video over to you very
quickly.
Mr. MARCHANT. And did you or others at the IRS directly
consult with the Treasury on how to produce that video to
Congress?
Mr. WERFEL. How to produce it? I am not aware of us
consulting with the Treasury Department on how to produce it.
But I don't necessarily understand your question.
Mr. MARCHANT. Well, let me follow up. The lack of
transparency pertains to just a silly video--and, being from
Texas, very bad line dancing.
Now, for something really more consequential, Chairman
Boustany wrote then Acting Commissioner Steven Miller on May 10
to ask about all documents containing the word ``Tea Party''
and a list of IRS employees involved in the targeting. You
wrote back on June 7. Did you consult with the Treasury
Department on any of the correspondence that you had with the
Committee before you responded?
Mr. WERFEL. I talked generally to the Treasury Department
about our correspondence with the Committee to make sure I am
giving them an update on the various requests we are receiving
and how we are producing information. I don't have a particular
recollection that we talked about this letter.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. WERFEL. But generally we do talk about discovery
requests that we get from Congress.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Ms. Black is recognized.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being here and helping us to
work through this situation.
I want to start out by saying that the very basis of any
relationship is trust. And we certainly see here that the trust
has been broken. There is no doubt about that. I think prior to
all of this being revealed over the last several months here,
if you had asked someone, what kind of reaction do you have if
you get a letter from the IRS, they would have already said, I
have fear, they are so powerful that even if I haven't done
something intentionally, they are going to come down on me, it
is not an organization that helps you work through something if
you haven't done it properly. A lot of uncertainty. I can call
one day, get one answer, the next day and get another answer.
So there was already this image of the IRS with people
prior to this. And I think that this has all just confirmed
what their feelings were, that there was a distrust and a fear.
And restoring this trust is going to be very difficult. And I
just wanted to go back and chronicle a couple of things that
have been said here, and I am going to add one to it.
Obviously, we are here for the targeting issue; that is
what this hearing was called for. But also we heard Chairman
Johnson talk about, and I was on that committee and heard Mr.
Miller, I believe it was Mr. Miller that was here the day that
we talked about the abuse of the earned income tax credit that
results in billions of dollars improperly being sent to people.
And there wasn't a concern that we could even work together to
fix this. We actually had to bring legislative action to fix
it.
Chairman Ryan talked about the misuse or the inappropriate
use of funds on these activities, over $100 million, which is a
significant amount of money, obviously. Chairman Boustany also
talked about the bonuses that are being given out to people
that perhaps were even involved in this. And we can't be
assured that those bonuses are really bonuses that they
deserve.
I also want to lift up a TIGTA report that showed that 1.7
million recipients received over $2.6 billion of improper
payment where we couldn't confirm that they even attended the
school that they were asking for the tax credit for on the
American Opportunity Tax refund.
And so we see over and over again this is not just about
what has happened here in targeting that is a very serious
issue, but it is a culture. There is a prevailing culture
within this organization that leads people to think when they
turn on their television night after night and they continue to
see one thing after another after another that there is a
reason to distrust this organization that has so much power
over them.
So my question for you is, in your report you do report
here that there were three things that you are looking at,
accountability, fixing the problem with the tax-exempt status,
and then the third area is a broad review of the IRS operations
and risk. Are those three things only related to what is
happening now with this tax-exempt status or is this something
you are going to look at overall?
Mr. WERFEL. It is broader. In Section 3 of the report, what
we attempt to do is we draw four general conclusions coming out
of this issue with respect to the IG report, and we ask
questions about the broader applicability of those four areas
into the rest of the IRS, and we analyze each question and come
up with a series of actions intended to deal with the issue.
For example, and I think an important one, are the taxpayers
not getting the appropriate customer service or treatment by
being in a backlog too long and getting inappropriate
questions----
Ms. BLACK. Okay. So I am going to interrupt you because I
am going to be limited on my time here and I want to go on to
another question.
Mr. WERFEL. Please. I understand.
Ms. BLACK. But what I would like to know, I would like to
know your plan. And I know you can't give me your whole plan
today. But given what we are seeing here, there has to be a
plan to show the American taxpayer they can have confidence,
that they can trust the IRS with their most personal
information.
Mr. WERFEL. An initial blueprint of that plan is here and
is in Section 3 of this report, and I would love feedback on
it. And certainly there are places we can fill out and do more.
And I think this report is about starting that dialogue.
Ms. BLACK. I am going to run out of time here, but I do
have one more question. Your report states that you have found
no evidence to date that anyone outside of the IRS had any role
in initiating or encouraging the Tea Party targeting.
The question I have for you is, did you come to this
conclusion by asking the White House or the Treasury officials
whether they were aware of the activity?
Mr. WERFEL. We came to this conclusion by looking at the
evidence that we had, which was a variety of documents, emails,
employee interviews, a lot of it conducted by the IG in their
audit report.
Ms. BLACK. So reclaiming any time----
Mr. WERFEL. So essentially we have looked at the evidence
that we have, but we have also said there is more evidence that
needs to be looked at.
Ms. BLACK. Okay. So I hope, then, that you will have a
conversation with those in the White House, all the way up to
the President, and that will be a part of your report that
comes back as well. Thank you.
Yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Commissioner, how are you? Thank you for being here.
You know, like a number of other people who have expressed
interest in the fact that you would take this position and even
asked why, I think I have come to the conclusion of why. I
think you know it is a very difficult situation, that you are
going to have a tough job restoring trust in the agency by the
American people. But I operate from the premise that if there
is righteousness in the heart, there is beauty in the
character.
And listening to you all of this time this morning, I get
the impression that that is really where you are and that is
what you really want to do and that is how you are going to
manage this agency, in a balanced kind of way, adhering to the
policies and practices, procedures and points of law that have
already been established legislatively, that this is what you
are supposed to do.
I have been tremendously impressed with the report that you
have issued, and there are some things that jump out at me. One
is the fact that you are ready to make some rectification for
those groups and individuals who feel that they have been
harmed with unusual delays of the processing of their
applications, even to the point of self-certification. How
would that work? How do you propose to have that work?
Mr. WERFEL. This week, the taxpayers that are in our
priority backlog for more than 120 days will receive a letter
that will explain this new program that we have that will
enable them to get a fast-track approval if they are willing to
certify to these particular facts and realities. As I have
said, it has to do with their expenditures and their voluntary
person hours, and not to exceed certain thresholds.
So if they feel comfortable that they can attest to that
being the way they are going to carry out their operations with
respect to political and social welfare activity, they will
sign the document, just like they sign their application today,
submit it to the IRS, and we will give them an approval. And if
their activities change, they will be required to let us know.
And it is possible, like with any taxpayer, that they could be
reviewed on audit or exam at some later point, and if we find
compliance, we will move forward, if we find noncompliance, we
will deal with it at that time.
Mr. DAVIS. I know that much of our conversation has been
about transgressions and activity that was outside the realm of
what one would expect. And I also know that history is history
and that it is very difficult to change what has already
happened, but it is not impossible to make sure that it does
not happen again.
You mention in your report that there are certain risks and
information relative to operations of the entire agency that
the Commissioner's office may not have had enough information
about.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. DAVIS. And that you would want to seriously analyze
that. And how do you change that information gap that may
exist?
Mr. WERFEL. When I came to the IRS, I recognized that
across the organization I do not believe today there is enough
work being done to both identify, categorize, understand
emerging risks and operational challenges within the
organization and bring it together on a portfolio basis across
the IRS so that the senior leadership of the IRS can understand
those issues and deal with them. Not just deal with them, by
having transparency into them it automatically triggers
accountability for them to deal with it, it creates an
environment in which the leadership and the division itself are
working together toward a solution. And, very importantly, it
enables the leadership to then push that information out
earlier in the process to the IRS Oversight Board, to the IG as
necessary, to this Committee as necessary.
We have an architecture that we are now putting together,
an enterprise-wide risk-management program that will redefine
the way in which we capture this information and report it up.
It seems very textbook within this report, but it is actually
very important. And it is potentially, I believe,
transformational to getting at some of the root of the very
issues that this Committee is raising. How can we----
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Young is recognized.
Mr. YOUNG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Commissioner, for being here today. You are
certainly entering this organization at a difficult time.
Your organization, like all others, is only as effective,
only as good as the people that populate it, and by extension
the extent to which we hold people accountable. We have many
good, public-spirited, conscientious public servants working at
the IRS and other agencies, and we must ensure that we don't
put forward any baseless sort of disciplinary actions with
respect to these individuals. I know you agree with that.
My preference would be to hold these individuals, however,
to the same standards that other workers around the country
outside of the Federal Government must pertain to. You have
said time and again during this hearing that we need to
discover the facts, or some variant of this, first discover the
facts, wait on those facts to emerge, and then take corrective
action. Entirely, imminently reasonable, and I agree with that.
This would presumably apply to personnel actions as well,
where you have taken some bold actions over at the IRS with
respect to management failures within your agency, replacing
four individuals, five positions. This is prominently displayed
in your plan of action here.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. YOUNG. And so what I want to know is what specific
facts have you collected which justify the replacement of Steve
Miller? We will begin with Mr. Miller.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay. As I mentioned earlier, at that level of
the organization we perceived in our review a deficiency in
leadership in not understanding earlier in the process the
emerging challenges that were happening within the Exempt
Organization unit, the emerging concerns that were being
registered by taxpayers. A lot of the activities that were
going on in the IG report should have surfaced to the
leadership before the IG brought to it their attention.
Mr. YOUNG. What did he fail to do? Were there signals that
existed that he failed to identify? Did he fail to put in place
quality control mechanisms that should have existed?
This ought to be documented. I know that throughout our
Federal Government union protections for your rank and file
workers are typically also applied at the higher echelons of
management. So you had to overcome a pretty high threshold of
evidence before the decision was made to replace Steve Miller
or any of these other individuals. So I want to know with
particularity, why was Steve Miller replaced, Commissioner?
Mr. WERFEL. Well, let me first state that I was not at the
IRS when this situation happened. That was a decision I think
that was determined between Mr. Miller, the Secretary of
Treasury, and the President on terms of whether the confidence
had been lost due to this current situation.
Mr. YOUNG. Has it been documented? Have the reasons for
that decision to replace Mr. Miller been documented? Or could
they be articulated by the new Commissioner, yourself, though
you go by a slightly different title?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes. This report is in part an attempt to
provide a review of what we found in the organization at
multiple levels. And I think we talk very explicitly about
particular--I think we identify them as failures within the
Commissioner's office to--and I think these are the exact words
that we use--to identify, prevent, correct, and disclose the
information that was----
Mr. YOUNG. All right. You know, to my constituents, that
sounds like a lot of Washington speak. A lot of words. You are
taking up my time here. I have 5 minutes. I appreciate an
answer. But maybe I need to ask the question in a different
way. So I will move to a different individual.
How about Joseph Grant. Can you tell me with specificity
why Joseph Grant was removed from his position as Acting
Commissioner, Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division?
Mr. WERFEL. Again, let me take a step back and make sure
that I don't violate anyone's rights of privacy. Let me also
step back and make sure that I don't impugn any particular
individual, because these are organizational layers, these
failures were both individual and organizational, and I don't
want to necessarily place the holistic blame for the situation
on a given individual. There was a collective organizational
failure. There were particular individual failures. And I don't
think in 25 seconds I can articulate----
Mr. YOUNG. Well, I don't need it here, because you have
used the clock down to the end. And I do appreciate the answers
that have been forthcoming.
I would like to know, I would like you to report to this
Committee what disciplinary action beyond replacement of these
individuals has been taken.
Mr. WERFEL. And we can provide that to you in a different
setting.
Mr. YOUNG. Right. And perhaps you will think of or acquire
through other means the reasoning behind these separations and
communicate those to Congress as well. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Werfel, I was thinking along the same lines as Mr.
Young, coming out of the private sector. And I did notice you
do have a great deal of concern for the folks that we are
asking you to take a look at right now, saying you want to make
sure we don't violate any of their rights or privacy. And I
think that is very noble. And I think that is your desire.
But when I am back home in western Pennsylvania people ask
me about, you know, why are they able to do this and why are
they able to continue doing these things and nothing happens?
Because what I would like to say is, you know, our role as
Congress is to be here for the people that we represent, that
voted us into office.
I guess then my question would be, we are so concerned
about these individuals' rights and privacy, but for these
folks that were targeted, we don't have the same amount of
concern. And for all of this idea about my rights, my privacy,
all those things seem to be secondhand to an agency that you
are running right now. There are over 90,000 people there. Is
that correct?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. KELLY. And an $11 billion budget. My goodness, is there
any doubt that anything this big and this expensive could
possibly be reined in? I don't understand how you are going to
do it. I think it is a noble idea, but I don't know that it can
be done.
And again, moving forward, tell me, the people that were
let go, what can you do to assure the American people that--
they really haven't been let go, have they?
Mr. WERFEL. There is a combination of personnel actions
that have been taken.
Mr. KELLY. But nobody has been let go.
Mr. WERFEL. Again, there has been----
Mr. KELLY. Either they were let go----
Mr. WERFEL. Has anyone been fired yet as a procedural
matter? No. But all of these options are being proceeded with--
--
Mr. KELLY. Yeah. Because the way government works, they
usually get redeployed. I haven't seen anybody get let go for
anything. And I know you don't have a lot of tools in your
toolbox when people go on a leave of absence that is always
paid. And I think for the American taxpayers that like to
think, you know what, shouldn't somebody be watching our
dollars, the answer is that you don't have the----
Mr. WERFEL. People do get fired from the Federal
Government, but it follows a process.
Mr. KELLY. I understand that. Yeah, well, I understand all
that. But as of my 2\1/2\ years here, for any wrongdoing,
nobody has ever been let go. They have been redeployed, they
have been repositioned, they have been placed on administrative
leave with pay, all different types of things. Both Ms. Lerner,
and I think it was Mr. Roseman yesterday, people pleading the
Fifth when they come before the people's house to answer
questions about something that they could be involved in.
Now, I know there is a rule of law. I can appreciate that.
But that adds then to the public's distrust and loss of faith
in the government. So I know you have a large job on your
hands.
As we go forward, though, you said to start off, and maybe
I didn't understand you, but more investigation needs to be
done. How long do you foresee this going on?
Mr. WERFEL. That is a good question. And I don't want to
lock into a particular timeframe because I want to make sure
that we follow the facts wherever they take us. But I would
anticipate that over the next 2 months there will be a material
amount of interviews and document review that would enable us
to revisit the issues and see where we are. I think that is
probably the right complement of time.
Will I say it is over at that point? No. But I think that
seems to me a good milestone to check in and figure out, have
we learned a material amount of information.
Mr. KELLY. So, what I have seen in your comments so far is
that there has been a lot of wrongdoing or somehow things
weren't handled the right way, but nothing that you could say
was intentional.
Mr. WERFEL. At this time, we haven't seen anything, but we
are open to the fact that it may have occurred. We just want to
make sure that we are doing all the right due diligence to
answer those questions.
Mr. KELLY. I understand that. I understand that. Just to
switch real quick to Cincinnati.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. KELLY. Did it originate in Cincinnati and only happen
in Cincinnati? Does it go any deeper? Can you tell that yet?
Mr. WERFEL. What I think is important to understand here is
that there were----
Mr. KELLY. I am sorry, I am running out of time. Did you--
--
Mr. WERFEL. Here is the point. I need to make this point.
The individual that supervised the Cincinnati office sat in
Washington, D.C. And if I----
Mr. KELLY. No, I understand. I understand. But the answer
is, no, you don't know yet whether it is just in Cincinnati?
Mr. WERFEL. I could offer more than that, but we don't know
the answer. If you wanted me to expound, I could. But----
Mr. KELLY. I don't have the time. I would love to have a
longer conversation.
Mr. WERFEL. Okay. I don't know the definitive answer to
that question.
Mr. KELLY. Okay. Is there any doubt in your mind that it
doesn't lead back farther?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't understand that question.
Mr. KELLY. Well, is it just Cincinnati? Or does it come
back? Does it come toward Washington? How high does it go?
Mr. WERFEL. I was about to say that there are people in
Washington, D.C., in particular, for example, the position of
Director of Rulings and Agreement, which is in my report.
Mr. KELLY. Okay. So it could go much deeper.
Mr. WERFEL. That person sits in Washington, D.C. Now, there
are five levels beneath the Commissioner's office.
Mr. KELLY. Okay.
Mr. WERFEL. But they are involved in these activities and
their office is in Washington, D.C.
Mr. KELLY. Well, I appreciate it. I just want to tell you
that the people that I represent back in northwest Pennsylvania
do not for any--they don't believe right now that there is
going to be a serious inquiry into this, and they don't think
that the IRS is going to come out on its own and do it or the
Administration is going to do it on its own. It is going to be
up to us in Congress to continue to look for what the answers
are.
So I wish you luck on your job, but I also would say this
is critical to the faith and trust that the people have in this
government. Right now their tank is running on empty because we
haven't seen anything yet that makes sense to the American
people that is fair and just to them.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. Renacci, and then Mr. Griffin.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being here. You know, I was
watching all of this questioning. It reminded me of the days in
my private sector life when I was hired to go into bad
situations and turn them around. And that is exactly what you
have had to do. And I had to report to a court every week in
bankruptcy, in those situations, as a trustee's representative.
So one of the things that people always wanted to know in
those situations was, what are you going to do to change
things? How are you going to fix things? And I think that is
along the line of questions that American people want to hear;
they want to hear the answers.
I have a lot of questions, so I am going to ask you just
for yes or no answers, and if you want to go back to them, we
can.
Did you talk to the Treasury about your testimony and
discovery today?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes, I consulted with Treasury about this
hearing.
Mr. RENACCI. Did you supply them your testimony or submit
your testimony before----
Mr. WERFEL. My testimony today was the report. So they had
the report, of course.
Mr. RENACCI. Did Treasury make any corrections, revisions,
or make any suggestions on what you would say or not say or
submit today? Yes or no.
Mr. WERFEL. I wouldn't say corrections. I mean, I was
keeping them informed of how the report was developing.
Mr. RENACCI. Did they make any----
Mr. WERFEL. I briefed them and, you know, they offered I
would say high-level suggestions. But as an important point, I
don't think we got a single line edit from them. It was more
general guidance.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. Right. So you did discuss it. Okay.
You know, Ranking Member Levin said in his opening
statement that individuals at the IRS that targeted groups
should be relieved of their duties. I made a quote of that,
``relieved of their duties.'' I agree with Mr. Levin. Do you
agree with Mr. Levin?
Mr. WERFEL. I believe that if there is----
Mr. RENACCI. If they targeted----
Mr. WERFEL [continuing]. If there is management neglect or
inappropriate conduct, and it depends on the nature and extent
of the management neglect.
Mr. RENACCI. If they targeted groups----
Mr. WERFEL. Intentionally, yes, I would agree.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. You have testified several times today
that there was no intentional wrongdoing. Was there wrongdoing?
Mr. WERFEL. I said there is not evidence yet of intentional
wrongdoing. But, yes, I would articulate there was wrongdoing,
there were----
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. You testified--as I said, I have a lot
of questions. And I----
Mr. WERFEL. Keep going, keep going.
Mr. RENACCI. You testified that there was neglect of duty.
You said that earlier. Do you believe there was neglect of
duty?
Mr. WERFEL. I do.
Mr. RENACCI. So there was wrongdoing and there was the
neglect of duty, but there was no intentional wrongdoing. Would
you agree with that?
Mr. WERFEL. There is no evidence yet of intentional
wrongdoing. But I am not going to reach a definitive conclusion
until all the evidence is obtained.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. Do you believe targeting of individuals
or organizations for political purposes is illegal?
Mr. WERFEL. To target with political bias? Yes, I think
there is potential illegality there. It is certainly
inconsistent with the IRS mission statement.
Mr. RENACCI. Do you believe there is wrongdoing?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI. Do you believe there is neglect of duty?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI. Did the IRS seek removal of Mrs. Lerner?
Mr. WERFEL. I can't answer that question in this setting.
But I can answer that question in a different setting to you
directly.
Mr. RENACCI. So you can't answer whether she was asked to
resign or be fired?
Mr. WERFEL. Not in this setting, but in a separate setting,
I can.
Mr. RENACCI. What is Mrs. Lerner doing right now?
Mr. WERFEL. I can't answer that question in this setting.
Mr. RENACCI. Do you believe the IRS--again, I am going to
go back--do you believe the IRS employees who were deemed to
have targeted someone for political purposes should be fired?
Mr. WERFEL. If it was based on political animus or that
type of intent, yes. If the seriousness of the management
neglect was to the appropriate level of seriousness, then, yes.
Mr. RENACCI. Are you aware of Section 1203 of the IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998?
Mr. WERFEL. I am aware of the Act, but you would have to
tell me exactly which section you are referring to.
Mr. RENACCI. The section of the Act that creates a list of
10 deadly sins----
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI [continuing]. That the IRS employees can be
terminated for.
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. RENACCI. Are you aware that political targeting is on
it or not on it?
Mr. WERFEL. I don't have the list memorized, but I can look
into it. I think it is implied through other, more general
criteria, is my recollection.
Mr. RENACCI. It is specifically not mentioned. Can you
think of any reason why we should not add the targeting of an
individual for political purposes by the IRS agent to that
list?
Mr. WERFEL. Given these events, I think it is a reasonable
suggestion.
Mr. RENACCI. Okay. Well, I agree. So you know I will be
introducing language to do that, and I hope your agency will
support that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Griffin is recognized.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Werfel, for being here. I also have heard
great things about your reputation, and I hope that you will
get to the bottom of this. I want to raise some specific
questions, though.
This report, ``Charting a Path Forward at the IRS,'' is a
public report. And in this town, as you know, you have been
here a while, and I have spent some time in this town, a public
report, whether it is intentioned to be or not, is a political
report. People are going to seize upon what is in that report.
Statements like the one that you made where you have not found
evidence of intentional wrongdoing on behalf of IRS personnel,
they are going to seize on statements like that and they are
going to hold that up and say, aha, see there, no evidence. I
was a staff investigator here in the House. I have been a
prosecutor.
Did you not know that by putting that in the statement you
were communicating to the world, even though this is simply an
update, you were communicating to the world from a political
perspective that there is no evidence of wrongdoing? I
understand factually what you mean. But the reason this has
gotten so much attention is because what a responsible
investigator would say is either nothing where that line exists
or the investigation continues.
The idea that you would say there is no evidence of
intentional wrongdoing at this point is--I worked at the White
House in political affairs. You have worked to the White House.
I worked up here. That is a political statement. Whether you
intended it to be or not, that is a political statement that,
whether you mean it to or not, gives cover to people
politically at a time when Lois Lerner pled the Fifth
Amendment, where anybody who has gone to YouTube and seen the
testimony of high-level IRS officials in front of this
Committee, based on what we know now, it is clear that they
were not being forthright in telling the whole truth with this
Committee.
Now, whether that constitutes what you would call evidence
or not, if I knew that one of my top lieutenants had just pled
the Fifth and my other lieutenants had given less than the
whole truth to this Committee, and I saw a staff person write
that sentence, if they did, I would take it out.
So my first question is, did you write that sentence or did
a staff member write that sentence?
Mr. WERFEL. There was a group of people. I was one of the
authors. We coauthored it amongst a group of people. I will
take ownership of every sentence in this document. If you allow
me the opportunity, I can respond to some of your points, but I
don't want to use your time. It is up to you.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Okay. I know. I would love to have a lot more
time than I do. And maybe because I am last, I can keep going.
Maybe not.
But did the White House at any time--I know the White
House, as I used to say, and probably you say, is not a
person--did anyone at the White House review this statement?
Mr. WERFEL. No.
Mr. GRIFFIN. No one?
Mr. WERFEL. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Okay. Anyone at Treasury?
Mr. WERFEL. Yes.
Mr. GRIFFIN. Yes. Well, I----
Mr. WERFEL. Let me just say, I did brief the President a
few hours before the report went out on the morning the report
was issued on Monday, and I did mention this conclusion. I just
want to make sure that was clear.
Mr. GRIFFIN. I appreciate you pointing that out.
I think the bottom line here is we have an ongoing
investigation in this Committee. We have an ongoing
investigation in the Senate. We have an ongoing investigation
at another committee. We have a criminal investigation. We have
a top lieutenant who has pled the Fifth Amendment. We have, in
my view, we have video of high-level officials giving less than
the whole truth to this Committee, which is potentially a
criminal act. I just think that, whether you believe that
statement or not, putting it in here with your background in
Washington is irresponsible.
And let me go on to the next point here. These individuals
that you personally did not interview, Joe Grant, Steven
Miller, Doug Shulman, Lois Lerner, can you tell me who is
interviewing--first of all, is someone interviewing them?
Mr. WERFEL. The Inspector General and the Justice
Department are putting together a witness list or have put
together a witness list. I assume it is evolving based on the
facts that they are gathering. And the professional
investigators of both the Inspector General and the Justice
Department are conducting those interviews and at the
appropriate time will share those results with me, and I assume
you, in order to make sure that we have a collective
understanding of the facts.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Werfel, for your testimony this morning.
And with that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:07 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
