- (TRUTH IN TESTIMONY) HEARING ON THE CHALLENGES OF ACHIEVING FAIR AND CONSISTENT DISABILITY DECISIONS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE CHALLENGES
OF ACHIEVING FAIR AND
CONSISTENT DISABILITY DECISIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

__________

FIRST SESSION

__________

March 20, 2013

__________

SERIAL 113-SS2

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
89-589                             WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        XAVIER BECERRA, California
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                LINDA SANCHEZ, California
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              XAVIER BECERRA, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
JIM RENACCI, Ohio                    MIKE THOMPSON, California
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ALLYSON SCHWARTZ, Pennsylvania
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
KEVIN BRADY, Texas

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of March 20, 2013 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

Patrick P. O'Carroll, Jr., Inspector General, Social Security
Administration, accompanied by Heather Hermann, National
Coordinator, Cooperative Disability Investigations Program,
Office of the Inspector General, Social Security
Administration, Testimony......................................     8
Arthur R. Spencer, Associate Commissioner, Office of Disability
Programs, Social Security Administration, Testimony............    16
Kathy Ruffing, Senior Fellow, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, Testimony..........................................    26
(Truth in Testimony).............................................    43
Trudy Lyon-Hart, Office of Disability Determination Services,
Vermont Agency of Human Services, on behalf of the National
Council of Disability Determination Directors, Testimony.......    44
(Truth in Testimony).............................................    55
David Hatfield, Administrative Law Judge (Retired), Wexford,
Pennsylvania, Testimony........................................    56
(Truth in Testimony).............................................    67

(TRUTH IN TESTIMONY) HEARING ON THE CHALLENGES OF ACHIEVING FAIR AND
CONSISTENT DISABILITY DECISIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Sam
Johnson [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Chairman Johnson Announces Hearing on the Challenges of Achieving Fair
and Consistent Disability Decisions

Washington, Mar 13, 2013
U.S. Congressman Sam Johnson (R-TX), Chairman of the House
Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Social Security, today
announced a hearing on achieving fair and consistent disability
decisions. The hearing will take place on Wednesday, March 20, 2013, in
B-318 Rayburn House Office Building, beginning at 10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Subcommittee and
for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

Under the Social Security Act, disability is defined as ``unable to
engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically
determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to
result in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a
continuous period of not less than twelve months.'' The disability must
be so severe that the person is unable to do any ``substantial gainful
work which exists in the national economy,'' whether or not a specific
job exists or the person would actually be hired. The disability must
result from a physical or psychological condition that is
``demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical and laboratory
diagnostic techniques.''
The responsibility for making initial disability decisions is
shared by the States and the Social Security Administration (SSA). All
50 States, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, maintain
fully federally-funded agencies, known as Disability Determination
Services (DDS), which decide initial and continuing eligibility for
benefits. In making the initial determination, DDS examiners review the
available medical evidence under a five-step sequential evaluation
process.
The independent, bipartisan Social Security Advisory Board has
raised concerns as early as its 1998 report, How SSA's Disability
Programs Can Be Improved, about the complex administrative structure
under which the Disability Insurance (DI) program operates, as well as
the fact that eligibility is ``fundamentally a judgmental process in
which different decision makers will frequently have different views.''
In 2001, the Board issued two reports: Disability Decision Making: Data
and Materials, and a companion report Charting the Future of Social
Security's Disability Programs: The Need for Fundamental Change. In
these reports, the Board raised questions about the fairness and the
consistency of the process, noting wide and unexplained variations in
outcomes between different regions of the country and different levels
of adjudication, as well as major changes in how disability is
determined based on court decisions that have not been overturned by
Congress.
In February 2012, the Board updated its Aspects of Disability
Decision-Making: Data and Materials, noting the ``longstanding lack of
consistency in the disability determination process that may award
benefits to individuals who do not meet the SSA disability criteria and
deny benefits to individuals who do meet the criteria.'' The Board
stated that the ``updated data continue to highlight significant
questions about [the] SSA's disability decision-making process and
about the disability programs . . . .''
In announcing the hearing, Social Security Subcommittee Chairman
Sam Johnson (R-TX) said, ``As we work to secure the future of this
vital program, hard-working taxpayers deserve to know that disability
decisions are fair, consistent and protected from con artists trying to
cheat the program. In the past, Congress expanded the ways people can
qualify for benefits. Instead of relying on objective standards to
reach decisions, examiners and judges on the front lines have
increasingly had to make more judgment calls. Given the advances in
medical treatment and rehabilitation, we need to fundamentally
understand how agency policies may be influencing decisions and
determine whether these policies still make sense for the times we live
in.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will examine policies that have expanded the role of
subjective evaluations in determining whether applicants qualify for
benefits and how these policies may result in unexplained variations in
decision-making, weakening public confidence in the consistency and
fairness of this national program.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday, April 3, 2013.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days' notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman JOHNSON. We are waiting on my compatriot from the
other side of the aisle, but I am going to go ahead and get us
started, because we are past time. I will call the meeting to
order. And I want to say good morning, and happy first day of
spring. We can all smile, can't we, because it has quit
snowing, right? Wrong.
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Fairness and consistency are essential to
ensuring America's confidence in Social Security's disability
insurance program. Their importance has been consistently
recognized since the disability program was created in 1956.
As we know, Social Security's definition of who is disabled
is a strict one. Whether someone is disabled depends on medical
evidence, and whether a severe physical or mental condition,
referred to in the program as ``impairment,'' prevents someone
from working. But for some conditions, there are also
subjective criteria based in statute that affect the way the
definition is applied. In these cases, making the final
decision on whether an individual is disabled is as much an art
as a science.
In the early 1980s, there was a growing public concern
about the increasing number of statutorily-required continuing
disability reviews that removed thousands of people from the
rolls. In response, federal courts all over the country began
to step in to stem the tide of benefit terminations by
requiring the use of a medical improvement standard in making
the decision to terminate benefits. The courts also issued
orders requiring the Secretary to apply a particular standard
for evaluating disability on a statewide or a circuit-wide
basis.
Soon after, Congress passed the Disability Benefit Reform
Act of 1984, which added several new criteria that increased
the importance of subjective evaluations in deciding whether
someone was disabled, and codified the medical improvement
standard against which medical reviews would be conducted.
According to the Congressional Budget Office, the '84 Act
shifted the criteria for disability insurance eligibility from
a list of specific impairments to a more general consideration
of a person's medical condition and ability to work.
The amendments allowed applicants to qualify for benefits
on the basis of the combined effect of the medical condition,
each of which alone might not have resulted in a decision that
the individual was disabled. The amendments also allowed
symptoms of mental illness and pain to be considered, even in
the absence of a clear-cut medical diagnosis, and revise mental
impairment criteria in the listing of impairments.
It is very clear that our colleagues in the 98th Congress
were anxious about Social Security's actions, and the
increasing inconsistencies caused by so many different circuit
court decisions. Their concern, clearly stated in conference,
was to preserve the consistency and uniformity of this national
program in the way it served those who were truly disabled.
What our colleagues did not foresee was that easing the
criteria would contribute to growing the disability insurance
rolls, including increasing the number of younger workers on
the rolls.
Today, those with mental and musculoskeletal disorders have
grown to 60 percent of the rolls, and those assessments are
usually based on the more subjective steps of the evaluation
process.
The other result of the '84 Act, and one our colleagues
clearly did not intend, is the substantial variation among
decision-makers in the same offices, the same regions, and at
different decision levels. That means two decision-makers can
review the case and make a different decision, and yet still be
right.
So, I might look at a claimant's file and decide that the
person is entitled to benefits. My colleague, Mr. Becerra,
could look at the same file and decide the person is not
entitled to benefits. And as you will hear today, we could both
be right under the Agency's complex policies. If that sounds as
though an award of benefits may come down to who is making the
decision, you are right. Got to remember, this is the United
States Government.
It shouldn't surprise anyone that claimant representatives,
those who represent individuals applying for disability have
figured this out. The Supreme Court said this system for
deciding disability was meant to be simple enough for the
average person to understand. Yet, over the last 20 years,
individuals applying for disability have gone from being
represented 10 percent of the time to over 80 percent of the
time.
Most claimant representatives are well-intentioned, and
want to do their best. But they are quick to take advantage of
confusing and complex policies to try to ensure an award. Their
behavior underscores how far this process has moved away from a
national program with uniform rules to one that is about who
makes the decision. And they have been very successful at it.
Last year the representative industry pulled in over $1 billion
from back payments of those who need these funds the most.
Another indicator that the rules aren't as hard and fast
and consistent as a national program should be is the fact that
we have folks who are trying to cheat the system. Close to half
the state disability determination services have access to
cooperative disability investigating units, who investigate
suspicious applications and, as a result of their efforts, stop
crooks from getting on the rolls. That leaves examiners in half
the country with no way of proving whether their suspicions are
right or not. Our Inspector General has been doing a good job
with that, by the way.
Social Security can't know the number of people who are
receiving benefits who don't deserve them. Yet increasingly,
our constituents tell us they know someone who is receiving
benefits but shouldn't. That undermines the public's confidence
in the program, the Agency, and this body. Further, the
bipartisan, independent Social Security Advisory Board has been
shining a bright light on these issues since 1998. Since then,
they have issued seven reports and several data updates,
repeatedly raising concerns about how the program operates and
the fairness and consistency of the process.
In a February 2012 report update to aspects of the
disability decision-making data and materials, the board states
that updated data continue to highlight significant questions
about Social Security's disability decision-making process, and
about the disability program, listing ongoing inconsistencies
in decision-making. The large gap between policy and
administrative feasibility, continued use of the outdated
dictionary of occupational titles, the definition of
disability, and the need for an in-depth assessment of the
disability decision-making process among its concerns.
My number one priority in holding these hearings is to make
sure we keep this program strong for those who really need it.
And that means taking a good and hard look at what may not be
working, assessing the options for changes, and taking action.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today, and I
look forward to hearing your testimony later.
Mr. Becerra, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Social Security
disability trust fund belongs to the workers who paid into it.
So decisions about whether applicants meet the strict criteria
for benefits need to be made very carefully and as consistently
as possible. This is not always easy. Work-ending disability or
illness comes in many different forms, from terminal illness to
an accumulation of many physical and mental limitations that
worsen with age.
That said, some applicants will always involve close calls:
people who are just barely able or just barely unable to work.
The challenge is to decide cases as fairly and consistently as
possible, but not at the cost of denying earned benefits,
simply because certain disabilities, by their nature, are more
difficult to assess.
Because of the diversity of applicants, and the challenge
of drawing a line between can't work and can work, SSA needs to
have the tools and resources necessary to make decisions that
are as fair and accurate as possible. This means SSA needs to
have clear, specific, and updated policies for disability
examiners and ALJs that they can follow in evaluating those who
apply for benefits. They need effective training for
adjudicators at all levels, so that they can correctly and
consistently perform the complex analysis required to make the
right decision. Quality control to correct and prevent errors,
identify training needs, and useful policy clarifications are
also important.
SSA needs the resources necessary to keep its policies up
to date, to train its staff, and to ensure quality control. At
the same time, because of the inherent challenges of
determining whether a worker's impairments are severe enough to
render him or her unable to work, we must ensure due process
protections for those who are navigating the DI program while
sick and unable to work.
As we examine the challenges SSA faces in determining who
is eligible, especially in those close-call situations, we
should keep in mind that most people who apply to Social
Security for these disability benefits are turned down. The
eligibility standard is very strict. It doesn't allow for
benefits for partial disability or any disability that isn't
expected to last for at least a year, or lead to death.
Medical evidence must show that the condition prevents the
individual from working at any job in the national economy, not
just their previous type of work. As a result, the majority of
people who apply for benefits do not qualify. Even after
appeals, only about 4 in 10 applicants ever qualify for
benefits. It is worth noting that even rejected applicants who
don't get disability benefits are very limited in their ability
to work.
We take our responsibility to safeguard the Social Security
Trust Fund for workers very seriously. We are very concerned
about the decision by the House Republican Majority to block
the investment in the program integrity system. This is the
initiative within SSA that helps weed out the fraud and make
sure unnecessary payments are not made to people who really
should be working.
By failing to fully fund these Social Security case reviews
at the level agreed to in the Budget Control Act of 2011, this
House is being penny wise and pound foolish. If the agreed-upon
number of reviews had been funded for 2013, it would have saved
the taxpayers and the trust fund between $1.6 to $2.4 billion
over the next decade.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for calling this hearing.
It is a complicated, but important question. In the end, our
most important goal must be to ensure Americans receive the
Social Security benefits they have earned, and that they need
to make ends meet. I look forward to learning more about
today's issue from today's witnesses, and I look forward to
hearing the best way that we can move forward.
So, I thank our witnesses in advance for having come, and
we look forward to hearing from you.
Mr. Chairman, with that----
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. BECERRA [continuing]. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman JOHNSON. We do need to get rid of fraud in the
system.
Thank you all for being here. As is customary, any Member
is welcome to submit a statement for the hearing record.
Before we move on to our testimony, I want to remind our
witnesses to please limit your oral remarks to five minutes.
However, without objection, all of the written testimony will
be made part of the written record.
We have one witness panel today. And seated at the table
are Patrick O'Carroll, Jr., Inspector General, Social Security
Administration, accompanied by Heather Hermann, National
Coordinator, Cooperative Disability Investigations Program,
Office of the Inspector General, Social Security
Administration. Glad you all made it down here before the snow.
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Arthur Spencer, Associate Commissioner,
Office of Disability Programs, Social Security Administration.
Kathy Ruffing, Senior Fellow, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities. Trudy Lyon-Hart, Director, Office of Disability
Determination Services, Vermont Agency of Human Services, on
behalf of the National Council of Disability Determination
Directors. David Hatfield, Administrative Law Judge--it says
retired, but I had a conversation with him, he is still a
judge----
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. [continuing]. Wexford, Pennsylvania.
Welcome. Thanks for being here----
Mr. BECERRA. And Judge, when the Chairman says you are
still a judge, you are still a judge, so----
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Welcome and thanks for being here. Mr.
O'Carroll, good to see you again. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK P. O'CARROLL, JR., INSPECTOR GENERAL,
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, ACCOMPANIED BY HEATHER HERMANN,
NATIONAL COORDINATOR, COOPERATIVE DISABILITY INVESTIGATIONS
PROGRAM, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

Mr. O'CARROLL. Good morning, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am joined by
Heather Hermann, national coordinator for our CDI program.
In fiscal year 2012, SSA received about 3.2 million
disability insurance claims, and paid more than $135 billion in
disability benefits. This is a critical time to focus on the
future of the disability program and avoiding improper
payments.
In my written statement I discuss a number of systemic and
policy issues that could save millions in dollars, including
revising the Agency's policy on administrative finality,
terminating payments timely once beneficiaries are deemed
ineligible, and addressing the concept of medical improvement.
However, I would like to take a few minutes to discuss two of
the greatest integrity tools we have available, the CDI program
and continuing disability reviews, or CDRs.
Medical CDRs determine whether a beneficiary remains
disabled and eligible, and are critical in reducing
overpayments in the disability program. SSA has a goal of
conducting 435,000 medical CDRs this year. However, the current
backlog is about 1.2 million. Our audit work has found that the
Agency would have avoided paying hundreds of millions of
dollars to ineligible beneficiaries if CDRs were conducted when
they were due.
Sometimes DDS has even asked CDI units to investigate a
beneficiary during a CDR. That combines the value of our two
most effective integrity tools, which is one of the many
reasons we believe DDSs in all 50 states should have access to
a CDI unit.
In one recent example, a CDI unit investigated a man who
had received disability for almost 18 years, and was undergoing
a CDR. He alleged severe back problems and other ailments. When
investigators interviewed the man, he showed no signs of the
back pain or discomfort he alleged. And when the investigators
looked into the man's social media presence, they found he was
something of a YouTube star, which we would like to show you.
[Video shown.]
Mr. O'CARROLL. As you can see, his video suggests that his
back problems might have been exaggerated. With this
information, the DDS terminated the man's benefits.
Special Agent Hermann will now tell you a little bit more
about CDI.
Heather?

STATEMENT OF HEATHER HERMANN, NATIONAL COORDINATOR, COOPERATIVE
DISABILITY INVESTIGATIONS PROGRAM, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Ms. HERMANN. Thank you, and good morning. Since 1998, CDI
has been successful in detecting abuse in SSA's disability
programs and preventing payment on disability cases involving
potential fraud.
Since the program was established, CDI work nationwide has
resulted in projected SSA savings of $2.2 billion. The process
typically begins with a referral from a state DDS or SSA, or
from administrative law judges during the appeals process. They
refer benefit claims or reviews that have been identified as
suspicious. When the CDI investigation is complete, they send a
report detailing their findings to the DDS, which determines
whether the person is eligible for benefits.
In this case, the man with the cane was on disability,
alleging brain and pelvis injuries. But he bought the cane on
his way to a consultative exam. Here we see him using the new
cane for support. But after the exam, we see him walking freely
and carrying the cane in his left hand. And later that same
day, we see him back at the pharmacy, returning the cane for a
refund. With this information, the Missouri DDS terminated the
man's benefits, and found he was overpaid $11,000. This is
typical of the work that our 24 CDI units--soon to be 25, as we
open a unit in Puerto Rico--do every day.
The National Association of Disability Examiners and the
Government Accountability Office support CDI expansion. And the
program has received great support from your subcommittee, as
well. We look forward to continuing to assist SSA in this
vitally important and growing initiative.
Mr. O'CARROLL. In conclusion, to improve the DI program we
support CDI program expansion, investing in integrity reviews
like CDRs, establishing a self-supporting program for
stewardship activities, and policy or legislative changes that
could reduce the program complexity.
Thank you again for the invitation to testify today, and we
will be more than happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Carroll follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. You know, those are just
a few of the incidents that occur. We were in Dallas, listening
to some of this, and watched a guy take a wheelchair out of the
hearing, fold it up, put it in the truck, walk around the car,
and get in and drive away. People are making a mess of our
disability program. And thanks to our IG, we are getting some
good information on it, and hopefully stopping some of it. By
far, not all of it, though.
Mr. Spencer, welcome. Please proceed, sir.

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR R. SPENCER, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER, OFFICE
OF DISABILITY PROGRAMS, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Mr. SPENCER. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra,
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
discuss the Social Security Disability Insurance program. I am
Art Spencer, Social Security's Associate Commissioner for
Disability Programs, and responsible for disability policy.
A lot has been said and written about the DI program in
recent years, some true. Much, though, that is half true or
even incorrect. I hope that I can help you today with the right
information you need to make the best decisions about the
program's future.
The DI program provides benefits to disabled workers and
their dependents. Workers become insured under the program
based on their contributions to the Social Security Trust Fund.
For this reason, the DI benefit is rightfully described as an
earned benefit.
When we decide whether a person qualifies for DI benefits,
we are required to follow the definition of ``disability'' that
Congress included in the Social Security Act. The Act generally
defines ``disability'' as the inability to engage in any work,
substantial gainful activity, due to a medically-determinable
physical or mental impairment that has lasted or will last for
at least 12 months, or result in death. This is a very strict
standard, and most people don't meet it.
While some have attributed DI program growth to loosening
of the rules, that is simply not the case. As our Chief Actuary
explained to the subcommittee last week, the aging of the
population and expansion of the workforce are the main drivers
of program growth.
To apply the statutory definition of ``disability,'' we do
a rigorous and structured analysis of each case, using five
steps called the sequential analysis process, or sequential
evaluation process.
At step one, we determine whether a person is working and
engaging in SGA, substantial gainful activity. If so, we deny
the claim.
At step two, we assess the existence and severity of a
person's impairment using objective medical evidence. If we do
not find a severe impairment, we deny the claim.
At step three, we determine whether the severe impairment
meets or equals the criteria of one of our medical listing of
impairments found in our regs. The listings describe for each
major body system the impairments that can be considered so
debilitating that they could reasonably prevent someone from
working. We use a process to regularly update the listings
following advances in medical science. We have updated 10 of
the 14 systems, and are working hard on the final 4.
If a person has a listings-level impairment, we allow the
claim. If not, we proceed to step four. At step four, we
consider whether a person's residual functional capacity allows
him or her to do any work that they have successfully done. If
they can do any work that they have done, we deny the claim.
At step five, we determine whether the claimant, given his
or her residual functional capacity, age, education, and past
work experience can do other work that exists in the national
economy. If they cannot do any work that exists in significant
numbers in the national economy, we do allow the claim. But if
they can do any work that exists in the economy, we deny the
claim.
Our partners at state agencies call disability
determination services, make initial disability decisions. They
also reconsider the decisions of denied claimants who appeal.
For those claims that the DDSs allow, we perform an independent
and comprehensive review of at least 50 percent of the cases
before any payment is made. These pre-effectuation reviews
allow us to correct errors before we issue a final decision.
People denied benefits by the DDSs can request a hearing
before an administrative law judge. And thereafter they can
appeal to our appeals council or to federal district court.
Throughout all levels of our administrative process,
program experts review the quality of the decisions, re-target
our feedback and our training to those areas where our experts
find the most frequent errors.
We have also developed technology to help adjudicators make
accurate decisions. For example, our electronic claims analysis
tool is a web-based application that guides DDS adjudicators
through the sequential evaluation process. We are piloting a
similar tool in our hearings offices called the Electronic
Bench Book. Our hearings offices also use How MI Doing to
improve their quality. It explains the reasons for appeals
council remands, and allows adjudicators to view their
performance in relationship to other offices, regions, and the
nation's.
As we continue to improve the DI program, we need
congressional support. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today, and I am happy to answer any questions that
you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Spencer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. I appreciate your
testimony.
Ms. Ruffing, welcome. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF KATHY RUFFING, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER ON BUDGET AND
POLICY PRIORITIES

Ms. RUFFING. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Minority Member Becerra,
and Members of the Committee, I appreciate the invitation to
testify today about this program that is so very important to
over 8 million people who, because of a severe medical
impairment, can no longer work substantially; to members of
their families; and to 150 million workers who have earned
protection from the program, if such a misfortune should happen
to them.
The DI program has grown rapidly over the last several
decades, and that has led some critics to charge that the
program is somehow out of control or in crisis. That is not
correct. We have shown, like the Social Security actuaries,
that the overwhelming bulk of the growth in the program can be
traced to three very straightforward demographic factors: the
aging of the baby boomers into the fifties and sixties, the
years of greatest risk for disability; the growing labor force
participation of women who can now qualify for benefits on
their own work; and the rise in the full retirement age in the
Social Security program. Over five percent of people who are
now on DI would have been called retired workers a decade ago,
not disabled workers.
It turns out that when you properly age and sex-adjust the
rates of disability, the rate has, in fact, grown only very
modestly. It has not doubled or tripled, as some critics claim.
Yet program participation has grown. We can't always quantify
the reasons, but we can name some of them. And, of course, one
of them is legislation, the Disability Benefits Reform Act of
1984, which Chairman Johnson, I think, very accurately summed
up.
I would like to add an historical note here, which is that
DBRA of 1984 came as a reaction to the overzealous actions of
the Reagan Administration, and that is passed both Houses of
Congress unanimously. People who criticize it as somehow
subjective or liberal are sometimes forgetting that history.
Another factor that was, in fact, recognized in DBRA of
1984 is the competitive nature of today's workplace. It is true
that work is generally less physical than in the past. But that
is a two-edged sword. For older workers with limited education,
and for workers of any age with cognitive impairments, a
technologically advanced and a fast-paced workplace is a very
harsh environment.
Other factors that have probably buoyed participation in
the program include the rise in cost and declining availability
of private health insurance, the indirect effect of the rise in
the retirement age, and the economic downturn which, at
minimum, has boosted applications and, to a lesser extend,
awards.
I would like to note briefly that these pressures have not
affected the SSI program equally. That program has been quite
stable since the mid-1990s.
As we know, it is difficult to qualify for disability
benefits. The substantial gainful activity criterion is only a
little over $1,000 a month. That is less than 40 percent of the
median wage of a high-school graduate with no college. The
program does permit and even encourage work. And yet statistics
show that most DI beneficiaries never work again after the
onset of disability, although they are permitted to do so.
Studies of rejected applicants, studies of so-called
parking behavior, and studies of beneficiaries who are
converted to retirement benefits all point to the same
conclusion: DI beneficiaries are unable to perform substantial
work.
We at the Center on Budget strongly advise that disability
be addressed in the context of overall solvency for the Social
Security program, which is a formidable but achievable goal. I
would like briefly, though, to focus on something Congress can
do right now, which is focus on--which is fund continuing
disability reviews. Congress left money on the table in both
2012 and 2013. We believe that Congress can still act in time
to fund those reviews properly.
We look forward to working with you to safeguard and
strengthen this vital program.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ruffing follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am. I guess I got to push
my button, too. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Lyon-Hart, welcome again. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF TRUDY LYON-HART, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF DISABILITY
DETERMINATION SERVICES, VERMONT AGENCY OF HUMAN SERVICES, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF DISABILITY DETERMINATION
DIRECTORS

Ms. LYON-HART. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra,
and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity
to testify on the challenges of disability determination. I
speak on behalf of the National Council of Disability
Determination Directors, representing the management of the
disability determination services. We process nearly 4.8
million cases a year, working with Social Security to provide
consistent, fair, accurate, timely, and cost-efficient
decisions to disability applicants, and to ensure program
integrity.
The disability criteria are very strict by design. DDSs
allow roughly a third of initial claims, about 70 percent of
all favorable decisions, with better than 97 percent accuracy.
DDSs also process medical continuing disability reviews, CDRs,
resulting in $9 of program savings for each administrative
dollar spent.
DDSs face serious challenges. Backlogs keep rising, now
nearly 190,000 cases waiting many months to be assigned to an
adjudicator while a hiring freeze continues for a third year.
When we hire, it takes two years training to recover lost
capacity.
Budgets are challenging all across government. With tight
oversight, DDSs keep expenditures mission-critical and cost-
effective. We ask Congress for the funding to serve disability
applicants and bring CDRs up to date in a carefully planned,
strategic way.
We also recommend considering policy changes to improve
consistency and preserve integrity of this important program.
My testimony today will speak to three highly complex policies
that have the most potential for inconsistency in decision-
making. I will also touch on the medical improvement standard
for CDRs.
The first policy is evaluation of symptoms. A medical
impairment that could cause the symptom is required. But
objective findings are often not sufficient to determine
resulting limitations. The same diagnosis affects different
people differently. Policy requires assessing credibility,
evaluating the consistency and degree of support for the
statements throughout the record, not a gut feeling about the
person's truthfulness.
Second is medical source opinion. Treating source opinions
are controlling only if well-supported by objective medical
evidence and consistent with other substantial evidence. If not
controlling, opinions must still receive appropriate weight,
considering all facts of the case.
Third is residual functional capacity, an administrative
assessment of what the person can do on a sustained basis,
requiring difficult judgements about function, given
fluctuating symptoms and differing medical opinions.
Adjudicators may interpret these policies differently in
individual cases. The information itself is subjective. Policy
defines the factors we must consider, but does not direct any
specific decision.
SSA and DDS work together to improve quality and
consistency: intensive training, mentoring, performance
management, technology to support case analysis, nationalized
quality review, and centralized program consultation. All are
helpful, but more work is needed.
We should think carefully about changing policy. It would
not be right or fair to many truly disabled people not to
consider their symptoms and the opinions of the doctors that
know them best. However, we should look for ways to decide
disability with fewer resources and more consistency.
A few words about CDRs and the medical improvement
standard. This policy was developed in the mid-eighties in
response to public outcry over the way people were being taken
off the rolls. With few exceptions, the policy requires
significant work-related medical improvement for benefit
cessation, whether or not the prior allowance established a
truly disabling impairment. Adjudicators may not substitute
their judgement for that used in the prior allowance.
In practice, medical cessations are not common. We
recommend a review of statute and policy to advance program
integrity, while doing no harm to people who continue to
qualify. Due process and the real effects of aging, chronic
impairment, and time out of the workforce are important. Even
under current policy, medical CDRs provide substantial savings.
Unfortunately, funding has not been sufficient for timely
processing of either CDRs or new applications. And both are
critical.
In conclusion, DDSs have long provided high-quality service
and program stewardship. Together with SSA, we have made
strides in consistency, despite the challenge inherent in
deciding who can and cannot work. Sufficient resources are
critical for continuing this work. With our knowledge of front-
line adjudication, we recommend careful policy revision to
improve the program.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony, and I would be glad to answer any further questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lyon-Hart follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Judge Hatfield, welcome. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF DAVID HATFIELD, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE
(RETIRED), WEXFORD, PENNSYLVANIA

Judge HATFIELD. Thank you, sir. Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
this tremendous opportunity to speak to you today. I am
extremely pleased to see you are focusing on policy, and I
encourage continuing congressional oversight of the disability
program.
My name is David Hatfield, I am a retired administrative
law judge. I worked for 36 years in the Social Security
Administration, participating in the disability process at
almost every level, both in policy and adjudication. I am not
here today representing an organization or a constituency
group. I am not here to say there should be fewer or more
people on disability. I am here as an informed, concerned
citizen to speak plainly about disability policy, which I
believe is the primary cause of inconsistent adjudication.
The last large-scale reform of the program was in 1984. It
shifted a program of reliance on objective medical evidence to
an assessment of an individual's ability to function. SSA has
since issued extensive regulations and numerous clarifying
rulings on pain and opinion evidence, many of which are
restatements of court interpretations of the 1984 changes.
The result is, frankly, a recipe for decision-making that
no cook would dare touch. The policies have allowed too much
subjectivity and have become overly complicated, confusing, and
outdated. The policy has emphasized subjective factors to the
point that, at the ALJ level, just about any case could be
allowed or denied, and either decision can be written in a way
that is consistent with existing Agency policy. Is that a fair
process?
Policy has also become overly complicated. Evaluation of
pain was a short paragraph before 1988. It is now several
pages, with more pages of rulings mandating considerations of
all kinds of factors. The handling of opinion evidence has also
been expanded. And these are not merely guidelines for
evaluating evidence, but are specific requirements that need to
be addressed in every unfavorable decision. If I don't evaluate
a neighbor's written statement saying the claimant is disabled,
yet there are four medical opinions in file saying he isn't
disabled, the case comes back.
Lost in all these gotcha requirements is the question of
whether the claimant is truly disabled, and whether there is
substantial evidence in the record. This high burden adversely
affects timeliness and, in my opinion, alters decision-making.
We must stop the tail wagging the dog. The standard of
review needs to be amended to include a harmless error
component, or alternatively, change to a more deferential
standard. We must put an end to redoing thousands of decisions
that are already supported by substantial evidence.
Confusing policy should also be eliminated, including the
often misused controlling weight standard for treating source
opinions, another concoction of the courts. It trumps all other
evidence, but only if it is ``well supported and not
inconsistent with the other substantial evidence.'' But what
does ``other substantial evidence'' mean? The trump card is
often misapplied.
Finally, many policies are simply outdated, such as the
medical vocational guidelines. They were established in 1979.
It is now 34 years later, and they remain untouched. They must
be updated to reflect the current economy and workforce.
Second, regulations regarding representatives. There are
none. More than 80 percent of the claimants at the hearing
level are now represented, yet there are no rules and no
burdens placed on representatives. Evidence can be submitted at
any time; it is essentially a free-for-all. This hurts
claimants, as they are being cheated out of their due process
hearings.
Third, permanent disability. It is time to re-examine the
permanence in disability. With the advances in medical science,
we know there are many impairments that, with medical
treatment, should not only improve but disappear. I had cases
where the claimant met the duration requirement and was
certainly disabled at the time of my hearing, but I knew he
would be better in six months. I couldn't do anything about it,
as my jurisdiction ended at my decision.
So let's consider specified term disabilities, and let
those folks even return to work within their time-specified
period of disability with no penalty. After all, helping people
to get back to work should be our number one priority.
Ten years ago, the chair of the Social Security Advisory
Board told this Committee that a full-scale review of
disability policy had not been done in twenty years. Ladies and
gentlemen, it has now been 30 years.
Thank you again for this opportunity to express my views
and thoughts.
[The prepared statement of Judge Hatfield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. Thirty years, huh? As is
customary, for each round of questions I will limit my time to
five minutes and ask my colleagues to also limit their
questioning to five minutes, as well.
Members should always speak clearly into the microphone,
but it is especially important to try to help Ms. Ruffing hear
us today.
One half of the country is disadvantaged because they do
not have access to a Cooperative Disability Investigative unit,
a CDI. Ms. Hermann, those state disability determination
services that have access to local Cooperative Disability
Investigative units have the advantage of being able to refer
any suspected fraud cases to that unit for surveillance or
other government database or social media. These units operate
in 21 states. What happens in the other states? Does fraud
remain undetected? And what cost to the taxpayers?
Ms. HERMANN. In the other states who don't have access to a
CDI unit, they can refer those allegations to their local
Office of the Inspector General. The Office of the Inspector
General will review them. However, you know, the decision to
investigate or not is based on local priorities and their local
caseload.
So, often times, the DDS must make whatever decision, based
on the information they have available to them.
Chairman JOHNSON. Or they ignore them.
Ms. HERMANN. We hope they don't ignore them. We hope that
they still refer them to the OIG.
Chairman JOHNSON. I hope you are right. Judge Hatfield, you
know representing Social Security claimants is a thriving
industry. In fact, persons representing claimants pulled in
over $1 billion in fees last year, all of which was skimmed
right off the top of back benefits that were awarded those who
were found disabled. I know most of those representatives want
to do their best for claimants, but it seems to me they are
quick to take advantage of confusing and complex policies to
try to ensure an award.
Is there any standard on what someone who is representing a
claimant is required to submit to the ALJ before the hearing?
Judge HATFIELD. No, Mr. Chairman, there really isn't. It is
really up to the ALJ to enforce that. Some reps are good at
submitting evidence, others are not. But the--ultimately, it is
the judge's responsibility to ultimately ensure the record is
fully developed.
There are really essentially no rules of practice in the
Social Security regulations. So what happens is that evidence
trickles in, it can come in at the day of the hearing. I am
here to ensure claimants get a good, due-process hearing. That
is what the regulations require. And so I need to read that
record. It is non-adversarial, by the way. So I need to read
that record and be sure I can ask the kinds of questions to the
claimant to make sure I make a proper decision. I can't do that
if evidence comes in at the day of the hearing, for instance,
talking about a new impairment, for instance.
So, what happens? I can delay the hearing, which is not
fair to the claimant. I can let the representative sit, at the
end of the day, and I have done that. Time is money. But
ultimately, what I do is I have to read the evidence before the
hearing, delaying all the other cases that I have for that day,
so that I can ensure the claimant is having a due-process
hearing.
So, my feeling is that the record should be closed before
the hearing. And it is not for the judges, it is not for--you
know, to be a judge. It is for the claimant. It is for a due-
process hearing, so that I can ask the right questions at the
hearing.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, that sounds like some of the people
are cherry-picking the evidence and delaying giving it to you
so they are going to get a favorable decision, probably. It
might even slow down the decision. Is that true?
Judge HATFIELD. That is true. And in terms of that, we rely
on the representatives to send in the evidence. If the evidence
is adverse to the claimant, there is nothing in the regulations
at this point that requires a representative to submit that
evidence unless I--you know, I know about it and I ask for it.
There is no sanctions against a representative if they don't
submit that evidence. So----
Chairman JOHNSON. In your experience, did you find people
hiding evidence from you?
Judge HATFIELD. A couple of times. Generally--and this is
in Pittsburgh, where the representatives are, by and large,
very good, and they are very honorable people. But when I was
the acting chief judge, I knew of other instances across the
country where this happened, yes.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Spencer, is it true that a
person can receive both unemployment and disability at the same
time?
Mr. SPENCER. Yes, sir, it is true. There is no prohibition
that would restrict someone getting both unemployment and
Social Security disability insurance.
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay. Do you believe that is a good idea
or not?
Mr. SPENCER. It has never been put into our rules before.
It has always been totally separate.
We are [continuing]. We have looked at this, and would
certainly be willing to continue to work with your staff and
your subcommittee----
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. SPENCER [continuing]. If you would like to move in that
direction.
Chairman JOHNSON. I appreciate that. Mr. Becerra, you are
recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you all for your testimony and for
helping us on this issue.
I think we should make one thing clear. None of us wants to
see the bad apples. They ruin it for everyone else. As I think
you have all indicated, these are earned benefits. And so, any
American who has truly lost the ability to work should be able
to turn to a program that was established as a result of his or
her taxes that he or she paid into the system for this very
reason.
But when you see a video of someone who is trying to take
advantage of the system, it gets you very angry. And we have to
kill that, because if we don't, then it not only makes it
difficult for us to have confidence that we are giving out
these taxpayer benefits that have been earned when they are
rightfully earned, but it also, I think, undermines the
confidence that the public has to have in the system.
And so, I want to make sure we make a point here. Mr.
O'Carroll, you pointed out some cases--I have got some numbers
here. Tell me if I am wrong. There were some--in 2012 some 13
people who were subject to criminal prosecution as a result of
some of your work, the CDI work, right?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, sir.
Mr. BECERRA. I have a number that 19 other cases were
subject to civil monetary penalties. So 19 other people were
subject to civil monetary penalty, as a result of all your CDI
work.
Mr. O'CARROLL. That is correct.
Mr. BECERRA. That is 32 people. The number of people that
you investigated is somewhere around 3,300.
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, sir.
Mr. BECERRA. So of the 3,300, about 32 you found cause to
go after them civilly or criminally. That number is based on
3.2 million people who apply for disability insurance benefits.
And so I want to make something very clear. We have to beef up
your units so you all can find these folks. But there were 32
that you found out of 3.2 million who applied for disability
insurance benefits. And so it is not rampant, but it sure makes
you mad when you find it. And so we have to go after those bad
apples.
I think the judge made it very clear, as well. If you can't
have a system that is working well, if you start to go towards
an adversarial system, which is not what we have right now,
where people are going at it like attorneys will when you have
got a case in court, most of these folks are going to get
trampled, because most of these folks can't afford to get a
high-priced attorney. They are out of work, they are disabled,
or they are very modest-income, to begin with. And so, I hope
we never lose the non-adversarial character of these hearings,
where the ALJ is extremely important. The judge is essentially,
as you said, the gatherer of all the information.
I do agree with you on one thing, Judge. We can't expect
you to make the best decisions if you are getting information
at the end of the hearing. You should be getting as much as you
can before the hearing. And so, when you are at the hearing you
can really probe that applicant or his or her representative
and find out, ``Is there anything else I am missing in this
file so I can make a decision?'' And so I hope you will
continue to give us some guidance on how we can get there. And
I think all of you can provide that, as well.
I want to finish by asking a little bit about these CDRs,
the continuing disability reviews. And I just whispered to the
chairman a little while ago that I think this is something we
can handle bipartisanly. I am not here to try to go after my
colleagues on the Republican side because they are trying to
reduce the size of government and, as a result, one of the
casualties is funding for these CDRs, which we agreed would be
in the budget after the Budget Control Act passed in 2011. But
when you save nine taxpayer dollars for every dollar invested
in a CDR to make sure that someone who has got benefits really
should continue to get it, and if we find through this review,
the CDR review, that they no longer are disabled, and should be
getting back to work, we should go after that with a vengeance.
Because, once again, we provide integrity in the system.
So, Ms. Ruffing, quick question. Is it your sense that if
we had the investment in CDRs, that we could truly make sure
that those who have become disabled are the ones--only the ones
who are receiving the disability insurance benefit?
Ms. RUFFING. I think that is a fair statement.
Cumulatively, over 2012 and 2013, Congress is on track to
under-fund CDRs by about 400 million below the Budget Control
Act allowance. And a back-of-the-envelop estimate suggests to
me that that, over the long run, will cost us between 2.5 and
3.5 billion. As you say, that is penny wise and pound foolish.
Mr. BECERRA. So, not only is it costing us, but we are
going to have more videos of people who shouldn't have remained
on disability insurance, which is going to make it a caustic
program, because people are going to have real ambivalence
about whether we should support it.
I hope, Mr. Chairman, this is something that we should do
bipartisanly, to try to make sure that we go after the fraud,
those who are receiving the benefit when they don't qualify.
That way we can leave it for all those who really do deserve to
have the benefit they paid for.
With that I will yield back the balance of my time, and I
thank you all for your testimony.
Chairman JOHNSON. I think Mr. O'Carroll feels the same way,
and he is working that program pretty hard.
Mr. Tiberi, you are recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not sure anybody
here would be in line to answer this question, but maybe Judge
Hatfield can.
From my limited experience in dealing with folks I know who
have had a disability, I want to just follow up on something
Mr. Becerra said about claimants not being able to afford an
attorney. My experience has been that most lawyers in this line
of work actually get paid contingent on benefits being received
from a claim. Is that your experience, Judge?
Judge HATFIELD. Yes, that is. Almost all of the attorneys
work under that type of arrangement. And you can see them on
nightly television every night.
Mr. TIBERI. I wasn't going to mention that. But the point
being if my little sister, who makes $40,000 a year, gets
injured, she can get an attorney, a very good attorney, based
upon the contingency of her claim and winning her claim.
Judge HATFIELD. Yes, that is true.
Mr. TIBERI. I thought so.
Judge HATFIELD. That is true.
Mr. TIBERI. Just wanted to clear that up. In your testimony
on page seven you say it is time to re-examine--your words, not
mine--``the permanence of disability.'' Tell us more of what
you mean in terms of time for a change in that.
Judge HATFIELD. It--as the chairman had described the
statutory act, it is--a person has to be disabled at least one
year, or it could result in death. It is--but in my experience,
there have been many, many cases where the person is disabled,
they meet that one-year requirement, they have been waiting,
say a year, to get before me, but it has been a--say an
accident, a trauma, something like that, where they are
undergoing medical treatment, they are going to get better. It
is clear they are going to get better. I can't do anything
about that. I can only decide the case at the time of my
decision and find them ``permanently disabled.''
And my thought is to be able to, with the advances of
medical science--I mean 1957 is when the disability program
started. Things have changed much in medicine since then. It
seems to me we should be able to get together a group of people
who could identify certain impairments that should improve with
medical treatment, or perhaps even disappear within a certain
period of time.
And as I suggested, those persons would get a term
disability, based on their impairments and age, or maybe some
factors involved, and then they could go to work during that
time. Let them go to work. We expect those folks would go to
work. Instead, we put them on permanent disability, and then do
a CDR, say, 12 years later, or 10 years later. That person is
out of the workforce. They are never, probably, going to go
back.
So, you know, the whole point here is try to get folks back
to work. It seems to me if we do that quickly at the front end,
give them this sweetener of no penalty to work--and, of course,
if they are still disabled and they didn't go back to work,
they can always re-file after the expiration of their term.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you. You have been a judge for a long
time before you retired. We had CBO here last week. We had the
Chief Actuary here last week. Mr. Spencer, in your testimony
you mention the growth of the program being demographics as the
main driver of the DI program. But both Mr. Goss and the CBO
have been clear in their testimony, the written testimony, that
the 1984 change in the law, which Ms. Ruffing mentioned again
today, that was passed unanimously--but that that change in the
federal policy is another contributing pattern to the growth of
the program.
And in fact--again, CBO's words, not mine, that the change
in federal policy has contributed--the '94 Act--the '84 Act,
excuse me, contributed to the growth of the disability
insurance program, since it led to a larger number of
disability insurance beneficiaries with musculoskeletal or
mental impairments, many entering the rolls at younger ages and
staying in the program longer than the average beneficiary.
Anecdotally, from your seat on the bench that you served,
did you see an increase over the years?
Judge HATFIELD. Well, actually, I wasn't an ALJ prior to
1984, so I probably----
Mr. TIBERI. Hard for you to compare.
Judge HATFIELD.--couldn't comment on that. But yes----
Mr. TIBERI. In terms of those number of cases?
Judge HATFIELD. I think there were quite a few of those
cases that came before me, mental impairments, musculoskeletal,
absolutely. And I think there was a rise in those, and I think
that the statistics show that there was a rise in those over
the years. The percentage of people being paid based on those
two impairments rose significantly during that time.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you. So you think that should warrant a
look at the '84 law to see if we can tweak it?
Judge HATFIELD. That is--that would be my suggestion, yes.
I think that what--what I am suggesting is after 1984 the
reaction of the courts imposed certain requirements that the
Agency decided to adopt through ruling and regulation. And so I
think it is time to sort of reflect as to whether that really
was the intent of Congress, or whether it was just court
interpretation.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Renacci, you are recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses today for testifying. You know, I have only been in
Congress a couple years, but I always like to relate back to my
history as a private citizen and a businessman. And I know
that, over the years, I ran into three different individuals
that were collecting disability.
And as you were talking, I was thinking of those three. One
clearly deserved disability and was not able to work any more.
The second definitely had some impairments, but probably could
work at a desk, at a computer, and do some work. The third used
to golf with me every week. And I always used to wonder how
that third individual was collecting disability as he came to
golf in a golf league every week. So, you know, it is kind of
interesting when you look back over these situations, and then
you hear the testimony.
But with those things, I guess I would like to know what
is--Mr. Spencer, what is the definition of ``severe''
impairment?
Mr. SPENCER. In the first place, let me start by agreeing
with Judge Hatfield, that we don't look at each individual
impairment separately, we must combine the impairments to find
that severe level. But severity, to have a severe impairment or
impairments means it has significant impact on your ability to
stand, walk, sit, lift, carry, get along with people,
understand instructions cognitively, those type of basic
functions that you need to work. Having a severe impairment
does not mean that you are going to be granted disability
benefits, it is just the first bar you must get over. If you
don't have a severe impairment, we stop and you do not get
awarded benefits.
Mr. RENACCI. And then what would be the definition of,
``any work that exists in the economy?'' And I use that as
someone who might be severely impaired, but can maybe work at a
computer and do work from that standpoint.
Mr. SPENCER. That is a great question. Any work in the
national economy means that there are jobs in the region or
contiguous regions in sufficient numbers that you can do, given
what you have left. So I mentioned sitting, standing, lifting,
carrying. If we determine, based on all your medical evidence,
including the subjective medical evidence, that you can sit 6
to 8 hours a day, that you can lift 10 to 20 pounds frequently,
that you don't need super-frequent breaks, that you have a
regular job, we can look for sedentary work for you. And if
that work exists in the economy, we will deny benefits.
It is not based on whether they are hiring, it is not--
these jobs. It is not based on whether you want to apply. It is
based on whether you have the mental or physical capacity to do
work that exists. Does that help?
Mr. RENACCI. Yes. Mr. O'Carroll, I know my colleague
brought up, and I thought it was a good point, the 3.2 million
claims and 32 cases that you found. Do you believe there is an
opportunity to find more? What would be the way to find more? I
mean that is a small number, but clearly it appears there might
be a bigger number.
Mr. O'CARROLL. Thanks, Mr. Renacci, for that question,
because one of the things I had written with my notes here,
when we are talking about the 32 prosecutions that we were
doing of the millions that are--claims are out there, when--
those are the ones that were in pay, and that is part of our
CDI program that we identified. Obviously, with our other
disability fraud investigations, we are prosecuting hundreds of
other people.
However, the other part of the philosophy behind the CDI
program was pre-effectuation, was to be able to identify
people, provide the information to the decision-makers up
front, before people get on to the benefits. And since we are
preventing it in advance, there is--that--none of the
government money is lost that way.
So, what we are finding with the success of the CDI program
is that judges are asking us to do more inquiries with the CDI
program, we are being asked by the disability examiners to do
more. And, as a result of it, we are looking at more people in
pay. But at the moment, of people in pay compared to people on
the pre-effectuation, it is about--I would say about 84 percent
are pre-effectuation, so we are talking about 16 percent is
where that number of 32 comes from.
And then, in completion of your question on it, what we
have been saying from the beginning is that the purpose of the
CDIs is to provide the decision-makers with information that
can be used on this thing. And what we have been saying all
along, and this Committee has been very supportive on, is
expanding the CDI units so that when the DDSs or the judges or
any of the decision-makers have questions on it, we can be
providing the information and, again, showing the videos like
we are doing here, when the public sees them, much like the
person playing golf with you. Hopefully we have a camera
following that person around on other times that they are doing
what could be considered, you know, occupational-type things.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. My friend from Texas, Mr.
Doggett, you are recognized.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman. Judge Hatfield, you suggested a
number of forms that I want to explore. But just at the outset,
I believe you responded previously to Chairman Johnson that
most of the representatives that came in front of you during
your time serving as a judge were honorable people who were
doing their job effectively.
Judge HATFIELD. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. And I just have to say that I do find a little
troubling the use of this term, ``skimmed off the benefits,''
and the size for the whole country. It has been a long time
since I practiced law, but I knew few lawyers then and know few
now who would take a Social Security disability case. There is
no recovery unless there are benefits, which means, often in
complex cases, there is no recovery. And I believe that, from
the people that I have seen in more recent years in my district
office, over the last couple of decades people who had no
representation, who had limited education, or, even if they had
some education, had difficulty with the complexities of this
system, that many folks would not be able to access the
insurance benefits that they have paid over their working life
to get, unless they had honorable representation to
participate.
It is reasonable that across this country, with the number
of people who make application for benefits, that there is some
compensation. And absolutely, somebody who is out of work, who
is disabled, unless they can find someone to take their case on
a contingency, they won't have any representation at all.
When we describe--though the term may be applicable--when
we describe corporations who have a legal department or other
department to deal with the government, we don't refer to those
individuals as having skimmed off the corporate earnings; we
refer to it as part of the normal operating process. And I
think that that is true here.
I think every Member, regardless of party, on this
Committee is strongly against fraud. I am as outraged as anyone
else to see the program jeopardized by somebody dancing on the
Internet, just as we should be outraged when a pharmaceutical
company steals millions of dollars from the Medicaid program,
or a health care provider steals from Medicare. So, fraud, and
how we ferret it out, is very important. But not denying
benefits and not disparaging those who represent people who
have paid into this system to get the benefits to which they
are entitled, I think is equally important.
Now, Mr. Spencer, you mentioned that the standard is not a
low one to get Social Security benefits. Don't most people who
apply for Social Security disability benefits get denied?
Mr. SPENCER. Trudy is right. At the DDS level it is about
33 percent are allowed. But the important thing to really
remember with that number is that, while the hearings allowance
is higher--it is about 50 percent now, it has dropped--they
have a much smaller set of cases. So, in fact, about 70 percent
of all the allowances in the program are made by the DDSs, and
85 percent of DDS decisions end up being the final decision of
the Social Security Administration. So, yes, only about 40
percent of folks who apply are awarded benefits.
Mr. DOGGETT. And you reiterated the testimony we heard not
from a representative for the disabled or an advocate, but from
the chief actuary here in this very committee room recently,
that, despite all the alarmist articles that the sky is falling
and the disability program is about to crash, that, in fact, we
have a very sound disability program, there is not a crisis,
there is not an excess of claims, though there certainly may be
some fraudulent claims, and there may be some fraudulent
representatives out there that need to be ferreted out. But, in
fact, with the same kind of transfer among the funds as has
occurred in previous decades, this fund will be on firm footing
going for decades ahead, and that we can continue to provide
benefits to an aging workforce, and to a workforce that
involves more women in the workplace than occurred in prior
generations.
Mr. SPENCER. Yes, you summarized Mr. Goss's testimony.
If I might, when we think about Judge Hatfield's approach
to maybe temporary disability, while you are doing that let me
remind you that there are three levels of CDR diaries: one year
for people that we know should improve; three years for people
that we are not sure if they will improve; and seven years for
people with terminal illnesses, or with impairments that will
not improve, like intellectual disability.
So, while you are planning, we could deal with a lot of
these lengthy folks on the rolls that haven't been reviewed by
funding the CDR program.
Mr. DOGGETT. My time is up. I would just like if any of the
witnesses or if Judge Hatfield would like to expand on it, I
wanted to go into the medical vocational standards and
permanence of disability. You can forward further written
comments if you have recommendations for how we can improve
this system, make it work more effectively, and see that the
disabled individual, as well as the taxpayer, is adequately
protected here. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. Mr. Kelly, you are
recognized.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you all for being
here.
I think one of the concerns I have is the sustainability of
these programs. And I don't think there is anybody here that
would ever say that somebody who is deserving of these benefits
doesn't get them. But, by the same token, it must be very
difficult, Judge, sitting where you have sat all those years,
to look at what is happening. I was reading in your testimony,
and on page four you talk about some of the things. A bias has
been set in the system at the hearing level in favor of
allowance. And this is under the complicated section you had,
section two.
But I worry about it, because I will tell you. I read also
in the notes that deciding disability is also a complex and
expensive process. Administering the DI and Supplemental
Security Income programs consumes two-thirds of SSA's
approximately $11.5 billion operating budget this fiscal year.
So again, it is the sustainability of these programs. And that
seems to me that the dollars just keep growing and growing.
But for you to come up with a decision based on somebody
sitting in front of you is very difficult. Because I am trying
to figure out these definitions of if you are fully disabled or
your definition of pain. Pain is pretty much subjective. There
are some people who have a very low threshold of pain, other
people have a high threshold of pain. I am like Mr. Renacci. I
have friends who are on disability, but are not incapacitated.
And I understand that. I understand that.
But I read in your testimony, and I think it is incredibly
important. We have seen a lot of technological advances in
medicine. And I know in our job market, in the private sector,
things that would have been hard to do several years ago are no
longer hard to do. I have friends who have had to go from one
form of employment to another because one went away. It had
nothing to do with a disability, it had to do with a loss of a
job. And they transform very quickly into another phase.
But when you are sitting there, and you are looking at all
this information, it is difficult. And it looks to me like it
is very subjective. How do you balance those programs out, or
how do you work with that?
Judge HATFIELD. It is difficult. It is a difficult job. And
I want to say that the administrative law judge court does a
really terrific job of trying to sort that out. I mean that is
what they are doing every day, and they are trying to achieve
500 to 700 of these decisions every year, which is the
expectation, which is a lot of cases.
And so, we are moving cases along, and we have to consider
everything. We have to consider sometimes 500, 1,000 pages of
medical evidence, the claimant's testimony, of course, and all
those sort of amorphous factors in the file, as well, what
kinds of medications they take, what is their daily activities.
So--and this is where I go back to the due process
hearing--that is really the centerpiece to try and get--ferret
out, based on what the claimant is saying. Is it consistent or
inconsistent with the record? And that is why it is so
important to have a full record before me, because it is non-
adversarial. I have to ask the questions, I have to know what
to ask in advance. In short, it is a tough job.
Mr. KELLY. The whole process. In your closing, you said in
your conclusion today there is a serious gap between disability
policy and the administrative capacity required to carry out
that policy.
Now, going back to what Stanford Ross said in 2001--and I
think that this has been taking too long to get to where we
need to be on this review. It just seems to me that you are
kind of left hanging out there without having substantive
information or an update in these policies to be able to make
decisions that are in the best interest of those people who are
coming before you.
And as you say in here, the case load is so big, that there
is a lot of other people that need to get there and can't get
there because it is so backed up.
So, what would it take to get this review? I mean is there
something that I don't understand coming from the private
sector? We would have to--we don't have years to wait on
things. I mean here we kind of measure everything in 10-year
periods, the way we spend money, the way we are going to cut
spending, everything else. But I would say this is a program
that needs to be looked at sooner rather than later.
Judge HATFIELD. I agree, and I--one of the suggestions I
make is to have some sort of board or some body that would
involve adjudicators, as well as policy experts inside and
outside of SSA that would sit down and really work this out.
I think it is very important to get the adjudicators'
perspective on this policy, as well, because we see how a
policy where there may be some shalls and musts turns into
these requirements that I have to put in every decision, when
the bottom line is really is this claimant disabled or not
disabled.
Mr. KELLY. Well, listen. Again, I appreciate you all being
here. Because I think one of the things is, as we lose--or
these programs lose credibility with the American public, that
is where we start to have a real problem. And I have got a lot
of friends that really are very deserving, and we need to get
to them quicker. But there has to be a way to speed this
process up. So, thank you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Ms. Black, do you want to
question?
Mrs. BLACK. I certainly do, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to ask a question. Not being a member of the
subcommittee, it is an honor to sit in on the subcommittee.
I want to go to the Social Security Advisory Board, and the
fact that they have, on a number of occasions, done reports.
And in those reports--and I want to turn here to my notes--the
first one in 1998 that was done, entitled, ``How Social
Security Disability Programs Can Be Improved,'' that was done
in 1998. And in that particular report it did say--it discusses
the complexity of the administrative structure, and as well,
the eligibility as fundamentally a judgement process is what
they said in that report.
And then again in 2001, there was another report done by
the board, and it was entitled, ``Disability Decisions-Making
Data and Materials,'' and there was a companion report:
``Charting the Future of Social Security Disability Programs:
the Need for Fundamental Change.'' And again, in this report,
they noted that there was a question of fairness and
consistency of the process, noting wide and unexplained
variations in the outcomes between the different regions of the
country and different levels of adjudication, and major changes
on how disability is determined, based on court decisions that
have never been reviewed by Congress. So Congress has some
responsibility in this, as well.
And then, more recently, in March of 2011 there was another
report, ``A Vision for the Future: Social Security
Administration.'' And in here, once again, they talked about
the complexity of the program. And this is a quote out of the
report. ``After 75 years, many of the policies governing the
SSA's programs have become overly complex and, in some cases,
unintentionally conflicting, thereby impeding the Agency's
ability to administer its programs effectively.''
And once again--and this is the last one--in February of
2012 the board had another updated report entitled, ``Aspects
of Disability Decision-Making Data and the Materials,'' and I
quote here, ``Long-standing''--noting the, ``Long-standing lack
of consistency in disability determination process that may
award benefits to individuals who do not meet the SSA
disability criteria, and deny benefit to individuals who do
meet the criteria.''
One of the things that I continue to hear from my
constituency is this complexity, is that it is such a weave of
complexity that they have a hard time working through the
process. And most of my constituents end up getting a lawyer.
Very few of the cases that, at least I am aware of--and I am
sure there are a lot of them I am not aware of, to be fair--do
come to me, and even when I was at the state level, to say,
``Look, this is so complex, can you help me?''
And what I would like to know from those who may know of
this report, these reports, if you have--and I guess, Mr.
Spencer, maybe that first one is for you--if you are aware of
these reports, if you have taken any of the suggestions in
trying to help with that complexity.
And, in addition to that, are there some recommendations
out of these reports that you think that we could still apply
at some point in time?
And third, is there anything that we in Congress can do to
help you to make sure it is less complex, and to help those who
are applying to get through the process?
Mr. SPENCER. I will certainly address the first. And if you
could remind me of the second and third----
[Laughter.]
Mrs. BLACK. Okay, sure.
Mr. SPENCER. Absolutely I am familiar with the reports. We
work very closely with the Social Security Board, both the
board and the staff. They have got great ideas. They ask us for
data, we share data. We meet with them very regularly.
I think that I want to emphasize that our first goal in
disability policy is consistency, to make sure that this very
complicated program--and it is--that there is a modicum of
complexity. And yet, to find as much simplification as you can.
Let me just emphasize that, from my analysis over time--and
I have been with the program a very long time--I think that it
is very complicated primarily to serve as a protection for each
individual, that it is very difficult to put an individual into
certain impairment categories and have it always work. A good
example of that right now is--is it Valerie Harper, the woman
who played Rhoda on TV? She is dying. She has months to live.
She looks pretty good. She looks fine, and she is on TV and
talking about it. So it is really hard to see an individual and
know that, well, this person meets the requirements of
disability or not.
What we emphasize in the policy shop is getting guidance
out, and case-by-case guidance. Yes, we write regulations and
rulings and we write instructions. But at the same time, we
also build electronic tools that walk a person through the
complexity in the DDS side, at the eCAT, on the hearing side we
are moving forward on Electronic Bench Book, so that if you
have got a question as you are looking at this document, this
tool, you can actually have the policy come down and guide you.
We build fake cases for adjudicators to show allowances and
denials, and we gather data. We have something called the
residual functional--I am sorry, the Request for Program
Consultation Process, where people disagree on cases, and we
have over 6,000 very difficult cases----
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Spencer?
Mr. SPENCER. Yes, I am----
Mrs. BLACK. I don't mean to interrupt you.
Mr. SPENCER. Okay.
Mrs. BLACK. But I am reclaiming my time, which I actually
don't have, because I see I have a red light.
Chairman JOHNSON. That is correct.
Mrs. BLACK. But, Mr. Chairman, if I may ask, I think this
is a really important question, given that there are advisory
board recommendations. And I would like each of the panelists
if they do have an opinion on how those recommendations could
be implemented, whether it is something that we can work with
them, if they can give us, in written form back to this
Committee, their recommendations on where they think that this
could occur, and how we might be able to help, given we are
Congress and looking at this thing.
Chairman JOHNSON. I know the IG can. So thank you, we
appreciate it. Your time has expired. Mr. Renacci, you are
recognized.
Mr. RENACCI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Spencer, I did
have one follow-up, and I know my time had expired. And it gets
back to your organization. And I know the American people were
always concerned about fraud and abuse, and you were really the
gatekeeper in your organization at the starting point. And I
heard your five-step approach to evaluate claimants, and I
think those are very good approaches.
I ask you about a sixth approach, and that is what
happens--does your organization ever look to those that have
gotten through, the golfer, the guy with the cane, and all
these, and then bring those back and decide how they got
through, what caused them to get passed? Even though you have
this five-step approach, and it is a good approach, and you are
really--looks like you are really attempting to do the best you
can, what do you have in the process that says, ``Let's pull
these back in and see what happened''?
Mr. SPENCER. That is a super question. The DDSs and the
decision-makers, especially at the CDR level, that is the first
line of defense, to send referrals over to our OIG partners.
But whenever we find fraud cases, we absolutely like to see
them and figure out what went wrong. We do that not only on OIG
cases, but on pre-effectuation, before decisions are made,
where someone might recommend an allowance. And part of our
review, because before allowance is paid, we look at at least
50 percent of all those allowance proposed decisions. And if we
find that something looks funny, the case is held up, the case
is referred, we investigate it for either fraud or similar
fault.
So, yes, the five-step process is a very broad process. But
whenever we suspect fraud, the decision-makers and the policy
folks go into that in some detail.
Mr. RENACCI. So do you--when you re-evaluate, do you put
new processes in place to make sure that some of these items
are caught?
Mr. SPENCER. Yes, we have given guidance on what to do when
you suspect fraud, that is true. But we fully support the work
of our OIG. I was a Disability Determination Services Director
in New Jersey, when we started one of the very first CDI units
in New Jersey, for example. But yes, we pay a great deal of
attention, and learn as much as we can from every case.
Mr. RENACCI. All right. Thank you, Mr. Spencer. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Kelly, do you have a
follow-up?
Mr. KELLY. I do, Chairman. I wanted to go back to the
administrative--and Ms. Black and I were just talking about
this, and I am trying to understand. If two-thirds of an $11.5
billion budget is being funded into the administration of it,
there has to be something basically or fundamentally wrong with
the way it is set up. I mean does anybody--this doesn't pass a
smell test if we are saying, oh, it is a little bit--yes, a
little bit complicated? Two-thirds of 11.5 billion? A little
over $7 billion is going to the administrative costs?
I mean to me there have to be bells going off somewhere,
lights flashing somewhere. Who is looking at this? And how does
that compare to other agencies and their breakdown? Because I
am getting the feeling that--I know we got a big government, I
know we got a lot to cover. But I am really concerned when
administrative costs are eating up that amount. And anybody can
tell me. Anybody have a feel for that?
[No response.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Don't everybody speak at once.
Ms. RUFFING. I will venture an opinion here, and it is the
fact that disability determination and continuing program
integrity activities are inherently complicated. There are
approximately 45 million people on the old age and survivors
program, and approximately 10 million on the disability
insurance program. Please correct me, but those are in the
ballpark. But the retirement program really only requires you
to verify that somebody is 62 years old or over, or that they
were married to a deceased worker. That is pretty simple to do.
There is nothing----
Mr. KELLY. Well, excuse me. I mean--not to interrupt you,
but I have to. I mean I understand the scope of it. But there
is no way in the private sector you could look at a program
where two-thirds of it is being eaten up by administrative
costs and think that this is a program that is effective and
efficient. It just doesn't make sense.
But, of course, I am coming from an area where you actually
have to pay for it out of your own pocket, you don't have these
deep wells that you can reach into to grab revenue all the
time.
I am really concerned about this. I mean I understand the
complexity of it, but there is something wrong. The
administrative process takes up two-thirds of an $11.5 billion
budget? That is almost 8 billion--Jim, you are a CPA. It comes
out to, what, 7.5, 7.6? It is a lot of money.
Mr. SPENCER. Our administrative costs, as a factor of our
program costs, is 1.5 percent. So----
Mr. KELLY. Wait a minute, wait. Your administrative cost is
1.5 percent?
Mr. SPENCER. Of the money we pay out, the program costs.
Mr. KELLY. The money you pay out.
Mr. SPENCER. So----
Mr. KELLY. What is your total budget, though? I mean it is
not 1.5 percent of your total budget.
Mr. SPENCER. Oh, no.
Mr. KELLY. No.
Mr. SPENCER. I don't have that.
Mr. KELLY. Okay.
Mr. SPENCER. I can get that for you.
Transcript Insert
Mr. KELLY. Well, let's compare apples to apples and oranges
to oranges.
Mr. SPENCER. Yes.
Mr. KELLY. I understand what you paid out----
Mr. SPENCER. I think a lot of private disability insurance
will run between a four and a five percent cost. We have
significantly less----
Mr. KELLY. Of what they pay out.
Mr. SPENCER. Of what they pay out.
Mr. KELLY. Okay. But that is not the entire budget.
Mr. SPENCER. No, no, no, sir.
Mr. KELLY. Okay. Because there is nothing--there is not a
model out there that works on a 1.5 or 4 percent administrative
cost. I mean I worked in a lot of charities back home. If you
can keep it somewhere under 15 percent, you are walking in
rarified air.
So this is alarming, though. This amount of money we are
spending for administrative costs really is alarming, which
goes back to Judge Hatfield. This has become so complicated and
so complex and so willy-nilly, I mean what do you want the pain
to be? Pain is what I may think what pain is, you may think
what pain is. But permanent disability versus--maybe there is
some other way to do it. I don't want to take anything away
from anybody, but the sustainability of these programs is in
great jeopardy because of the structure.
So, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you for your questions.
Ms. Hermann, what are the most common types of disability
fraud that CDI units investigate?
Ms. HERMANN. We investigate all types of disability fraud.
But the most common things we see are people--it really runs
the spectrum--people outright faking their disabilities to
people who are mildly exaggerating some of their--the things
they are able to do. And it, again, runs the spectrum from
pain, generalized back pain, migraines, all the way to, you
know, mental disorders, personality disorders----
Chairman JOHNSON. When you find somebody that is
fraudulently trying to take money from the system, how fast
does the money stop? Or is it immediate?
Ms. HERMANN. That is actually a good question for some of
the SSA counterparts here. Our investigations, we try to do as
quickly as possible, but still as thoroughly as possible, so--
--
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, then you give them to him. And do
you stop the payments?
Mr. SPENCER. We do. As soon as fraud is suspected, payments
can be suspended. And we re-evaluate the case, ignoring all the
suspect evidence.
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. O'Carroll, what percentage of CDI
investigations focus on initial claims?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Chairman, that is about, I would say, 84
percent is initial claims. So about 16 percent are in pay.
Chairman JOHNSON. And why is the program more focused on
applicants, rather than those already receiving benefits? And
you got any more videos that you want to show us?
[Laughter.]
Mr. O'CARROLL. I just happened to bring some extra videos
with me.
But to tee it up again, just as you had said, Chairman, on
it, what we wanted to do with the CDI program at the beginning
of it, was stop the money from going out the door. And that is
why our focus, from the beginning of it, was to get the
information to the decision-makers before the benefits go out.
Because it is so hard to recoup the money once it is lost. It
is better to get it on the front end.
However, because of the success, and doing the videos that
I will be showing you in a minute, it has become so good a tool
for providing judges with the information, for finding the DDS
people with the information, that we are getting more and more
referrals, so we are doing more and more in pay. And those are
the ones that--as came up earlier, those are the ones, when
they are in pay, that are more likely to be prosecuted.
But with this, we did bring a couple of other examples, and
I will show them to you now.
[Video shown.]
Mr. O'CARROLL. In this first video, we have--this first
woman, she is the lead singer in a musical group, and she
claims she was disabled and isolated herself from others. CDI
investigators located this tube [sic] on YouTube and then
shared it with the DDS.
The next woman we see is jogging at a softball game, and
she claims she suffered from chronic back pain. And she talked
about the softball game, as well as other workouts and
activities, on her Facebook page.
And finally, this is the case of the drummer girl who was
featured--she was featured on Fox News. The case became, as a
result of a CDR on the woman, who was receiving benefits for
back pain and other disorders. We discovered she was actually a
very talented drummer in an all-female band. And the
investigators located some videos on YouTube, and then they
went to the concert and filmed the whole thing, which is what
we used, and then we turned it over to the DDS and she didn't
get her benefits.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I think that is all I want to do at this point. Mr.
Becerra, you are recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for letting us
ask a second series of questions. And actually, to Mr. Kelly's
point, that is why there is an expense to the Administration of
the DI program, because we have to pay your salary, and Ms.
Hermann's salary, and all the folks who are going to go out
there to make sure we do this right. Then we have to make sure
we pay Judge Hatfield to conduct the hearing, we have to pay
Mr. Spencer and Ms. Lyon-Hart, to make sure that the process is
done properly.
When you think about it, in terms of the actual amount
spent administering the program, one or two percent, that is
great, in terms of the benefits that are doled out. And I
actually think, given that you have to deal with tens of
millions of Americans who are either getting survivor's
benefits, retirement benefits, or disability benefits, that,
for the cost, I just want to say to each and every one of you
who are working, because I don't know if we said this to you,
but each and every one of you who work in this field, thank
you.
Thank you for what you have done in helping make
determinations, and helping process the folks, and helping make
sure that Americans can have confidence in the system. I don't
think, often times, we recognize how much work you do. And so,
when you find that person who is trying to take advantage, it
is important. Because there is going to be someone who does
come through the door of the judge who really can't afford an
attorney, who really has a case, but doesn't know how to
prosecute it for himself or herself. And that is where the
judge comes in and all the folks who make sure that those
Americans who paid into the system for years and years and
years have a chance to make it happen.
So, quite honestly, I think, Mr. Kelly, if we look into
this, we will find that, for the money, you can't find a
better-administered program than what you have with the Social
Security----
Mr. KELLY. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. BECERRA. Absolutely.
Mr. KELLY. There is a huge difference between the
percentage of what is paid out and the total percentage of the
budget that is allotted. Administrative costs that eat up two-
thirds? I can tell you, Mr. Becerra, coming from the private
sector, there is nobody operating any business today in the
private sector that looks at two-thirds of the administrative--
going to the administrative costs of what they are spending,
and thinking they are running a successful business. It can
only be done inside Washington, and that is because we got
other people that fund it for us.
Mr. BECERRA. And, Mr. Kelly, name me another company that
has to deal with millions of people who claim that they are
disabled after paying benefits and have to go through the
process.
Mr. KELLY. We are comparing apples and oranges.
Mr. BECERRA. Comcast doesn't have to do that. AT&T doesn't
have to do that. Northrop Grumman doesn't have to do that. This
is tough.
It ain't easy, nor should it be easy to get those benefits.
But Americans are entitled to get those benefits, if they
worked hard and they can prove that they are now qualified.
And so, I honestly think, if we look into this, no one does
it better. And I guarantee you Northrop Grumman, AT&T, Comcast
pay a lot more for attorneys than the Social Security
Administration pays their ALJ judges and everybody else who
tries to put these cases together. I guarantee you AT&T has a
far bigger budget to do its investigations and so forth than
does the SSA to have Mr. O'Carroll do that great work that he
and Ms. Hermann are doing.
And so, I think that we could put all that out there
transparently. And I guarantee you that many of us would be
willing to dive on the sword to say that SSA is working very
hard to make sure that the system is working for Americans who
paid into it.
Let me ask a couple of quick questions. So--by the way,
thank you. By the way, can I also, Mr. Chairman, say thank you
to Kim and the staff on this Subcommittee? Because we have had
a couple of great hearings, where I think we are digging deep
into what we can do to make the program work better. And I want
to thank the cooperation that we have seen from our staff, both
Majority and Minority staff, in helping us really have what I
think are solid hearings, where people want--Members of
Congress want to stay and actually ask a second round of
questions of the witnesses. So I want to say thank you to Kim
and all the staff on our side, as well, Kathryn and staff.
Judge Hatfield mentioned something that caused me some
cause for concern, until I thought about this a little bit. Mr.
Spencer, isn't it the case that, with regard to those people
who have a severe but not a permanent disability, that those
are the types of cases that SSA most likely is going to send
Mr. O'Carroll to go look at first?
Mr. SPENCER. Well, yes but. And the reason I say, ``yes
but,'' there are impairments that last a year, but we expect
them to get better. So our first line of defense is, in fact,
the CDR. At any time, if we suspect that something is not right
in a claim, we refer that over to the OIG, because they are the
experts in these type of----
Mr. BECERRA. And the CDRs, which we have been told save us
nine bucks for every buck invested in that investigation, is
what this congress chose to under-fund. And so, Mr. Chairman,
there again, I hope we do something more about trying to make
sure those reviews can be done.
And final question, Mr. Spencer, lots of variation in the
rate at which people are awarded disability benefits, because
there are a lot of differences among those folks who apply.
What are the things that SSA does to make sure that a person
with the same type of limitation in one part of the country
gets the same answer, no matter where he or she files, compared
to someone else in another part of the country?
Mr. SPENCER. We have a comprehensive quality assurance
process. The states have an internal QA. As I said, 50 percent
of all allowances are reviewed by a federal component before
benefits are awarded. We take the information we gain from
that, we feed it back as training. We gather data, we have
something called a policy feedback system, where folks look for
good case examples, and then we build training modules around
those good cases, cases that should be allowed or denied.
As I mentioned, the RPC process takes complex cases and
gives feedback to the decision-makers, so that they know what
the policy guidance is. Those are just some examples, sir.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Ms. Black, will you close us
out? Do you have another question?
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My last question was
for the judge.
Judge Hatfield, so the ALJ's get specific training on
hearing these cases?
Judge HATFIELD. Yes, they do. In fact, I was the lead
instructor for many, many years in the Agency. They get initial
training, which is about four weeks. And then, after a year,
they come back and have supplemental training for a week,
where, after they have heard some cases, they are able to
discuss the issues in more depth.
Mrs. BLACK. And is there a review of their cases to just
see how many cases are being approved, related to just looking
at, geographically, the whole country? Because I know in some
of the studies that I have done, it seems that certain areas of
the country have judges that are approving more cases than
others. And again, that is just looking at it cursorily, not
looking deeply to find out why that is.
But is there any sort of review to make sure that what they
are hearing and in the cases that they are reviewing,
especially if they are unusually high numbers, that they are
reviewed?
Judge HATFIELD. The Appeals Council, which is the
administrative body above the judges, chiefly looks at cases
based on denials of review, a claimant's initiated appeals. And
that has been their largest workload for years and years. They
have expanded lately--tremendously, actually--to look at
allowances, as well. And I think they are looking at more
allowances at this point.
But in terms of looking at a particular judge, there has
been a history in the agency, sort of a bloody history,
honestly, of looking at targeting particular judges and their
allowance and denial rates. So it is a little tricky in that
area. I will say, though, and I said this before in my
testimony, is there is somewhat of a bias at the ALJ level to
pay a case, because the allowances aren't looked at as deeply
as the denials. Denials are on appeal. Whereas, in the DDS, as
Art said, they look at about 50 percent of the allowances. But
in terms of the denials--so there may be a bias in that
particular part of the process to deny a case, as opposed to
pay.
So, I believe there isn't quite the balance here between
allowances and denials at each level that there should be.
Mrs. BLACK. I think that is another area, when you look at
the disparity geographically, that we might want to look at a
little deeper to find out what the justifications are there,
and why it seems that some areas the judges find in favor much,
much more than other areas.
So thank you for your testimony.
Chairman JOHNSON. That has been a problem. As a matter of
fact, especially in Puerto Rico. I won't say any more than
that. You know what I am talking about.
Thank you, witnesses, for your testimony. I thank you also
to the Members that are here. Understanding the challenges of
achieving fair and consistent disability decisions is critical
to making sure that the Disability Insurance program can keep
serving the people it needs to serve the most.
And, with that, this Committee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:47 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

_________

Questions For The Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________

[all]
