- D.C. HOME RULE: EXAMINING THE INTENT OF CONGRESS IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA HOME RULE ACT OF 1973

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

D.C. HOME RULE: EXAMINING THE INTENT OF CONGRESS IN THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA HOME RULE ACT OF 1973

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 12, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-112

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-481 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Patrick Hartobey, Counsel
Willie Marx, Clerk

------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 12, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Edda Emmanuelli Perez, Managing Associate General Counsel,
Office of General Counsel, U.S. Government Accountability
Office
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Jacques Depuy, Partner (Retired), Greenstein Delorme and
Luchs, P.C., Former Counsel (1971-1974), Subcommittee on
Government Operations and Reorganization
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30
Mr. Philip H. Mendelson, Chairman, Council of the District of
Columbia
Oral Statement...............................................    91
Written Statement............................................    94
Mr. Irvin B. Nathan, Senior Counsel, Arnold & Porter, Former
Attorney General, District of Columbia
Oral Statement...............................................   103
Written Statement............................................   105
Mr. Brian Netter, Partner, Mayer Brown
Oral Statement...............................................   132
Written Statement............................................   134

APPENDIX

October 9, 1973-Congressional Record-U.S. House of
Representatives, Specifically the Statements made by Chairman
Charles Coles Diggs, Entered by Chairman Meadows...............   154
Former Mayor Vincent C. Gray's letter sent on April 11, 2014 to
Phil Mendelson, Chairman, Council of the District of Columbia,
Entered by Chairman Mark Meadows...............................   155
Written Statement of Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton, Entered
by Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton..............................   159
Brief Amici Curiae of Dr. Alice M. Rivlin, the Hon. Thomas M.
Davis, and the Hon. Anthony A. Williams in Support of Neither
Party. The Case is Council of the District of Columbia v.
Vincent Gray, in his Official Capacity as Chief Financial
Officer for the District of Columbia, Entered by Delegate.
Eleanor Holmes Norton..........................................   161
``Local Budget Autonomy Amendment Act of 2012'' text. Entered by
Chairman Meadows...............................................   174
GAO Responses to Questions for the Reform sent by the Committee
on Oversight and Government Reform.............................   177

D.C. HOME RULE: EXAMINING THE INTENT OF CONGRESS IN THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA HOME RULE ACT OF 1973

----------

Thursday, May 12, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Meadows
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Meadows, Jordan, Walberg, Buck,
Grothman, Connolly, Norton, and Clay.
Mr. Meadows. The Subcommittee on Government Operations will
come to order. And, without objection, the chair is authorized
to declare a recess at any time.
It is the chairman's responsibility under the Rules of the
House to maintain order and preserve decorum in the committee
room. Members of the audience are reminded that disruption of
congressional business is a violation of the law. We certainly
welcome your presence and we would just caution you against any
disruption.
Good afternoon and welcome. Today's hearing will shine a
light on what Congress intended when it passed the Home Rule
Act in 1973. We are not here to discuss the soundness of the
District having budget authority as a policy matter. Our goal
today is to determine whether the Local Budget Autonomy Act was
consistent with the Home Rule Act enacted by Congress.
In addition, today's hearing will seek to identify the
potential ramifications that we may face by the District of
Columbia and local D.C. Government employees in the event the
Local Budget Autonomy Act is enforced.
And at the outset of our country, the Founding Fathers saw
fit to vest in Congress a constitutional right to maintain
supreme legislative authority over the District. So important
was this authority to James Madison that he even took time to
expand upon the necessity of the Federal Government having an
independent seat in The Federalist No. 43.
It was a result of this indispensable necessity, as Madison
described it, for an independent seat of government that the
District of Columbia was created, and in 1973 Congress
undertook the process of delegating to the District a limited
home rule for the first time in roughly 100 years. And it did
so, undoubtedly, with the need to maintain its constitutionally
vested authority in mind.
The voluminous Congressional Record associated with the
Home Rule Act serves to demonstrate the need to balance popular
sovereignty for the people of the District against the
essential requirement that Congress maintain its supreme
legislative authority.
Reviewing the record shows that numerous debates, hearings,
and discussions were had over many of the provisions in the
final Home Rule Act. In fact, the debates and editing continued
all the way through to the House floor, where very important
clarifying changes were made that were incorporated in the
final version of the act.
During the floor debate a number of edits were made which,
in the words of one of the principal architects of the Home
Rule Act, Chairman Charles Coles Diggs, Jr., clarified the
intent of the act. I ask unanimous consent that the Chairman
Charles Coles Diggs, Jr.'s ``Dear Colleague'' letter, dated
October the 9th, 1973, be put into the record. And without
objection, so ordered.
Mr. Meadows. Among these edits was the express retention of
the appropriations power of the Congress and the role of the
Federal Government as a whole in the budgetary process as it
relates to the District.
The intent to retain the role of the Federal Government in
the budgetary process went unquestioned for nearly 40 years. In
2012, however, the District unilaterally claimed that this was
not the congressional intent of the Home Rule Act and passed a
Local Budget Autonomy Act. The Local Budget Autonomy Act was
voted on by less than 10 percent of the eligible voters in the
District of Columbia.
This act is currently involved in litigation at the Federal
level regarding its legal status and was previously the subject
of extended litigation in both the Federal and State courts
with the House Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group having supported
the plaintiff challenging the act's legality. As such, its
status remains in legal limbo until the courts issue a final
and definitive ruling.
The Local Budget Autonomy Act is not settled law, as some
have asserted. Further, the GAO, or the Government
Accountability Office, issued an opinion in January of 2014
stating that they believe the enforcement of this act would
constitute a violation of the Antideficiency Act.
As a result, should the District attempt to enforce this
act, D.C. employees could face repercussions, including those
which stem from the Antideficiency Act violations. These
employees could then be subjected to potential administrative
penalties and could even be subject to criminal liabilities for
violating the act.
Former D.C. Mayor Vincent Gray expressed these concerns of
subjecting District employees to the possible administrative
and criminal punishments for enforcing the Local Budget
Autonomy Act in his April 11, 2014, letter to the Council of
the District of Columbia stating that he would not implement
the Local Budget Autonomy Act. So I ask for unanimous consent
to enter this letter into the record. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Mr. Meadows. I'd like to thank all of the witnesses for
agreeing to testify before the committee today. We are
fortunate to have attorneys who participated in litigating this
issue, the chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia,
and a member of GAO's General Counsel's Office, also members of
the congressional staff who were involved in the drafting of
the Home Rule Act at the time of its passage.
I look forward to hearing from each of you on this very
important issue.
I now recognize my good friend, Mr. Connolly, the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Government Operations, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing. I also want to welcome my friend and
former colleague, Phil Mendelson, who is chairman of the
Washington, D.C., City Council.
I approach the subject of home rule as a former local
government official, having served in neighboring Fairfax
County for 14 years on the governing body, 5 years as chairman,
of the largest jurisdiction in metropolitan Washington. I know
what it takes to produce a budget every year. I know the
difficulty of making revenue and expenditure estimates under
the best of circumstances. I cannot imagine how a local
government, my local government, would function efficiently or
effectively if each budgetary decision required congressional
approval.
I have consistently supported autonomy for the District and
would argue that Congress' actions have actually had a
deleterious effect on the District, its management, and its
residents. I hope the irony of this situation is not lost on
anyone watching who support the conservative principles of
limited government and states' rights ostensibly. I don't mean
my friend the chairman. I guess the District of Columbia is an
ideological carveout.
How is it that a legislative body that struggles to pass
its own annual budget and routinely misses appropriations
deadlines would nonetheless insist on exercising overall
authority and oversight over somebody else's?
D.C.'s lack of budget autonomy affects the entire national
capital region, especially the thousands of my constituents who
are civil servants and work every day here in the District of
Columbia. Former Virginia Governor Bob McDonnell, a Republican,
supported budget autonomy because of the negative consequences
for both Virginia and Maryland if D.C.'s fiscal situation is
left uncertain, particularly during a Federal Government
shutdown like the one we endured several years ago.
Without budget autonomy, if the Federal Government shuts
down, the D.C. government shuts down too, absent a specific
exemption from Congress. That means all nonessential D.C.
municipal services cease, potentially paralyzing the city and
hundreds of thousands of commuters coming into the city, to say
nothing of our constituents nationwide who visit D.C. in the
millions every year.
The past two Republican chairmen of this committee also
supported the policy of budget autonomy for the District. My
predecessor and friend Tom Davis, and Darrell Issa, introduced
legislation to expand the home rule, including bills to give
D.C. autonomy. In fact, Tom Davis, my predecessor in this job,
continues to fight for budget autonomy as a private citizen.
I regret that the committee has seemingly abandoned those
bipartisan efforts in recent years. In fact, the committee,
this committee, has gone out of its way to restrict home rule.
Last year the committee and the House for the first time since
1991 passed a resolution of disapproval on a law passed by the
D.C. City Council, the Reproductive Health Non-Discrimination
Amendment Act. We did it because we could. That law prohibits
employers from discriminating against employees based on their
reproductive health decisions.
More recently, House Republicans passed for the second time
this Congress a misguided D.C. voucher bill that was not only
not requested by the District, but also has failed to deliver
educational results according to a number of studies and tests.
The chairman of this committee seemed to also threaten jail
time for the D.C. city Mayor for implementing the city's
marijuana legalization law, which was adopted by public
referendum by the residents of the District of Columbia. And
when we do something like that, to me it's painful irony. First
of all, we couldn't do it in Denver, same referendum, same
outcome, because our reach doesn't go to Denver. We do it here
because we can, because the Constitution gives us authority
over a city that did not yet exist when the Constitution was
adopted and was never envisioned to be a modern urban
metropolis. In fact, D.C. Superior Court recently upheld the
District's Budget Autonomy Act approved by those votes in 2013.
While some disagree about how to achieve it, all, including
I think most of the witnesses today, will agree on the policy
of budget autonomy for the District. To me, it's shameful that
the community housing the Federal Government is not afforded
the same rights to self-government as all others across the
country.
It is time for congressional Republicans to get on board.
And this is one case where I would hope, upon reflection, they
would actually adhere to their own conservative principles:
that government closest to the people is the best form of
government, people are entitled to self-determination, there
should never be taxation without representation.
These are American values, but they certainly are values I
have heard from my conservative friends and I respect them.
Let's start to apply them irrespective of race, irrespective of
partisan voting patterns. This is about American rights, and
nothing should substitute itself for our enshrinement of those
rights and our respect for those rights.
I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman for his opening
statements. And we will caution the audience, in terms of
public displays of either pleasure or displeasure, we would ask
you to refrain from that.
And so I now recognize the delegate from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Eleanor Holmes Norton, for her opening statement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to welcome Chairman Mendelson. I want to
welcome all of the witnesses, especially my constituents, and
others to this hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that you have given me this
time. You're my good friend, even when good friends must
disagree, as we do today. I will read what I have to say in
order to stay within the time you have given me.
You, Mr. Chairman, are known for your well-known kindness,
and it's a courtesy, since I am not ranking member, for you to
allow me to give an opening statement at this hearing. Of
course, this hearing is on my very own district and it affects
only those who live in the District of Columbia.
This hearing, however, appears to be a fait accompli,
similar to when the committee went through the motions last
month marking up the District of Columbia school vouchers bill.
The committee knew that the bill could only be enacted on an
appropriation bill, that there was not the support in the
Senate, and Chairman Jason Chaffetz had already requested that
the matter be put on the upcoming appropriation bill even
before we had that hearing here.
This hearing seems designed to lay the predicate for using
the appropriation process yet again to try to overturn, block,
or preempt the Local Budget Autonomy Act of 2012, which was
ratified by 83 percent of the D.C. voters.
The evidence for this is transparent. Speaker Paul Ryan's
spokesperson told the press that Republicans are considering,
quote, ``legislative options'' for the Budget Autonomy Act. The
three top House Republican leaders have filed amicus briefs
expressing their view that the Budget Autonomy Act is invalid.
The House Appropriations Committee has said that the Budget
Appropriation Act is invalid.
By calling legal experts, the subcommittee is trying a
complicated legal matter in the court of public opinion and
most will not understand much of the legal machinations we
discuss here today because they are normally discussed in a
court of law. Only the courts can determine the validity of the
Budget Autonomy Act. Indeed, the Budget Autonomy Act has been
litigated for the last 2 years with courts reaching conflicting
conclusions.
Yet, the act is the law of the land. The Congress did not
disapprove the Budget Autonomy Act during the congressional
review period and the only court order in effect on the Budget
Autonomy Act upheld its validity.
What is within the committee's authority is to remove
Federal restrictions that harm the finances and operations of
the D.C. government. The last two Republican chairmen of the
committee studied this issue closely, Tom Davis and Darrell
Issa, and sought budget autonomy for the District of Columbia.
As Mr. Davis has said, ``The benefits of budget autonomy for
the District are numerous, real, and much needed. There is no
drawback.'' Indeed, even the Republican witnesses here who have
taken a position on the policy of budget autonomy support it.
Control over the dollars raised by local taxpayers and
businesses is central to local control, one of the oldest
principles of the United States Government and a much-cited
principle of congressional Republicans in particular.
Budget autonomy also has practical benefits for both the
District and the Federal Governments. For the District
government, it means lower borrowing costs, more accurate
revenue and expenditure forecasts, improved agency operations,
and the removal of the threat of Federal Government shutdowns.
For Congress, it means not wasting time on budget line
items it never amends. For the Federal Government, it means
that the municipal services that government, our government,
relies on to function will not cease during a Federal shutdown.
To its credit, Congress has begun to recognize the
hardships caused by the lack of budget autonomy. Since 2014,
for the first time we were able to keep the Congress from
involving the District, and Congress has exempted D.C. from
Federal shutdowns.
Congress losses nothing under budget autonomy. This is not
statehood. Under the U.S. Constitution, Congress has the
authority to legislate on any District matter, including its
local budget, at any time.
This year's Republican budget made the case for budget
autonomy, and I conclude with what my colleagues said in their
own budget:
``This budget would give our States and local
municipalities the freedom and flexibility...that meets the
unique needs and challenges of their communities...We are
humble enough,'' said by my colleagues, ``to admit that the
Federal Government does not have all of the answers...Putting
our faith in the people will respect and restore the principle
of federalism in America.''
Mr. Chairman, I rest my case. Thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman for her comments.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
member who would like to submit a written statement.
Mr. Meadows. We will now recognize our panel of witnesses.
And I'm pleased to welcome Ms. Edda Emmanuelli Perez, managing
associate general counsel at the Office of General Council at
the U.S. Government Accountability Office; Mr. Jacques DePuy, a
retired partner at Greenstein Delorme and Luchs and a former
counsel for the Subcommittee on Government Operations and
Reorganization; Mr. Philip Mendelson, chairman of the Council
of the District of Columbia; Mr. Irvin Nathan, senior counsel
at Arnold & Porter and former attorney general of the District
of Columbia; and Mr. Brian Netter, partner at Mayer Brown.
Welcome to you all. And pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses will be sworn in before they testify. So I would ask
that you please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
Thank you. Please be seated.
And so in order to allow time for discussion, I would ask
that you please limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes. Your
entire written statement will be made part of the record.
And you're now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF EDDA EMMANUELLI PEREZ

Ms. Perez. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity
to discuss our legal opinion concerning the effect of the
District of Columbia's Local Budget Autonomy Act.
The Budget Autonomy Act attempts to change the Federal
Government's role in the District's budget process by removing
Congress from the appropriation process of most District funds
and by removing the President from the District's budget
formulation process. GAO concluded that provisions of the
Budget Autonomy Act that attempt to change the Federal
Government's role in this way have no legal effect.
In the District of Columbia Home Rule Act, Congress
established a District government and delineated its budget
process. The Home Rule Act, as well as the Antideficiency Act
and the Budget and Accounting Act, serve and protect two
important constitutional powers reserved to the Congress: its
power to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever
over the District and Congress' constitutional power of the
purse.
GAO addressed the conflict between the Budget Autonomy Act
and the Antideficiency Act and the Budget and Accounting Act.
The Antideficiency Act bars officers and employees of the U.S.
Government and the government of the District of Columbia from
making or authorizing expenditures or obligations exceeding the
amount available in appropriation. The Budget and Accounting
Act requires the head of each agency, which includes the
District government, to submit a budget request to the
President for transmission to Congress. The Home Rule Act
states that the council may not amend or repeal any act of
Congress which is not restricted in its application exclusively
in or to the District.
In addition to applying to the District, both the
Antideficiency Act and the Budget and Accounting Act apply to
all officers and employees of the United States and heads of
Federal agencies. Thus, the Home Rule Act bars the District
from amending or repealing these statutes.
We concluded that without affirmative congressional action
otherwise, the requirements of the Antideficiency Act continue
to apply and District officers and employees may not obligate
or expend funds except in accordance with appropriations
enacted into Federal law by Congress. The District government
also remains bound by the Budget and Accounting Act, which
requires it to submit budget estimates to the President.
We examined the legislative history of the Home Rule Act
and found that it supported the conclusion that the
Antideficiency Act continues to apply to the District. Although
the Senate version of the Home Rule Act would have granted
considerable fiscal autonomy to the District, the conference
committee adopted the House provisions that required that the
District submit its budget to Congress. The stated reason was
that they did so to preserve the process through which Congress
appropriates amounts for the District. By considering and
explicitly rejecting the idea of granting greater budget
autonomy to the District, Congress reserved to itself the
authority to appropriate funds for the District.
We considered other arguments made in support of the Budget
Autonomy Act. One such argument was that Congress granted the
District a permanent appropriation of the District's local
funds that would make local funds available without further
action by Congress. We disagree. By law, the making of an
appropriation must be expressly stated and cannot be inferred
or made by implication. Congress enacts appropriations by
identifying the source of funding and authorizing the
obligation and expenditure of those funds. Congress has not
provided the District with such authority.
A further argument was that the purpose and text of the
Antideficiency Act would be satisfied when the District
government, rather than Congress, enacts an annual
appropriation. Again, we disagree. Pursuant to the
Constitution, both the appropriations power and the exclusive
power to legislate over the District belong to Congress. As the
cornerstone of fiscal laws enacted by Congress to implement its
power of the purse, the Antideficiency Act clearly applies to
the District, both by its very terms and by the terms of the
Home Rule Act, reflecting Congress' decision to expressly limit
District spending to amounts Congress appropriates.
We also considered whether it was legally significant that
Congress has not enacted into law a resolution disapproving of
the Budget Autonomy Act. Since the Home Rule Act provided no
authority to enact the Budget Autonomy Act and acts taken
without legal authority are void at the outset, it is of no
legal significance that Congress did not enact a resolution
disapproving of the Budget Autonomy Act.
GAO does not take a view on the merits of Congress granting
greater budget autonomy to the District. Under the framework
that the Constitution has established, only Congress has power
to determine the nature of the District's process. In the Home
Rule Act, Congress clearly established that it continues to
retain sole authority to appropriate amounts for the District.
If Congress wishes to change the District's budget process, it
may, of course, do so by enacting legislation.
We are aware of court rulings issued after our January 2014
legal opinion. GAO's analysis and conclusions are consistent
with and compelled by Congress' constitutional authority to
exercise exclusive legislation over the District and with the
laws Congress has enacted pursuant to that authority.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member. This concludes
my statement, and I'd be pleased to answer any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Perez follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you so such.
Mr. DePuy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQUES DEPUY

Mr. DePuy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify today with
regard to congressional intent in the passage of the D.C. Home
Rule Act of 1973.
I was subcommittee counsel to the Subcommittee of the House
D.C. Committee, which held the hearings on and initially
drafted the D.C. home rule bill in 1973. I was also very
actively involved in the further drafting of the bill and
political strategy pertaining to the bill in the full House
District of Columbia Committee prior to House floor
consideration of the bill and in the House-Senate conference
committee.
I'm also a coauthor with Jason I. Newman of a law review
article on the Home Rule Act published in 1975 by the American
University Law Review. I also participated in the litigation
brought by the Council of the District of Columbia against then
Mayor Vincent Gray and Jeffrey DeWitt in the United States
District Court in May 2014, along with two other former
committee staff members and Mr. Newman as amici curiae. I have
submitted a copy of the brief prepared by the four of us as
amici to this committee.
Mr. DePuy. I appear today solely on my own behalf.
I would also like this committee to know that although I
testify today that the Congress did not intend to delegate to
the D.C. Council or District voters any authority over local
revenues through the charter amendment or any other process, I
am personally a fervent believer in and advocate for the rights
of the citizens of the District of Columbia to fully enjoy all
rights of self-determination.
First, as indicated in the brief, the Home Rule Act
contains numerous limitations and restrictions on the powers
and authority of the then-to-be-created local government.
Included among such limitations and restrictions were the
charter amendment process, the authorization of a Federal
payment, the budget process, and borrowing and spending. Such
matters were not contained within the charter, were not to be
subjected to a vote by District residents, and were not subject
to the charter amendment process. In essence, such matters,
with numerous others, were to be off limits to the local
government.
Secondly, when Congress adopted the Home Rule Act, it was
clearly understood that the act did not provide the local
government with budget autonomy. Specifically, there was to be
no change in the existing line item congressional
appropriations role.
Furthermore, no distinction was made between local and
Federal or any other category of revenues. Indeed, section
603(a) of the act states that, quote, ``Nothing in this act
shall be construed as making any change in existing law,
regulation, or basic procedure and practice relating to...the
preparation, review, submission, examination, authorization,
and appropriation of the total budget''--and I emphasize the
words ``total budget''--``of the District of Columbia.'' This
provision is not part of the charter and cannot be changed by
the charter amendment process.
I direct the committee to the brief, which, as I indicated,
has been submitted for a much more detailed discussion of these
important matters.
I'm happy to respond to questions, and I thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DePuy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. DePuy.
Chairman Mendelson, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHILIP H. MENDELSON

Mr. Mendelson. Thank you Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member
Connolly, Congresswoman Norton, and other members of the
committee. I appreciate this opportunity to testify.
Although the topic for today's hearing is ``D.C. Home Rule:
Examining the Intent of Congress in the District of Columbia
Home Rule Act of 1973,'' I want to speak more generally about
the purpose and need for budget autonomy for the government of
the District of Columbia.
With all due respect, the fundamental question before us is
not whether budget autonomy as enacted by the Council and the
voters is legitimate or consistent with the intent of the 93rd
Congress. Rather, the fundamental question is whether Congress
today wants budget autonomy for the District.
I frame the question this way because, as you know,
Congress has plenary authority over the District. We have made
our case in court that the Budget Autonomy Act of 2012 is
legitimate. But that really doesn't matter if you, a majority
of the Members of the House and Senate, want to overturn it
because you can do so.
When we talk about budget autonomy, we are talking about
only the local dollars portion of our budget. Many people
believe the District's budget is comprised of Federal dollars
because it has been appropriated by Congress in the same
process as the budgets of the Federal departments. You know it
isn't. In fact, 74.6 percent of our budget comes from locally
imposed fees and taxes.
So I want to make three points. First, why budget autonomy
is a good thing, that having budget autonomy is best practice
for the fiscal management of the District. Second, why Congress
shouldn't want exclusive budget authority over the District.
And third, that while budget autonomy makes a big difference
for the District, it does not make a big difference for
Congress.
Why is budget autonomy a good thing? There are many
reasons. It allows us to adopt our budget more quickly. It
allows us to make changes, especially reductions in an economic
downturn, immediately.
It also allows us to move quickly to implement a solution
to emerging service needs. For instance, responding to a spike
in homicides.
It gives us flexibility to change our fiscal year so as to
better align it with the school year or the fiscal year of
regional authorities. It also gives us the flexibility to
budget or spend across fiscal years, such as rewarding program
managers who save funds by allowing them to carry those funds
forward.
Budget autonomy severs our ability to spend from the
uncertainties of the Federal appropriation process. I mean, to
put it bluntly, government shutdowns and the failure to
appropriate timely.
It also enables us to tighten the period between budget
preparation and implementation. Currently, the budget beginning
October 1 is adopted 4 months earlier, in May, and based on
revenue estimates prepared 7 months earlier, in February.
All of these positives from budget autonomy can be summed
up in one simple fact: Budget autonomy helps our credit rating
or Wall Street. Being tied to the Federal appropriations
process is a negative rating factor.
Congress shouldn't want exclusive budget authority over the
District. Some 145 years ago, Congress dissolved the
territorial government of the District of Columbia and assumed
direct control. It might have made sense during the century
between reconstruction and home rule to treat the District as
if it were an agency of the Federal Government, like the
Department of Agriculture. In that time, Congress appropriated
large Federal payments each year as part of our budget.
Accordingly, both houses of the Congress had committees focused
expressly on the District and substantial resources were
devoted by you to running the District.
All that has changed. There is no longer a House or Senate
District committee. While I'm sure our annual budget is
carefully reviewed, Congress no longer rewrites it. Indeed, our
budget is almost an afterthought in the Federal appropriation
process, as evidenced by our treatment during the last
government shutdown.
Congress wasn't sure it could trust us to handle our own
finances when we got limited home rule in 1974, but all of that
has changed. In many ways we have today the best financial
situation of any large city in the Nation.
Congress will always have budget authority over us because
it has plenary authority, but Congress should no longer want to
maintain exclusive budget authority over the District. Not only
is it a drag, as I outlined in my first point, but it is no
longer necessary and Congress is no longer set up for it.
While budget autonomy makes a big difference for the
District, it does not make a big different for Congress.
Congress has failed to adopt our budget on time in almost 20
years, has not made any substantive changes to our local funds
budget since at least the control board some 15 years ago.
In recent years, the Congress has tried to help the
District by giving us authority to increase appropriations--
slightly--when revenues increase and to enable us to spend our
local budget without an appropriation during a government
shutdown. These congressional actions actually support our
argument that allowing local budget autonomy won't make a big
difference for Congress.
What does Congress give up or lose with budget autonomy?
Nothing. If you are worried we will misspend our money,
Congress still has plenary authority to step in at any time.
Congress also can have oversight hearings on our spending or on
our local programs at any time, which you can do with or
without a pending appropriation. As for riders, I would suggest
hesitantly, that there will still be a Federal appropriations
act for the District.
The pros versus the cons are overwhelming. The District is
better off with it, not just as a home rule issue, but as a
fiscal matter. Meanwhile, Congress gives up nothing fundamental
and budget autonomy for our local dollars better matches the
current structure and practice of the Congress.
As I said at the outset, the essential question before us
today is not what was the intent of the 93rd Congress, but
whether Congress today will support budget autonomy for the
District. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mendelson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Chairman Mendelson.
Mr. Nathan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF IRVIN B. NATHAN

Mr. Nathan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
invitation to appear here today to testify about the validity
of the District of Columbia Budget Autonomy Act, which was
passed by the D.C. Council in 2012 and ratified by the District
voters in 2013. During that period I served, as you mentioned,
as the attorney general for the District.
I want to make clear that my views today about budget
autonomy for the District are the same as when I was the D.C.
attorney general. I believe that budget autonomy for the
locally raised revenues of the District is sound and
appropriate public policy. And for the reasons that have been
described by the ranking member, by Congresswoman Norton, and
by Chairman Mendelson, I think they should be enacted by the
Congress. And if it were enacted by the Congress, it would be
signed by the President.
However, unilateral legislation by the D.C. City Council
enacting such a budget autonomy contravenes several explicit
provisions of the Home Rule Act of 1973, contravenes the
legislative bargain that led to the passage of home rule. It
violates, as said by GAO, the longstanding Federal
Antideficiency Act. And in my view, the Council's Budget
Autonomy Act is null and void, and implementation of it may put
D.C. office holders and their actions in legal jeopardy. This
is the same opinion I expressed when I was the attorney
general.
I want to make clear that my views are shared by the career
lawyers at the attorney general's office. They are shared by
the current elected attorney general, who courageously took
this position in litigation during his election campaign, and
in litigation in the Federal and local courts. And it's the
view of the only Federal Court to look at this issue.
The legislative history is clear and so is the language of
the statute. The legislative history is that the Home Rule Act
was not going to pass until the Diggs compromise was reached,
and you mentioned the ``Dear Colleague'' letter. That
compromise gave limited home rule to the District and left
budget authority with the Congress.
I note that neither Mr. Mendelson in his testimony nor the
outside council for the city mentioned in their prepared
testimony the language of the law, the Diggs compromise, or
Federal Judge Emmet Sullivan's decision. I believe that Judge
Sullivan's decision is a very sound one and is likely to be
followed by courts that deal with this issue in the future.
What's important to recognize is that there is no court
decision that has yet been decided that is going to be binding
on any other court that is likely to consider this matter in
the future. There could have been if Mayor Bowser's outside
lawyers had allowed the matter to be decided by the Federal
Court of Appeals. But they asked the Federal Court of Appeals
to dismiss the case as moot and asked it to be remanded to the
Superior Court.
When they asked it to be remanded, they said they were
going to seek dismissal of the action in the Superior Court and
claimed that the action was not ripe as to the CFO, who was
another party to that case. But when they got back to the
Superior Court, they changed positions and said it was urgent
to have this resolved, and they asked the Superior Court to
decide it. And as you know, the Superior Court sided with the
Council and said that this was valid.
In my testimony, I discuss the deficiencies of the Superior
Court decision, and I think what's most important is that in a
future litigation neither the Superior Court's decision nor
Judge Sullivan's is going to be binding, but I believe that as
a result of the Council's legislation there will be future
litigation. There is already a case pending in the Federal
Court, as you mentioned. And after this takes effect, it is
inevitable, it seems to me, that there is going to be future
litigation. And in the future litigation, I think most judges
are going to find Judge Sullivan's decision invalidating this
act, is going to find that persuasive and not find the Superior
Court persuasive.
What I think and what has troubled me all along is that
this is going to lead to confusion and chaos in the District's
budgeting and finances, and I don't believe that's in anybody's
interest, certainly not the residents of the District of
Columbia and not in the congressional interest. I think
everyone has an interest in seeing that there is no confusion
and chaos in the budget or financial affairs as a result of
litigation over the Budget Autonomy Act. That kind of confusion
would not be fair to the D.C. residents or the many people who
work in the District every day or tourists whose come and rely
on the services.
Now, the best way to present such confusion or uncertainty
is for Congress to enact budget autonomy, as the D.C. delegate
has urged for years, in legislation, and as the President has
recommended, and as the referendum shows that the D.C.
residents desire.
You know, I think it's pretty clear that, as Mr. Mendelson
has said, that the officials in the District of Columbia are
responsible stewards of the D.C. budget and they would do a
good job. They have done a good job and I think they would
continue to do a good job of maintaining fiscal responsibility.
And as noted, this would be consistent with congressional
responsibility, which can always pass legislation if Congress
is not satisfied with a particular policy or expenditure of the
D.C. government.
So I think that the right solution to avoid this future
litigation, which is going to be confusing and unfortunate, is
for Congress to recognize the validity of what has been said
here by Mr. Mendelson and by Congresswoman Norton and to pass
budget autonomy and clarify the situation which at the moment
is--it could be very deleterious to the District and,
therefore, to the Nation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nathan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Nathan.
Mr. Netter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN NETTER

Mr. Netter. Thank you, Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member
Connolly, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Brian
Netter and I'm a partner in the Washington, D.C., office of the
law firm Mayer Brown.
Along with my co-counsel, Karen Dunn of Boies, Schiller &
Flexner, I was retained on a pro bono basis by the Council of
the District of Columbia to independently assess whether the
Local Budget Autonomy Act of 2012 complies with Federal law,
including the Home Rule Act of 1973. I was not then and am not
now an advocate for any policy outcome. Questions about why
budget autonomy is desirable for the District and for Congress
are better directed to Chairman Mendelson. My team's objective
was to determine whether the Budget Autonomy Act comports with
Federal requirements.
When we began investigating the legal issues presented by
the Budget Autonomy Act, various political actors had taken
positions already as to the validity of the act. But so far as
we were aware, none had undertaken the no-stones-unturned sort
of investigation warranted by the circumstances here. We
therefore undertook an exhaustive investigation that began with
the review of the 4,000-page set of committee proceedings from
1973, and ultimately resulted in us contacting each of the
living Members of Congress who served on the relevant
committees in 1973, as well as consulting the personal archives
of key Members and Senators who have died.
The Home Rule Act represented a bipartisan success of the
civil rights era. Overcoming longstanding resistance that had
been blamed on racist attitudes toward the District, Congress
came together to create for the District of Columbia a
government by the people, of the people, and for the people.
The centerpiece of the Home Rule Act was the District's
charter, which Congress envisioned as akin to a State
constitution. In 1973, Congress created the process through
which the District could propose amendments to the charter.
Those amendments would become law only if both Chambers of
Congress affirmatively approved the amendment by enacting a
concurrent resolution. Because Congress retained for itself the
ultimate authority to approve those amendments, the limitations
on the District's charter amendment authority were few and
narrow.
In 1983, the Supreme Court's decision in INS v. Chadha
invalidated legislative procedures, such as the procedure for
amending the District's charter. Accordingly, Congress needed
to change the process. Congress decided to make amendments
proposed by the District presumptively valid unless Congress
enacted and the President signed a joint resolution of
disapproval. In so doing, however, Congress did not alter the
narrow set of limitations on the District's charter amendment
authority that had been enacted in 1973 when Congress'
affirmative ascent was required.
We investigated each of the supposed limitations on the
District's authority that opponents of the Budget Autonomy Act
used to question its legitimacy. In particular, we reviewed the
reports that were supplied by GAO and by Mr. Nathan. But we
found the concerns in those reports to be legally unfounded.
In our system of laws, where there is a dispute about the
interpretation or validity of a statute, it is the province and
duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. And so
we filed a lawsuit so that the issue could be resolved as our
Constitution contemplates.
This was a high-profile case that received attention from
thoughtful commentators. The Superior Court had before it
briefs from the three parties, the Council, the mayor, and the
chief financial officer, as well as friend of the court
submissions from 11 different groups offering their views.
Those groups included scholars on Federal budget law,
legislative interpretation and local government law, and
legislators and staffers who participated in the drafting of
the Home Rule Act in 1973.
There obviously isn't sufficient time for us to discuss all
of the many contours of those briefs. However, they provide a
very detailed and sophisticated understanding of what Congress
was doing, the context in which it was doing what it did, and
how subsequent events, including the Supreme Court's decision
in Chadha, affect the analysis of the Home Rule Act today.
On March 18, 2016, the Superior Court for the District of
Columbia issued an opinion upholding the Budget Autonomy Act
and offering a detailed explanation for why the opponents of
the legislation were incorrect. The Superior Court permanently
enjoined all district officers and officials to enforce all
provisions of the Budget Autonomy Act, and the time to appeal
has now expired.
What this means is that budget autonomy is, indisputably,
the law of the District of Columbia. Congress retains its
plenary authority over District affairs and will have the same
review period over the District's budget as it has over any
other legislation that originates from the D.C. Council. But in
circumstances in which Congress fails to act, the default rule
is now that the D.C. government will not be paralyzed and will
instead be permitted to operate.
I thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss
these important matters and would be pleased to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Netter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Netter.
The chair recognizes the vice chair of the Subcommittee on
Government Operations, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel for being here.
Mr. DePuy, you were counsel to the committee responsible
for the Home Rule Act at the time of its drafting. Can you
describe for us the extent to which the act was debated at the
committee level?
Mr. DePuy. Yes. Congressman, the debate on the so-called
Diggs compromise occurred after the bill had been reported to
the floor, and it became clear to the majority of the committee
that there were insufficient votes to pass the bill as then
constituted. A majority of the committee members then chose to
support a substitute amendment to the committee's own bill, a
somewhat unusual procedure, and it was debated extensively on
the floor. It was the subject of the ``Dear Colleague'' letter
that the chairman mentioned.
Mr. Walberg. It was debated in the committee as well?
Mr. DePuy. It was not debated----
Mr. Walberg. So it was sent to the floor.
Mr. DePuy. It was sent to the floor, that's correct. And
then, of course, it was the subject of much discussion in the
Senate-House conference committee.
Mr. Walberg. How was it altered out of committee on the
floor? How was it altered?
Mr. DePuy. The provision dealing with the basic
appropriations process and the basic budgetary process was not
amended. It was very clear and made clear by the Members of
both parties that that topic was essentially not debatable and
had to remain as it was and as it was passed by the House.
Mr. Walberg. Was the 1973 act the only time either Chamber
introduced home rule legislation while you were working in
Congress?
Mr. DePuy. The Senate had for years introduced home rule
legislation. The House had not done so until Chairman Diggs
became chairman of the House District of Columbia Committee,
and so essentially that was the first time that the House in
decades, if not longer, had considered home rule.
Mr. Walberg. But it didn't pass any of those efforts prior
for any specific reason that you could determine?
Mr. DePuy. The House D.C. Committee, prior to the time when
Chairman Diggs and others became a majority of the committee, I
think it's fair to say was not particularly disposed towards
granting the city much authority and retained as many powers as
it could. So there was a disinclination by the prior committee
to undertake any legislation that would generally grant more
power to the city.
Mr. Walberg. Why was the budget autonomy removed from the
final home rule legislation if it was included in earlier
versions?
Mr. DePuy. It was decided as the bill got closer to being
considered on the House floor that there were just not
sufficient votes to pass the bill as it had been prepared on
this topic prior to House consideration. There was considerable
opposition from the House Appropriations Committee and from key
Members of Congress to the home rule bill as it came out of
committee prior to the Diggs substitute and the so-called Diggs
compromise.
Mr. Walberg. Was the removal of the budget autonomy from
the Home Rule Act an intentional action by Congress?
Mr. DePuy. Yes, very clearly so.
Mr. Walberg. Very clearly intentional?
Mr. DePuy. Yes.
Mr. Walberg. What's the importance of section 603 in the
Home Rule Act as it relates to the budgetary process?
Mr. DePuy. I think that section is very clear that the
congressional appropriations process and powers were not to be
delegated to the new local government.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Connolly. Because of the exigencies of schedule, Mr.
Chairman, I would ask that my colleague, my friend from
Missouri, Mr. Clay, be recognized at this time, reserving my
right to revert back.
Mr. Meadows. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Clay, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you so such, Mr. Chairman.
Thank my friend Mr. Connolly, as well as Ms. Norton, for
your indulgence.
Chairman Mendelson and Mr. Nathan, even with budget
autonomy, all the Federal financial mandates on the District of
Columbia remain in place. These include an independent chief
financial officer, a borrowing cap, emergency and contingency
reserve accounts. Moreover, the financial control board that
Congress put in place in 1995 to address the District's
financial crisis automatically comes back into existence if the
District fails to meet any of seven financial conditions, such
as not meeting its payroll for any pay period.
I would like both of you to answer this question. Under
budget autonomy is there any reason to be concerned that the
District will not balance its budget or otherwise lose its
fiscal discipline? Mr. Mendelson first. Go right ahead.
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you, Congressman Clay. You're correct
in your question that those protections remain in place and
that we have requirements under the law with regard to certain
processes and to ensure that we have a balanced budget and that
we can make payroll and that we remain in good fiscal order.
I would want to add this, though. Yes, there is a
requirement in the law written by Congress about reserves, that
we have to have two reserves. In fact, we have four reserves.
There are two that we have added. And, in fact, the reserves
that we have are substantially more than what Congress
requires. And, in fact, our goal is to achieve reserves
equivalent to 60 days of operating expenditures. That's far in
excess of the congressional requirement. And we are currently
at, I believe, 49 days of reserves.
In addition, you mentioned the borrowing cap, which is in
the Home Rule Act. It is 18 percent of revenues, no more than
that can be dedicated to interest payments. Well, we passed a
local law that says 12 percent. So we are far better than what
the Federal requirement is.
But I would add that there are some other things that we
have in place, and this is something that you see across the
country with regard to local jurisdictions and States as well,
and that is how they are doing with their unfunded pension
liability and the other post-employment benefits. And while
that's not written into the Home Rule Act, we see city after
city struggling with a huge unfunded liability.
Well, on our retirement funds, our unfunded liability is
zero. We are at 105 percent funded. And with regard to the
other post-employment benefits, where city after city has zero,
and that is to say they have 100 liability, we are 120 percent
funded.
There is no other jurisdiction in the country, when you put
the two together, that's as good as the District of Columbia.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
Mr. Nathan?
Mr. Nathan. Well, I agree with the question. Those
restrictions are all in place and are adhered to by the
District of Columbia. My concern is, as I've expressed it
before, that with the Local Budget Autonomy Act, which will
allow officials of the District to spend money that is not
appropriated by Congress, that people could find that there are
some violations of both Federal law and the Home Rule Act and
that, for example, you said that we have to meet--the District
has to meet the payroll. If those people are paid by funds that
have not been appropriated by Congress, there would be an issue
as to whether or not the District is in compliance. If it is
not in compliance, there is a chance that the control board
could come back into effect, which is not a position to be
desired at all.
So, again, this is a reason why the passage of the Budget
Control Act by the council was not well advised, but I urge the
Congress to think about----
Mr. Clay. Fair enough, fair enough. And I agree with that.
Mr. Chairman, I think the conversation needs to happen on
this side now with the impetus of what Mr. Nathan said, that we
are reasonable people. We are guests of the people of the
District of Columbia. They are gracious. They are welcoming.
They host us as the seat of government. We need to be
reasonable and realize that they have evolved too since 1973.
We need to be reasonable about that.
I don't know if you are willing, but I wanted to kind of
share some of the history with the gentleman from Michigan of
how that compromise came about in 1973. The resistance wasn't
on your side of the aisle. It was on our side of the aisle
because of the seniority system. And you had the mostly
Southern Democrats that controlled that committee with the
District of Columbia, and that's how the compromise came.
Mr. Meadows. Are you saying this was all the Democrats
fault?
Mr. Clay. I am. I am admitting it, but I think that the
Republicans----
Mr. Meadows. I believe the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Clay. I know my time has expired.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes himself for a series of questions.
Ms. Perez, let me ask you, does the Antideficiency Act
apply to the District of Columbia?
Ms. Perez. Yes, Mr. Chairman, it does. The Antideficiency
Act by its own terms applies not only to officials and
employees of the U.S. Government but specifically to officials
and employees of the District government. In addition, the Home
Rule Act states that the Antideficiency Act continues to apply
to the District and also includes a section that says that
District funds continue to be appropriated by Congress so
employees can only obligate in accordance with congressional
appropriation.
Mr. Meadows. So is it GAO's opinion that the District of
Columbia would be in violation of the Antideficiency Act in the
event that the Budget Autonomy Act is implemented.
Ms. Perez. We would only opine on an Antideficiency Act
violation if we had facts before us. That is the nature of how
we do our opinions. But, certainly, we think it would be
advisable for the District to consider the implications of the
Antideficiency Act. It does say that District employees may not
obligate or expend funds, except in accordance with an
appropriation enacted by Congress or also that they cannot
obligate or expend funds before they receive such an
appropriation.
Mr. Meadows. So, Chairman Mendelson, with that information
before you, do you believe that it is prudent to put
potentially D.C. employees or those who would expend the funds
at a disadvantage as it relates to the Antideficiency Act and
potential punishment therewith?
Mr. Mendelson. Well, I would have that concern, Chairman
Meadows, except that we thought the way to resolve that would
be to seek a declaratory judgement in court, and that was why
the council initiated the litigation. And the litigation, as
has been largely described, it was filed in superior court, and
then it was removed to Federal court. And the circuit, as I
recall, vacated the decision and remanded it to the superior
court.
Mr. Meadows. Well, it was actually the mayor that--they
didn't judge it necessarily on the merits of that particular
case, as I understand. I've read hundreds and hundreds of
pages. I know more about Home Rule than I ever cared to know
about in the history thereof. So what we have is a superior
court that has made a judgment on Federal law where there
should be some question jurisdictionally with regards to that
particular decision. And so, in light of GAO's concern, do you
not share that same concern for D.C. employees?
Mr. Mendelson. The short answer would be no. We have a
court order, and the court order----
Mr. Meadows. I would suggest that maybe you rethink that
because I think it's--Mr. Chairman, it is a great concern of
mine, if they were my employees or under my direction to put
them in a legal battle that is still ongoing, still being
litigated, but potentially has the threat of not only fines,
but criminal violations.
Mr. Mendelson. Well, Chairman Meadows, there are two parts
to this: One is whether we comply with the Antideficiency Act,
and not only do we comply with the Antideficiency Act--in fact,
we have a local Antideficiency Act that is stronger than the
Federal Act with regard to our spending. So, with regard to
that issue, there isn't an issue. The other part of it has to
do with whether we could spend our local dollars without
appropriations.
Mr. Meadows. That's a different philosophy. So let me go a
little bit--Mr. Nathan has put forth a number. And I have read
things that you actually had submitted in terms of briefs and
other opinions that I find very illuminating because your
opinion is, is that you want budget autonomy personally. Is
that correct?
Mr. Nathan. That's correct.
Mr. Meadows. And so your personal opinion is that you
believe D.C. should have budget autonomy, but the way they went
about it was, in your opinion, not legal. Is that correct?
Mr. Nathan. That's correct. But Congress has the ability to
do it, and I think it is good policy and should be done.
Mr. Meadows. Well, and so as we look at that, Mr. Netter,
let me come to you, because you have unbelievably found all
kinds of information that I have not been able to find in
reading hundreds, if not several hundred, pages of documents in
the history and going through. How do you reconcile paragraph
601, 602, and 603 that shouldn't, in my mind, reading the clear
language, are not amendment. And yet what we've done is the
D.C. has tried to amend those through this particular action.
How do you reconcile that?
Mr. Netter. Well, chairman, I disagree vehemently that the
District has tried to amend any of those provisions. There are
a number of provisions and subprovisions within----
Mr. Meadows. Well, that's an interesting fact because 603
is very clear in terms of what it is. And it basically spells
out in the context of how it's written this whole discussion
that we're having.
Mr. Netter. It does, but I disagree with your conclusions.
Section 603(a) says: Nothing in this act shall be construed as
making any change to existing law. And that sort of provision,
which I am sure the chairman is quite familiar with, is a
provision that is a rule of construction for the particular
statute being enacted that explains how the statute is to be
interpreted. And our litigating position, which was adopted by
the superior court, was that section 603(a) explains for
everybody to understand what Congress was achieving in 1973.
Mr. Meadows. But let's go on. Let's look at other
paragraphs there, because if you look at the original intent of
Home Rule in the 100 paragraphs, if you look at really the
amendment process in the 300 paragraphs, and then you go to
601, 602, and 603, not just those, but if you look at the
details of that, I don't see how you can find any other
conclusion other than it was truly the intent of Congress to
keep the appropriation process as a function of Congress and
not to allow it to ever be amended.
Mr. Netter. Well, there are two separate issues there,
chairman. The first is whether Congress was granting budget
autonomy in 1973, and we agree that it wasn't. The second
question, however, is whether Congress was intending to prevent
the District from proposing any changes to its budget process
under the amendment authority that existed in 1973. Now, as I
indicated in my opening statement, at the time, both chambers
of commerce needed to acquiesce, needed to affirmatively agree
with----
Mr. Meadows. Which they did with the Diggs compromise. And
so if there is the Diggs compromise that, if you go back
through the Congressional Record, it's very clear that the
appropriators, which as my friend from Missouri talked about
were Democrats at the time, wanted to maintain control. Did you
not find that in your research? I know you didn't argue it, but
did you not find that----
Mr. Netter. We certainly did. We acknowledge that they
wanted to maintain control, and they did maintain control by--
--
Mr. Meadows. Is that not the intent of Congress in 1973?
Mr. Netter. But the intent of Congress was also to create
an amendment process, and the District here followed that
amendment process.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I respectfully disagree, and I'm out of
time.
But I will recognize the ranking member, Mr. Connolly, for
a very gracious 7-1/5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. My friend is always there. I thank him.
You know, the King of Siam in ``The King and I'' when faced
with all kinds of inexplicable problems would say, ``It's a
puzzlement.'' There is a lot to sort out here.
Let me start with you, Ms. Emmanuelli Perez, you're the
managing associate general counsel. Has somebody designated you
as the judicial arbiter of constitutional issues or even
adjudication of judicial rulings?
Ms. Perez. No, Mr. Ranking Member. The GAO----
Mr. Connolly. My name is Connolly. You can address me by my
name.
Ms. Perez. No, Mr. Connolly. GAO has statutory authority to
issue legal opinions to Congress on the use of appropriated
funds, to interpret the applicability of the Antideficiency
Act, and we've been doing so since----
Mr. Connolly. Even when there has been an adverse judicial
ruling? You get to ignore judicial rulings?
Ms. Perez. Our legal opinion, we issued it in January of
2014, prior to the opinions.
Mr. Connolly. Ah, but in your testimony today, you,
therefore, took no cognizance of the fact that there's in fact
been intervening judicial ruling.
Ms. Perez. Well, we have not issued----
Mr. Connolly. I understand, but what am I supposed to do as
a Member of Congress with your testimony as if there were no
court and no court opinion. You are supposed to be advising us?
Ms. Perez. Well, and we are----
Mr. Connolly. It seems you have a legal obligation, Ms.
Perez, to take cognizance of a judicial ruling when you come
here under oath and testify. And you've ignored the fact that
there was a judicial ruling, which I think taints your
testimony?
Ms. Perez. No, sir. I would not agree that we've ignored
it. What we've said----
Mr. Connolly. Well, you didn't even mention it.
Ms. Perez. No, I did. I said that we acknowledge that there
are court cases. What we have stated----
Mr. Connolly. Court cases? There is a court case.
Ms. Perez. Yes. And the----
Mr. Connolly. The dispositive court case is in front of us.
Now, Mr. Nathan shares your legal opinion, which I'm going
to get to, about, that notwithstanding, it still requires an
act of Congress because he thinks and apparently you think that
Mr. Mendelson and his friends, colleagues, on the city council
have put themselves in legal jeopardy, notwithstanding a court
ruling, because of the Antideficiency Act. Is that correct?
Ms. Perez. What we have interpreted is that the
Antideficiency Act, pursuant to Congress' constitutional powers
in this case, is it continues to apply. That's our opinion.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. But let me explore. Your opinion is,
even though there's been a court ruling, that Mr. Mendelson and
his colleagues are relying on, nonetheless, somebody somewhere
is going to find them in legal jeopardy, irrespective of a
court ruling that they cite as their legal protection. You
really think someone is going to prosecute him and his
colleagues in light of the legal ruling they are relying on?
Really?
Ms. Perez. Mr. Connolly, what we are saying is that we
believe the Antideficiency Act continues to apply. And so,
therefore, because it continues to state in codified law that
it applies to the District of Columbia in addition to in the
Home Rule Act that we always advise agencies and entities to
follow the Antideficiency----
Mr. Connolly. Well, if I were a member of D.C. City
Council, quite frankly, though you put that nicely--the same
with you, Mr. Nathan--I would call it intimidation. By citing
Antideficiency and their exposure, irrespective of a court
ruling, I don't know how else to conclude if I were a member of
the D.C. City Council, other than you're warning me I could be
in legal jeopardy; I should ignore court ruling, or I can
ignore court ruling. Now I just think that's improper. I think
that's not useful counsel for them, and it's certainly not
welcome counsel for me as a Member of Congress seeking guidance
through a very meddlesome set of problems.
Mr. Nathan, did you wish to comment?
Mr. Nathan. Yes, I do. First of all, the statute, the
Antideficiency Act, which has been in existence for over 100
years, is, of course, the supreme law of the land. That's a
congressional statute. And everyone, including District
officials, has to comply with that law.
Mr. Connolly. Because I'm running out of time, Mr. Nathan,
let me ask a question pursuant to what you just said.
Mr. Nathan. Okay.
Mr. Connolly. So is it your testimony that the court
ignored the Antideficiency Act in giving its ruling?
Mr. Nathan. It's my view that the court got it completely
wrong.
Mr. Connolly. Aha.
Mr. Nathan. In the first place, I think what's important is
the court, unlike the Federal court, ignored the GAO. The GAO
is the Federal expert----
Mr. Connolly. Listen, Mr. Nathan--Mr. Nathan. I'm sorry.
I'm running out of time. I think the Heller ruling was wrong.
Mr. Nathan. I think so too.
Mr. Connolly. I think the court got it wrong.
Mr. Nathan. I agree.
Mr. Connolly. But I don't get to ignore it. I don't get to
dismiss it.
Mr. Nathan. But there is a----
Mr. Connolly. I don't get to advise the city council they
can afford to do so.
Mr. Nathan. There is a very substantial difference, Mr.
Connolly, between the U.S. Supreme Court, which issued the
Heller opinion, and one trial judge of the Superior Court of
the District of Columbia, which will have no binding effect on
any other court----
Mr. Connolly. Wait a minute. Thank you. It's my time, sir.
On January 30th, GAO opined the BAA was invalid.
Mr. Nathan. Right.
Mr. Connolly. Its opinion did not have the force of law.You
don't have force of law. On May 19, 2014, the U.S. District
Court of the District of Columbia held that the BAA was
invalid. I agree with GAO. On May 27th, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia vacated that ruling and
ordered that the case be remanded to superior court. Hardly
some rogue court action here, Mr. Nathan. You're taking that
out of context. It was in response to an appellate court--
without comment sending it back.
Mr. Nathan. I didn't say it was a rogue court involved.
Mr. Connolly. And without explanation, on March 18, the day
after the holiest day of the year, Saint Patrick's Day, the
superior court upheld the validity of the BAA. The court ruled
that the HRA only preserved the then existing 1973 budget
process. It did not prohibit the District from changing the
local budget process in the future, confirming Mr. Netter's
legal opinion. The fact that you think the court got it dead
wrong is fascinating. You and I can have opinions about court
rulings. That isn't how it works. He has sworn to uphold the
law, Mr. Mendelson, and he's trying to do that, and he has an
opinion. And I think that opinion is a protection against the
Antideficiency Act and against any charge that he's clearly
thumbing his nose at Congress. And until and unless that
opinion is changed or we take action, that's the law of the
land, Mr. Nathan.
Mr. Nathan. It's not the law of the land. Let's----
Mr. Connolly. Well, it is a ruling he has to rely on.
Mr. Nathan. It is not even the law of the District of
Columbia. It is a decision of one trial court.
Mr. Connolly. I'm sorry, sir. You're the one cherry-
picking. You're choosing a process you like verses a process
you don't like. That's not what an elected official has to do.
He doesn't get to do that. He has to rely on the court, the
cognizant court of jurisdiction, that has made a ruling. And
until that ruling is overturned or until we pass a law or take
an action, he's perfectly within his right to proceed.
My time is up. I thank the chair.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlemen for his passion.
And I will recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. We'll try to clean up a little bit here with
Mr. Nathan. Thanks for coming on over. Why did the court remand
the budget autonomy case?
Mr. Nathan. Well, because the lawyers for Mayor Bowser, 3
months after she took office, went to the court of appeals. It
was after it had been argued in the court of appeals. There was
a transcript--there is a transcript. I urge the court--the
panel to look at that transcript. Not a single one of the three
Federal appellate judges that heard the argument raised a
question about the validity of Judge Sullivan's opinion of the
accuracy that it--which agreed with GAO that this was invalid.
But the mayor said that, unlike the previous mayor--of course,
she was on the city council when it passed it law--she said she
agreed with the law, and therefore, the matter was moot because
now the mayor and the city council were in agreement. And the
court of appeals said: Okay. It's moot.
The mayor's lawyer said: If you remand it to the superior
court where this case started, we will seek dismissal of the
action because it should be dismissed because it's moot and
because, as to the CFO, the matter is not right. And then--so
that's what the court of appeals did. They vacated. They
remanded. But when it got back to the superior court, those
same lawyers said: Well, we think it is urgent that this be
decided now. We ask the superior court to decide it.
The superior court did not hold a hearing, as both the
Federal district court and the court of appeals did, but based
on the pleadings and the memoranda that were filed, the court
issued its decision.
With respect to Mr. Connolly and the statement about the
Antideficiency Act, what the superior court said essentially
was that there--that the statute, the Antideficiency Act,
doesn't say that the appropriation or fund has to come from
Congress, and there is a fund here that the District has, and
therefore, this doesn't violate the Antideficiency Act.
In my view, as I said in my testimony, that interpretation
is inconsistent with the 100 years of Federal jurisprudence
that the Antideficiency Act means that the appropriation or
fund has to come from Congress. It says that all Federal
agencies, including expressly the District of Columbia, has to
comply with congressional appropriations or funds. And I point
out, as I pointed out in my testimony, that whereas Federal
judge Sullivan relied on the advice of the GAO, which is the
expert in the Antideficiency Act, the superior court judge
ignored the advice of the GAO and the opinion that it rendered
on the subject.
I think what's important here is to understand that this
decision by the superior court is not binding, even on another
superior court judge, much less on the appellate court in the
District and certainly not on any Federal district court judge
or the Federal court of appeals. And my concern is that there
could be and there already is other litigation. There's
litigation in the Federal court, and once this takes effect,
there is likely to be other litigation. And when there is this
other litigation, a judge is going to have a choice between
considering the decision of Judge Sullivan, the Federal
district court judge who gave this very serious consideration
and wrote a very well-articulated opinion on it. And they'll
have that and they'll have the opinion by Judge Holeman. And my
belief is that a court in the future is likely to be more
persuaded by Judge Sullivan's opinion than by Judge Holeman.
Mr. Grothman. How would you advise Mayor Gray on the Budget
Accountability Act?
Mr. Nathan. Well, I issued an opinion to him, and he
reflected that in the letter, which is part of the record where
he told the council that, because of the dangers of violating
both the Home Rule Act and the Antideficiency Act and putting
District employees in jeopardy, that he was not going to
implement the Budget Autonomy Act. That's what led to the
litigation that Mr. Mendelson filed on behalf of the council.
Mr. Grothman. And, finally, in your opinion, did Congress
intend to delegate the District's autonomous budget authority.
Mr. Nathan. No. I'm afraid that the Congress in 1973 passed
a Home Rule Act and specifically precluded the District from
amending the Home Rule Act to provide for budget autonomy. It
made it clear in section 303(d) that the amending procedure
could not be used to enact any law which would violate section
601, 602 and 603. Those sections said: We are specifically
reserving authority in the Congress, and we're putting limits
on what the council can do. And among the other things that
they said was: You can't violate the Antideficiency Act; you
can't change the way the budget is operated now, both by the
Congress, the President, OMB, and the practices and policies
that had existed for the previous hundred years.
And, of course, you know, when we looked at it, you know,
we had hoped to find the Budget Autonomy Act valid, but when we
looked at it, we saw that the language of the statute, the
legislative history, and the practice for 40 years after the
Home Rule Act would not permit it.
In addition to the fact that, during the 40 years after
Home Rule, that the budget was submitted, as required by the
Home Rule Act, to the President and then to the Congress. Over
that 40 years, every representative of the District, with the
concurrence of the council, asked for legislation from the
Congress to have budget autonomy. If those people who--
including those like Walter Fauntroy, who was there when the
Home Rule Act was passed, if they believed that the District
had that authority unilaterally to change it immediately after
the passage of the law, there would have been no need to ask
the Congress to pass legislation. I think that those proposals,
which, in my opinion, were valid and should have been enacted
by the Congress and can still be enacted by the Congress and
should be, but the fact that they asked Congress to do it is a
pretty good recognition that they understood that the D.C.
government on its own could not do this.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you so much. That's all my time.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman from Wisconsin.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Eleanor Holmes Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I regret that Mr. Nathan had to relitigate superior court
decision. He is a member of the bar. So am I. Whatever is the
final decision that is not appealed is the final decision until
appeals. So if you are Mr. Mendelson or the city council and
you have a court order from the superior court, it seems at the
very least we ought to agree that Mr. Mendelson and the council
are protected, given the final order of any court in the United
States at this point. And we shouldn't be getting into
nitpicking about whether you agree or I agree, because, in
fact, reasonable lawyers can and have shown even at this table
that they can disagree on the validity of the Local Budget
Autonomy Act approved in 2013. So I want to apologize to people
who have come to this hearing expecting to hear profound,
principled reasons why, since the birth of the Nation, the
District should have had budget autonomy over its own local
budget, because I'm now compelled for the record to, in fact,
engage in some statutory construction and to ask the witnesses
about their views.
Mr. DePuy, you helped draft the Home Rule Act, and of
course, that act establishes principles or procedures at least
for the city to amend the charter--the charter can be amended;
there are certain procedures--and for Congress to disapprove of
a charter amendment during a review. Now assuming--please
accept my assumptions for purposes of this question--that the
Local Budget Autonomy Act, the one that was recently passed,
was not otherwise prohibited by the Home Rule Act, did the
District of Columbia follow the procedures for passing and
transmitting a charter amendment to the Congress for a review
period.
Mr. DePuy. Ms. Norton, I did not follow that procedure so
I'm not in a position to respond to your question.
Mr. Nathan. I can answer that. You are correct,
Congresswoman Norton, the procedures were followed.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Nathan.
Mr. Netter, here, we really get into parsing legislation,
but that's what's necessary here, I believe. I'm looking first
at 603(a) of the Home Rule Act, which apparently everyone
agrees the District may not amend. And it provides--and here
I'm quoting--nothing in this act shall be construed as making
any change of existing law--``existing law'' it says--operative
words as far as I'm concerned. And, of course, it's referring
to the budget. When the Home Rule Act was passed in 1973,
existing law required Congress to approve the budget. Why then
doesn't 603(a) prevent the District from enacting the Local
Budget Autonomy Act?
Mr. Netter. It doesn't, Congresswoman Norton. I think it is
important to recognize also how section 603(a) came to be.
There was another proposed bill from Congressman Nelson that
had a provision that became 603(a), but it was worded
differently. It said: Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, unless specifically authorized or directed by the
Congress, there shall be no change made in existing law.
Ms. Norton. No change whatsoever.
Mr. Netter. Right. Unless Congress affirmatively made a
change. And that was revised in section 603(a) to say this act,
the Home Rule Act of 1973, was not making any change, and
that's why section 603(a) doesn't limit the future authority.
Ms. Norton. That's very important what you just said. This
bill is a compromise bill, so we have right there two different
versions and then the final version.
Mr. Netter, all agree as well that section 602(a)(3) of the
Home Rule Act may not be amended by the District. Now this is
the provision that prohibits the District from passing laws
that concern--and here are the operative words--the functions
or property of the United States. Now the Home Rule Act, as
passed in 1973, provided that the President shall transmit the
District's budget to the Congress for approval. The Local
Budget Act removes the President and the Congress from the
budget process. That's its point. Please explain whether the
Budget Autonomy Act violates the provision 602(3)--(a)(3), I'm
sorry.
Mr. Netter. It doesn't, Congresswoman Norton. And there is
a line of binding precedents from the D.C. Court of Appeals
that dates back to 1982 for the case called District of
Columbia v. Greater Washington Central Labor Council. And that
line of cases explains that, in section 602(a)(3), Congress was
limiting the District's authority to exercise Congress' role as
the national government but was not limiting the District's
role to exercise functions that Congress might otherwise
exercise as the local government. A series of cases have
rejected the theory that 602(a)(3) limits which actors are
discharging those obligations. It doesn't matter if an
obligation is moved from a Federal official to a local
official. The question is whether the underlying act would be
pursued under Congress' national legislative authority or its
Article I, Section 8, authority to legislate as a local
legislature for the District. There's no argument that I can
contemplate through which the District would be allowed to
raise taxes under its local legislative authority but could not
spend that money under its local legislative authority.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I've exceeded my time. Do you have questions?
Mr. Meadows. Yes. I mean, I want to be generous.
Ms. North. I'd appreciate it.
Mr. Meadows. If you have one followup question?
Ms. Norton. I do have a--my staffer reminds me it is not a
followup question. It's a question to the GAO.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. All right. Why don't we do a very brief
second round? And that way, I'll be courteous to the
gentlewoman, as any good Member from North Carolina should be.
Ms. Norton. Any good Southern gentleman.
Mr. Meadows. Yeah. All right. I didn't want to go there,
but--Mr. Netter, so do you concur with Ms. Holmes Norton's
premise that 602 and 603 and 601 are unamendable?
Mr. Netter. I do agree with that, yes.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So your premise under the Budget
Autonomy Act is that you amended what?
Mr. Netter. Section 446 of the charter was what was amended
by the Budget Autonomy Act. I think it is important to note
that if it were true that section 603(a) says that the Home
Rule Act----
Mr. Meadows. I don't want to relitigate it. I'm just
saying--for the record, you're saying that 601, 602, and 603
are unamendable.
Mr. Netter. They are unamendable. They remain in force, and
they are being honored by the Budget Autonomy Act, yes.
Mr. Meadows. That's all I want to know, because I think our
interpretation thereof and my reading of it and your reading
and the interpretation are vastly different based on the
context. And so it's real interesting because you talked about
this context that you went back. At what point or how many
different documents did you ignore that talked about the
appropriation authority wanting to be retained in Congress? How
many different pieces of evidence did you ignore?
Mr. Netter. We didn't ignore a single piece of evidence.
Mr. Meadows. How many of those did you leave out of your
argument?
Mr. Netter. Oh, none of them at all. I can tell you----
Mr. Meadows. You're under oath.
Mr. Netter. I am, yes.
Mr. Meadows. Because I've looked at your argument, and
there are a whole lot of information out there that seems to
not have been included in your argument.
Mr. Netter. I disagree with that. It is--certainly, our
position is that Congress made a compromise----
Mr. Meadows. So your testimony here today is that you found
no substantial reason to believe that it was the intent of
Congress to keep the appropriations process uniquely with
Congress. That's your sworn testimony?
Mr. Netter. That's not how I would state it.
Mr. Meadows. Well, that's my question. Is that your sworn
testimony, no?
Mr. Netter. No. My sworn testimony is that Congress in 1973
was leaving the budget process in place, but in doing so,
Congress did not create any impediments to the District
proposing----
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Nathan, would you agree with that?
Mr. Nathan. I do not agree with that, and it violates
common sense. This law would not have passed but for Congress
retaining the power of appropriations and the budget control
and not having the District have budget autonomy. If those
people who voted for that insisted on that believe that the
moment that the ink was dry on the President's signature that
the council could change that, they never would have voted for
this in the first place. And that's obvious by the 40 years of
practice in the District and the repeated efforts by the
representatives quite appropriately to get Congress to grant
budget autonomy. If they had that power and that's what
Congress thought in passing the law, they would never have
sought the authority of Congress. They would have just gone to
the council.
Mr. Meadows. So, Mr. Netter, how do you reconcile that? How
do you reconcile that the gentlewoman to my right has asked for
budget autonomy for Congress to act on budget autonomy for the
District. Other members have asked that. Why would they be
asking that if the District had the ability all along? How do
you reconcile those two?
Mr. Netter. Well, I disagree that the District had the
authority all along because of the charter problem that we
discussed earlier, which is to say that, in 1973, both Chambers
of Congress needed to affirmatively approve an amendment. So
this issue only arose after Congress changed the process in the
1980s. And the reason----
Mr. Meadows. So why--she's asked me for it since the--since
that particular--why would she have done that if they had the
right to do it? Is it just, all of a sudden, they found this
right that they've been ignoring for 40 years?
Mr. Netter. Well, it's true that there was not a single
amendment to the charter from 1980----
Mr. Meadows. Sir, that defies common sense. It just
defies--and, Mr. Netter, with all due respect, it defies common
sense. So let me finish with this, and then----
Mr. Mendelson. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Meadows. Hold on, just one second.
Mr. Nathan, are you aware of any Federal actions that are
taking place as it relates currently to the Budget Autonomy
Act. Is there any litigation that is pending?
Mr. Nathan. There is a lawsuit in Federal court. It is
actually before Judge Sullivan asking to invalidate the Budget
Autonomy Act. There is a very substantial question in that
litigation whether the plaintiff has standing to raise this
claim, and that has not yet been decided. But my concern--and
I've explained it to Mr. Mendelson and the council before--is
that if this takes effect and moneys are spent without
congressional appropriation, those who are adversely affected
by such expenditures will have standing to challenge the
statute. And if they do, then--and if they bring it in--any
court they bring it in, but certainly if they bring it in
Federal court, there will be no effect of the superior court's
decision, and that judge will decide this matter afresh and
will have the opinion of Judge Sullivan and may, in fact, be
assigned to Judge Sullivan to render a decision on that, and
that is why the actions of the District would be in jeopardy?
Mr. Meadows. The chair recognizes the gentlewoman Ms.
Eleanor Holmes Norton for another 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think Mr. Mendelson wanted to comment on--and I know you
didn't mean to cut him off, but your time had expired. So I
would like to give him some of my time to say why is it--why
didn't--you know, Mr. Nathan said you should have raised this
from the get-go. How come you're raising it now and prior
counsels haven't raised it?
Mr. Mendelson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Let me try to struggle with this briefly. You know, from
time to time, particularly in the area of I'll say civil rights
and voting rights, there are new theories that emerge. There
were some advocates who came to me in 2012, and they said: You
know, we think actually that the council has the authority to
amend the Home Rule Act in this area.
I was rather dubious at first. But this was a theory, a
legal theory that had not been realized or argued or advanced
prior to that. And this happens all the time if you look over
the history of this country and the way arguments evolve on
different issues, particularly issues involving civil rights or
voting rights. So it was a new theory. We argued it. And,
ultimately, we won in court.
The other thing I wanted to say is that a piece I think is
missing--and I say this from a lay perspective. I'm not an
attorney. I'm somewhat familiar with the legal arguments and
minutia of the legal arguments. But much of the debate here has
been stuck in 1973. And in 1973, because of the compromise, it
was clear that it was the intent of the majority of the Members
of Congress that the District would not be able to adopt its
own budget. But Congress also adopted a Home Rule Act that had
an amendment process. That amendment process in 1973 was pretty
locked tight. So if you were a Southern Democrat who did not
want the District to have budget autonomy--and that was where
the compromise was--you could look at the amendment process
that was included in the bill and be assured that it was going
to be over his dead body that we would get budget autonomy.
But that amendment process changed. It changed through some
acts of Congress--and--it changed through some acts of Congress
and so that what have been locked tight, requiring affirmative
act by Congress, was now a different process. And it's because
of those changes that we were able to advance this amendment to
the Home Rule Act. We have amended the Home Rule Act in recent
years in other ways. The elected attorney general is an
amendment that initiated from the council and went through the
congressional review process, not an affirmative process by the
Congress but a passive review. That was an amendment to the
Home Rule Act.
We believe, and Mr. Netter is better able than I am to
articulate this, that the changes in the amendment process
subsequent to 1973 are what allowed us to amend the Home Rule
Act with regard to our passing legislation, which is the
budget.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Mendelson, I'm very glad you made that
argument. It is so clear. You barely got Home Rule by the skin
of your teeth. Now you start out amending the darn thing.
I have been waiting for somebody here to cite the
amendments, the charter amendments that have, in fact, passed.
The reason people are stuck in 1973, of course, is they are
stuck in a period where, of course, our city got Home Rule in
the first place in a Democratic Congress with profound racial
overtones, with people who didn't want us to have it, because
at that time, the majority of those who lived in the District
of Columbia were African American, so they are going to start
off by challenging the Home Rule Act. Give me a break.
Let me indicate the best argument I can make, Mr. Nathan,
for not immediately challenging or even, in some of the ensuing
years, is when the 14th Amendment of the United States was
applied to women, it was not until the 1970s, not for a moment
do I believe that women were not, in fact, subject to the 14th
Amendment that provides that they are indeed fully equal when
it comes to State action, until the 1970s when Ruth Bader
Ginsburg argued that when she was a counsel for the ACLU. So I
don't think you ever ask: What's wrong were you people? If you
thought you were entitled to something all along, why didn't
you just do it then?
Look, I want to ask you, Ms. Emmanuelli Perez, about her
view, because she has said that the Budget Autonomy Act
violates the Antideficiency Act. And I have indicated I thought
Mr. Mendelson was entirely within his right with the only
outstanding court decision protecting the District. And I don't
think she said otherwise, but she certainly has said that the
budget autonomy--that it violates not only the Federal
Antideficiency Act but the Budget and Accounting Act, which
apply both to the District of Columbia and, of course, to the
Federal Government.
Now I'd like Mr. Netter's view--I would just like to say
what you have said that you have said that the Antideficiency
Act and the budget and accounting act were not violated. So,
Mr. Netter, can I ask you, does the Antideficiency Act specify
which--whether--I would like to get this out; this is important
to clarify and especially since it is a GAO--whether Congress
or the District must authorize the obligation or expenditure of
District local funds? Does it expressly say which one, or does
it mention either one?
Mr. Meadows. The gentlewoman's time has expired so you can
both very briefly--they have called votes--respond to that.
Ms. Perez. Yes. The Antideficiency Act refers to an
appropriation. When you look at the longstanding history of
that act, it's always been applied to congressional
appropriations.
Ms. Norton. But it doesn't say so, does it?
Ms. Perez. It doesn't say congressional appropriation. It
is enacted by Congress, and it is referring to Federal
officials as well as District officials who have always relied
on Federal appropriations by Congress.
Ms. Norton. It does not say expressly which of those
bodies, the District or the Congress. That's only--when you go
into statutory authority, look first to see what is said. Then
you go to see what was meant.
Ms. Perez. Yes, ma'am. It does not say an appropriation
enacted by Congress, but that is how it has always been
interpreted. It comes out of Congress----
Ms. Norton. That's what I want to hear.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Netter 30 seconds.
Mr. Netter. I appreciate that. Let me read into the record
what the statute says. It says: No officer of the District may
authorize or make an expenditure or obligation exceeding an
amount available in an appropriation or fund for the
expenditure or obligation.
The District of Columbia government possesses the District
of Columbia general fund under section 450 of the Home Rule
Act. That money does not pass through the Treasury, and it is
not subject to Congress' constitutional power of the purse. The
only question is whether the amount was made available. And
that becomes a circular question. If the Home Rule Act is
otherwise valid, as the superior court has found that it is,
then all the requirements of the Antideficiency Act have been
satisfied.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I want to thank all of the
witnesses.
Mr. DePuy, do you agree with Mr. Nathan's characterization
of the intent of Congress, yes or no?
Mr. DePuy. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Mendelson, in your response, it was clear
that you said the original intent of Congress was to retain
control of the appropriations process in your previous answer.
Is that correct?
Mr. Mendelson. Yes, in 1973.
Mr. Meadows. So I want to thank all of you for this
illuminating hearing, and obviously, it is one that will
continue to go on as we address this issue. I also want to
thank the audience because I know that this is something of
great passion and great concern to so many, and you have
conducted yourselves in a very congenial manner. I want to
thank you for that.
If there is no further business before this subcommittee,
the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
