- A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH CARE,
BENEFITS AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-44

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-954 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Sean Hayes, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and
Administrative Rules
Art Arthur, Staff Director, Subcommittee on National Security
Sarah Vance, Clerk
Subcommittee on National Security

RON DESANTIS, Florida, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee           Ranking Member
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma, Vice Chair  BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
WILL HURD, Texas                     TED LIEU, California

Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative Rules

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
TIM WALBERG, Michigan,               MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee              Ranking Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, Distict of
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming               Columbia
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina Vice   BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chair                            JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                Vacancy
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 17, 2015....................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Sarah R. Saldana, Director, U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     8
Mr. Leon Rodriguez, Director, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services, U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................     8
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. John Roth, Inspector General, Office of Inspector General,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................     9
Written Statement............................................    11

APPENDIX

Letters to Secretary Jeh Johnson, Department of Homeland Security    36
Questions and Responses to Mick Mulvaney.........................    62
Questions from Representatives Hice, Walker, and Carter..........
Statement for the hearing Record from NCAPA......................    71

A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON IMMIGRATION

----------

Wednesday, June 17, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security, joint with the
Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and
Administrative Rules,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ron DeSantis
[chairman of the Subcommittee on National Security] presiding.
Present: Representatives DeSantis, Jordan, Russell,
Walberg, DesJarlais, Hice, Meadows, Walker, Carter, Lynch,
Cartwright, Lieu, Norton, Kelly, DeSaulnier, and Lujan Grisham.
Mr. DeSantis. Subcommittee on National Security and the
Subcommittee on Healthcare, Benefits, and Administrative Rules
convenes today to review the President's executive actions on
immigration.
On November 20, 2014, just 2 weeks after the 2014 midterm
elections, President Obama made far-reaching unilateral changes
to our Nation's immigration policy, despite saying on over 22
different occasions that he did not have the authority to do
so. In his address on that day, the President said that: We're
a Nation of laws. Those who broke our immigration laws must be
held accountable, especially those who are dangerous. That's
why over the past 6 years, deportations of criminals are up 80
percent. And that's why we're going to keep focusing
enforcement resources on actual threats to our security. We
will prioritize, just like law enforcement does every day.
The administration's actions, however, have not matched the
President's rhetoric. According to documents provided to the
House Judiciary Committee by DHS in April of this year, ICE
arrests of criminal illegal aliens has declined 32 percent from
the same period a year before, with 51,337 administrative
arrests of criminal aliens in fiscal year 2015 compared to
75,171 arrests in the same period in fiscal year 2014. Those
declines occurred across the board of criminal offenses. We
have recently learned that between fiscal year 2010 and fiscal
year 2014, 121 criminal illegal immigrants were charged with
homicide following their release from ICE custody. The
administration failed to remove these criminals from the United
States. And 64 of those were released by ICE at its own
discretion, not pursuant to any court order.
It was also revealed that the administration has repeatedly
released the same criminal aliens. At our March 19 hearing on
the President's executive actions, the committee discussed the
fact that in fiscal year 2013 ICE released 36,007 criminals,
convicted criminals, that were in its custody. And we have
learned that 1,000 of those criminals who were released have
already been convicted again of new crimes.
And if that were not bad enough, we have since learned that
ICE released 156 of those repeat offenders again into American
communities instead of returning them to their home country.
Plainly, the President's assertion his administration will
keep focusing enforcement resources on actual threats to our
security is not--is contradicted by those facts. Simply put,
the President's policy changes are not doing a good job of
protecting the safety of the American people.
Now, the legality of the immigration policy change has been
called into question both by this Congress and by the Federal
courts. And, in fact, on February 16, a Federal judge ruled
that the administration failed to comply with the law when they
implemented the President's executive action. In a subsequent
order, on April 7, that same judge stated that he was, quote,
``extremely troubled by multiple representations made by the
government's counsel, both in the writing and orally, about the
administration's implementation of the revisions to his
immigration policy.''
Taken as a whole, these facts make it clear that the
President's unilateral changes are failing to achieve the
stated purpose of protecting the American people. They also
call into question the legality of certain actions taken by the
administration in implementing those changes, and these are
changes both in terms of the policy effect and the legality
that they--that we will review today.
Without objection, the chairman is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
I now recognize the ranking member of the National Security
Subcommittee, Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also want to thank our panelists for your willingness to
testify and help the committee with its work.
Today will mark the fourth hearing held by this committee
since the beginning of the 114th Congress to examine the
executive actions on immigration announced by President Obama
in November of 2014. We have also reviewed the Department of
Homeland Security's revised immigration enforcement policies at
both the subcommittee and full committee level, and we have
examined the economic impact of recent executive actions. We
have even looked at the questionable premise that those
executive actions will somehow encourage voter fraud in State
and Federal elections.
Now, I understand that these continued hearings may stem
from disagreement over the administration's course of action on
immigration. I have my own concerns about the precedent set by
executive actions when it comes to other major policy issues
that may affect future Congresses. However, I also share
President Obama's frustration with the inability of some
Members of Congress to support a balanced and sustainable
immigration policy.
Too often this immigration debate becomes a battle between
the throw-them-all-out crowd and the let-them-all-in crowd. But
the truth of the matter is that we simply need to develop a
responsible and sustainable immigration policy. And I think we
all agree that the current arrangement is not working.
The United States has always been a nation of immigrants
and welcoming those who would help build our country and who
want to come here for all the right reasons. That's a
fundamental American principle. That's why I strongly believe
that our primary focus as lawmakers and members of this
committee should be to make every effort to overcome the
legislative gridlock that has defined immigration reform thus
far so that Congress affords itself the opportunity to
thoroughly debate and shape our Nation's immigration policy
going forward.
In addition, we must ensure that those Federal agencies
responsible for immigration enforcement, such as the Department
of Homeland Security, have the resources and tools that they
need to do their jobs. Regrettably that is not the case. As
noted in the Department-wide memo issued by Secretary Jeh
Johnson in November of 2014, ``Due to the limited resources,
DHS and its components cannot respond to all immigration
violations or remove all persons illegally in the United
States.'' This is especially true given that the Federal
Government is still operating under sequestration. In addition,
Congress recently approved a budget blueprint that contemplates
cutting nondefense spending, including Homeland Security
budget, by $500 million below the sequester-level spending
caps.
In spite of budgetary constraints, the Department of
Homeland Security has detained and deported more individuals
than during any other period in its history. According to the
immigration--excuse me, the Migration Policy Institute, roughly
1.95 million people were removed from the United States between
2008 and 2013, those 6 years. That's approximately the same
number who were subject to removal during the 8 years of the
Bush administration.
In accordance with the guidance issued by Secretary Johnson
last year, the Department also continues to conduct its
enforcement and removal activities by prioritizing high-level
threats to National security, border security, and public
safety. Chief among the highest priority threats are
undocumented immigrants suspected or engaged in terrorism or
espionage, convicted felons, and those convicted of criminal
street gang activity.
DHS is also seeking to strengthen its ability to collect
and analyze immigration data in response to the recommendations
issued by DHS Inspector General Roth, who is a guest of ours
today, in May of 2015, regarding how best to enhance
enforcement efficiency. Specifically, the inspector general's
report notes that DHS agreed with the report's recommendation
and plans to initiate a multipronged approach to gathering
essential data on its use of prosecutorial discretion through
its Office of Immigration Statistics.
Secretary Johnson ordered the Department and its components
to fully comply with a February 2015 injunction issued by the
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas to halt
the expansion of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
program and the creation of a Deferred Action for Parental
Accountability Program. In particular, Secretary Johnson
announced on the day after the decision that DHS would not
accept requests for expanded childhood arrivals and will
suspend its plan to accept requests for the new parental
accountability program. He has also requested that the
Inspector General Roth investigate the issuance of
approximately 2,000 expanded work permits by U.S. citizens ship
and immigration services that were already in process but not
halted quickly enough in violation of the injunction. And I
understand that the Department has been cooperating with the
Inspector General's Office thus far.
So, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to discussing the progress
of this investigation and other issues pertaining to our
improving immigration enforcement with our panelists.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. DeSantis. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
The chair now recognizes the chairman of the Health Care,
Benefits, and Administrative Rules Subcommittee, Mr. Jordan,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be brief.
Here are the facts. As the chairman indicated, 22 times the
President said he couldn't do what he did. Federal judge agreed
with the President, what he said 22 times, and said the
executive amnesty order was in fact wrong. That judge has said
attorneys for the government, when they came before the court,
misrepresented the facts. And after the injunction, the
Department of Homeland Security violated the judge's order when
they sent 3-year work authorizations to approximately 2,000
individuals. Those are the facts. That's what we need to get
the answers to. That's why I'm pleased our panel is here, so
they can answer our questions.
And I think this is a hearing very necessary, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the chance to be here. Appreciate you calling the
hearing.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. DeSantis. Gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes my friend from Pennsylvania, the
ranking member on the Health Care, Benefits, and Administrative
Rules Subcommittee, Mr. Cartwright, for his opening statement.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for joining us today. I look forward to hearing
how the administration is working to uphold this Nation's
immigration laws. Following the issuance of the
administration's executive actions on November 20, 2014, a
lawsuit temporarily halted the rollout of new and expanded
deferred action programs. The Department of Homeland Security
trained its personnel and has begun implementing and working on
new prosecutorial discretion policies, and U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, ICE, prepared for the rollout of the new
Priority Enforcement Program.
In the midst of all that's happened, I think some of my
colleagues have forgotten the reasons for the actions in the
first place. Our immigration system was and continues to be in
dire need of reform. DHS faces 11 million undocumented
immigrants and does not have the resources available to remove
them all. Many of these individuals have been in this country
for upwards of a decade, living in the shadows, raising their
children, many of whom were born in the United States.
The Senate passed a bipartisan comprehensive reform bill in
2013, but legislative efforts have ground to a halt in the
House because of Republican opposition. In the face of
legislative inaction, DHS issued a series of memoranda
attempting to address the growing undocumented population. One
memo provided guidance to more consistently focus resources on
removing the most dangerous criminals and the most serious
threats to public safety. Another memo announced efforts to
improve the partnership between DHS and State and local law
enforcement. Yet another memo modified deferred action policies
in order to provide temporary stability to hardworking peaceful
immigrants who are willing to pay their dues.
These executive polices attempted to solve problems, but
the executive branch can only go so far legally. And the
immigration system will remain broken until Congress passes a
legislative solution. Republicans in Congress have been happy
to challenge and question and criticize the administration for
its actions instead of offering solutions. Now, given the
recent Texas Federal Court injunction, it is my belief that the
USCIS Director Leon Rodriguez understands his responsibility to
comply with the law and that he has worked quickly to halt the
implementation of the new and expanded deferred action programs
as soon as possible.
I also appreciate that the USCIS has taken full
responsibility for the release of work permits after the
injunction was ordered, and I look forward to hearing today
about changes at USCIS that will ensure that this kind of thing
doesn't happen again.
But while the courts hear the legal challenges to the
administration's actions and while Republicans in Congress
criticize those actions themselves, the problems in our
Nation's immigration system persist.
I urge that my colleague across the aisle turn their
efforts toward lawmaking and away from bellyaching. Moving
forward, I hope we can finally focus on comprehensive lasting
legislative solutions. This is the work and attention our
broken immigration system and the millions affected by it so
desperately need.
I thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DeSantis. Gentleman yields back. Thank you.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
We will now recognize our witnesses. And I'm pleased to
welcome Ms. Sarah Saldana, Director of U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement; Mr. Leon Rodriguez, Director of U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Service; and Mr. John Roth,
inspector general at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome all.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify.
If you please rise and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear the testimony you are about to give
will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Thank you. Please be seated.
All witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be
made part of the record.
And, with that, Ms. Saldana, you're up for 5 minutes. Thank
you.
Ms. Saldana. Thank you, Chairman Jordan and DeSantis and
ranking member----
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Mr. DeSantis. Committee will come to order. Please have the
police escort the protesters out. Committee will come to order.
Committee will suspend.

rotesters will leave the hearing room. We ask the people
who are watching, watch, listen, learn, but if you disrupt a
hearing, you will be removed.
I now recognize Ms. Saldana for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF SARAH R. SALDANA

Ms. Saldana. Thank you. I don't think I got to thank the
Ranking Members Cartwright and Lynch and subcommittee members.
I'm pleased to appear before you along with U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services Director Leon Rodriguez. While
Directors Rodriguez and I lead different agencies with
certainly distinct missions, we are part of the same Department
and are very mindful of the necessity to do all we can to
ensure coordination between our components.
In the 2 months since I first appeared before the full
committee, I have continued to take steps to enhance ICE's
ability to achieve one its primary goals, that of enforcing our
Nation's immigration laws and keeping our country safe by
ensuring we focus our resources on individuals who pose the
greatest threat to our National security and to public safety.
Secretary Johnson has made it clear to all of us that our
borders are not open to illegal migration and that I should
allocate enforcement resources accordingly, consistent with our
laws and with our values. As such, ICE is endeavoring to use
appropriate prosecutorial discretion and dedicating resources
to the greatest degree possible toward the removal of
individuals who are considered enforcement priorities, which
includes criminals and recent border entrants.
Guided by DHS' enforcement priorities, the approximately
7,300 personnel of ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations, or
ERO, identify and arrest and detain convicted criminals and
other removable aliens. We, as appropriate, supervise them
through alternatives to detention or remove them from the
United States through our immigration courts.
While there is still a lot of work to be done, I've seen
progress in my 6 months leading this agency. First and
foremost, our employees are dedicated to accomplishing this
mission with integrity and with professionalism. As a result of
their tireless effort focusing on the priorities I mentioned,
they are making our communities safer.
We are now removing a greater percentage of criminals than
we have in the past. And I'm committed to continuing this
trend. In fiscal year 2014, 85 percent, 85 percent, of
individuals removed or returned from the interior were
individuals previously convicted of a criminal offense,
reflecting a significant increase in the rate of removal of
individuals with convictions from 67 percent in fiscal year
2011 compared to 38 percent in fiscal year 2008.
The increasing number of convicted criminals removed from
our country is the result of a change in ICE's strategic focus,
which revised policies and your initiatives have helped us
achieve. That's why I, along with our employees at ICE and the
leadership of the Department, have been working hard to
implement the new Priority Enforcement Program, PEP, where we
engage State and local communities to enhance the agency's
ability to remove dangerous individuals.
Recently, both the counties of Los Angeles and Contra Costa
in California agreed to continue cooperating with ICE and DHS
in implementing PEP. We anticipate they will be the first of
many. That's also why I've been working to bolster ICE's
ability to obtain travel documents from recalcitrant countries,
a problem I know this committee is familiar with. I'll continue
to work closely with the Department of State to achieve better
compliance from countries in accepting the return of their
nationals.
I should also mention my establishment of enhanced
oversight and release procedures for ICE custody determinations
involving detainees with criminal convictions on their records,
to include developing a capability to provide appropriate
criminal alien release information to State law enforcement
authorities and relevant jurisdictions. I put this procedure in
place to enhance public safety and greater public confidence in
ICE's enforcement and administration of immigration laws. Part
and parcel of this effort is a law enforcement notification
system currently being used in Virginia, Louisiana, and my home
State of Texas, in its early stages currently and which we
expect to be fully implemented across the country sometime
before the end of the year.
With respect to family residential centers, last month I
announced a series of actions to enhance oversight over these
centers to increase access and transparency to ensure that they
continue to provide a safe and humane environment for detained
families. While we routinely review and evaluate our
facilities, all of our facilities, we understand the unique and
sensitive nature of dealing with women and children in these
settings. Even as we do this, however, we also cannot have an
immigration system that encourages criminals to take advantage
of people to abuse women and children while they attempt to
smuggle them into the United States. And both ERO and HSI are
working together to find and dismantle and bring to justice
these organizations.
As we move forward, I believe that ICE will be successful
in the deliberate implementation of our mission objectives. I
look forward to working with this committee, and I echo the
sentiments of the Congressman with respect to reform of the
laws, which are encompassed in this book, along with the
regulations. This is a very complex system that needs to be
reformed.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Saldana follows:]
For complete submitted testimony, please see the following
website:
https://oversight.house.gov/hearing/a-review-of-the-
presidents-executive-actions-on-immigration/
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you. Gentlewoman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Rodriguez for 5 minutes.
You're up.

STATEMENT OF LEON RODRIGUEZ

Mr. Rodriguez. Good afternoon, chairman--chairmen, ranking
members, and members of the committee. Thank you very much for
inviting me to be here today.
I have talked about my own personal story before. I am the
son of Cuban refugees from south Florida. I have talked often
about the sufferings that led them and my grandparents to make
the choices to come here to the United States and the hopes and
dreams that they brought with them when they came here. This
has taught me as Director of USCIS that every file we see,
whether it is a DACA request, naturalization request, a refugee
filing, a worker visa filing, that all of these cases represent
one family's hopes and dreams and, in many cases, that family's
sufferings. I believe deeply in the work that we do as USCIS.
And I believe in it because it requires us both from a
perspective of immigration policy and operating the immigration
system to answer fundamental questions about our country.
Will we be a prosperous country, or will we not? Will we
keep families together, or will we allow them to be fragmented
and destroyed? Will we be guided by the rule of law, or will we
not? Will we protect the National security, or will we not?
Will we lead when there are issues, or will we just watch as
those issues deepen, become worse, become problems and even
crises?
Unfortunately, for too long, our political system failed to
answer these questions with respect to a number of aspects of
our immigration system. Not simply the situation of those who
are here in undocumented status, and the many members of their
families who are here legally but also those aspects of our
immigration system that bear critically on our economic
prosperity and our civic stability. It is for this reason that
the President issued his executive actions back in November of
2014, focusing on promoting integration of immigrants,
promoting actual accountability of those who are here in an
undocumented status, a condition that did not exist before the
President took that step, and promoting within the confines of
what the law allows him, an immigration system that fully
promotes our economic success as a country.
The President was building on the success of the 2012 DACA
program, and there are many success stories. Young people who
have become teachers, nurses, doctors--in one case now, even a
lawyer--and who really demonstrate the potential that they have
to contribute to the United States. Our work was enjoined by
the court in Texas. The one thing I'd like to underscore about
that is that it's not over until it's over. We believe in the
legality of our policies, and we believe that in the end we
will be vindicated by the legal process.
Nonetheless, when the court issues an injunction, I as the
Director of USCIS, as an attorney, and as a former prosecutor,
ordered the immediate cessation of all activities to implement
the deferred action policies under the President's executive
actions. One of those actions was to stop the issuance of 3-
year work authorizations that had actually been granted the
week before the injunction was issued. Unfortunately, through a
miscommunication, those work authorizations were issued anyway.
I have taken full responsibility, both in this forum and before
the court, and to say that I took it before the court is to say
something significant. I am an attorney. I am a former
prosecutor. And I have said very clearly to Judge Hanen: I am
responsible. I am accountable for what my agency did.
The question, now, though is as I take accountability, will
we as a political system take full accountability for the
challenges that we have in our immigration system. The
President made it very clear at the time that he issued the
executive orders, that they could be stopped immediately if
instead we found a legislative solution to the ongoing now
decades-long challenges presented by the undocumented,
presented by the insufficiency of our immigration system to
meet our economic needs. I stand here today ready to work with
all of you to work toward those improvements.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Rodriguez follows:]
For complete submitted testimony, please see the following
website:
https://oversight.house.gov/hearing/a-review-of-the-
presidents-executive-actions-on-immigration/
Mr. DeSantis. Thank the gentleman.
Chair now recognizes Inspector Roth for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN ROTH

Mr. Roth. Good afternoon, Chairmen Jordan and DeSantis,
chairman member--Ranking Members Cartwright and Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me here to
today to discuss DHS' collection of prosecutorial discretion
data.
DHS has instituted various policies over time that allow
the use of prosecutorial discretion in making immigration
enforcement decisions. However, the Department does not collect
or use such data to help assess immigration policy, evaluate
the effectiveness and results of enforcement actions, or be
able to assess the reasonableness of the exercise of that
discretion on the part of DHS personnel.
Since DHS' formation in 2003, ICE has implemented various
policies to focus its efforts on criminal and civil enforcement
priorities. It has also used policies for processing aliens
with special circumstances, such as crime victims and
witnesses, nursing mothers and the elderly, as well as ensuring
that enforcement actions are not focused on sensitive
locations, such as schools and churches.
At the time of our audit, ICE's removal actions were
governed by a series of policy memoranda signed by then-ICE
Director John Morton in March and June of 2011 and focused its
enforcement resources on three things: One, aliens who pose a
danger to national security or risk to public safety; two,
aliens who recently violated the immigration controls at the
border and ports of entry or knowingly abused the visa process;
and, three, aliens who were fugitives or otherwise obstruct
immigrations controls.
Additionally, a year later, in 2012, the Department issued
guidance, known as the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals,
known as DACA, which allows the use of prosecutorial discretion
to defer action or release some aliens who came to the United
States as children and meet other criteria. Despite its
reliance on discretion to prioritize enforcement resources, ICE
often does not collect prosecutorial discretion data and does
not always ensure that its statistics are accurate and
complete. For example, ICE records its use of prosecutorial
discretion broadly, without distinguishing the various types of
exceptions to removal, such as DACA-related exceptions.
Additionally, prosecutorial discretion statistics may be
inaccurate because enforcement officers may not document every
encounter with aliens it considers to be a low enforcement
priority. ICE officials told us that field personnel often do
not record their use of prosecutorial discretion because it is
too time-consuming. As a result, data that supports decisions
on the use of prosecutorial discretion may not be available.
DHS should ensure it can support its decisions with solid
data. A feedback mechanism for the use of prosecutorial
discretion could help DHS identify gaps, set goals, determine
budget requirements, and provide information to improve program
performance. In terms of overall immigration enforcement
policy, such a mechanism could help develop sound future
programs and policies. In addition to assisting in the overall
policymaking process, capturing the right information would
allow the Department to ensure that the proper and evenhanded
application of the policies exist.
As it stands now, there's no mechanism by which to assess
the reasonableness of an individual officer's exercise of
discretion to compare prosecutorial discretion decisions for
similarly situated aliens or to compare the use of
prosecutorial discretion by various field offices. This data,
if collected, could also be used to evaluate the performance of
individual officers or field offices.
Uneven or inconsistent policy enforcement can have a
negative effect on DHS' immigration enforcement mission. Here
because the Department does not collect data on, much less
monitor the use of prosecutorial discretion, we are unable to
determine whether the Department is using prosecutorial
discretion consistently or fairly.
The Department agreed with our recommendations in our audit
to improve collection and analysis and reporting of data on the
use of prosecutorial discretion. DHS is planning a multipronged
approach for assessing and accounting for its immigration
enforcement efforts. We believe such a strategy is particularly
important given that over the last two fiscal years, ICE, CBP,
and USCIS collectively received on average about $21 billion
annually for immigration enforcement.
Chairmen DeSantis and Jordan, this concludes my prepared
statement. I'd be happy to answer any questions you or members
of the committee may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Roth follows:]
For complete submitted testimony, please see the following
website:
https://oversight.house.gov/hearing/a-review-of-the-
presidents-executive-actions-on-immigration/
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Roth.
Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Saldana, you recently reported to the Senate that 121
illegal aliens that had been released by ICE between fiscal
year 2010 and 2014 had been arrested for homicide since they
were released. How many total homicides have these 121
individuals been charged with?
Ms. Saldana. Beyond the specific information----
Mr. DeSantis. Can you hit your microphone, please.
Ms. Saldana. I'm sorry. Beyond the specific information we
provided with respect to the homicide, I think we broke down
the information, and I can't tell you whether there are other
homicides involved.
Mr. DeSantis. So you just know that those folks have been
charged with a homicide, but it doesn't rule out that they
could have been charged with multiple homicides. Is that
correct?
Ms. Saldana. I can't say sitting here today that that's not
the case.
Mr. DeSantis. And do you know at this point how many
convictions have resulted from those charges?
Ms. Saldana. No. I don't.
Mr. DeSantis. Is that something that you're interested in
finding out?
Ms. Saldana. Certainly. I think we have, as the inspector
general has pointed out, we're working on our systems to try to
be more flexible and responsive. We get a lot of inquiries
with--in all shapes and sizes, which we're trying to make our
information system more flexible, and that's taken a little
time. But, yes, absolutely, we're interested in that
information, like I know you are, sir.
Mr. DeSantis. Do you know if any of those individuals had
been convicted of a homicide-related offense before they were
released by DHS?
Ms. Saldana. I do not have that information. I don't
believe that's the case.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. But that's obviously something that's
important to know. What, if any, changes does ICE plan on
making in light of the fact that you do have 121 individuals
who were in ICE custody, were in the country illegally, have
been released, and now have been charged with committing
homicides. And just the way our criminal system works, I mean,
most people who get charged end up getting guilty. I mean,
let's just--it's probably over 90 percent. Let's just say it's
60 percent. That's a lot of people who have been killed. That's
a lot of families who have lost loved ones, and they can look
at ICE and say: Look. Had you just done your job better, maybe
my family member would be here today. So what policy changes
are you going to make to prevent that from happening in the
future?
Ms. Saldana. And I will say that is particularly
disturbing, I know, to all the members of this committee and to
myself as a prior U.S. Attorney in north Texas, and Dallas
based. That is something that we're always trying to do is to
find criminals and to convict them. As a result, when I first
came here----
Mr. DeSantis. Well, and you probably did that very well. I
know people on the state level in Texas and other places do it
very well. The problem, though, is, is if they're going and
they're being convicted and then ICE knows that they're not
here legally, and we know they're convicts, and yet they still
get released into society. And, in 2013, I know you weren't ICE
director then, 2013 DHS released 36,000 individuals who were in
the country illegally had been convicted of crimes. They
provided the crimes to us, and they included homicide. They
included rape. They included drug trafficking. Some very, very
serious offenses. 2014, you had 30,000 individuals, again, who
were in the country illegally convicted of crimes and yet still
released by DHS.
And so the local and Federal law enforcement officers and
the prosecutors, they play an important role, but if DHS is
then going to release people who have been proven to be a
danger to society into the public, well, then that leaves more
Americans to be victimized by, in some cases, very violent
crimes.
Ms. Saldana. And that's why, Mr. Chairman, I established a
procedure that I announced back in March for greater oversight
over the release of any person who had a prior--serious prior
conviction. In particular, I'm asking people to sign off a
piece of paper the original person who makes the determination
with respect to either custody or bond. I'm asking their
supervisors to review it. I've actually put together a panel in
headquarters which looks over all of these decisions to
determine whether or not they were based on the facts and
circumstances known to the individual and that they were right
decisions. As I mentioned earlier, this----
Mr. DeSantis. And if they're not right decisions, what
happens? Because I mentioned the 36,000 in fiscal year 2013.
These are folks that have been convicted in our courts of, in
many cases, very serious offenses. They weren't in the country
legally, they're released, and now, even at this point in 2015,
of those 36,000, by DHS' own figures, 1,000 of those people
have already been convicted of new crimes again in the future.
And so, clearly, there is a breakdown there. So when that is
not followed, what happens? Who is held accountable? Does
anyone lose their job?
Ms. Saldana. It could be, sir. We'll just have to see.
Mr. DeSantis. Has anyone lost their job----
Ms. Saldana. Not yet.
Mr. DeSantis. --since you have been ICE director?
Ms. Saldana. No. Not in----
Mr. DeSantis. So the 1,000 new convictions that we have
seen for people who had already been convicted, there's not
been any accountability within ICE for that. To me, that's a
major failure. Because if I were somebody whose family member
was victimized by a crime, I would want to know: Well, wait a
minute. You guys should have known. The President's policy is,
you know, we're going to go after the criminals, zero
tolerance. We're going to make it happen, and yet that hasn't
happened. So what do you say to the families who've seen the--
who've been victimized?
Ms. Saldana. If I may, sir, I would say that those are
tragedies. And I wish that our deportation officers and others
making these decisions were omniscient and could see into the
future and into the heart and soul of these individuals, but we
go by the facts that we know----
Mr. DeSantis. A criminal conviction for, say, aggravated
assault, that's not looking into the future, that's looking
into the past. I mean, as a prosecutor, if you have people who
run afoul with the law and get convicted of violent criminal
activity, those are people that are much more likely to commit
crimes in the future than somebody who's never committed a
crime in their life. So it's not just saying that this is all
just trying to look into the future and you need clairvoyance;
you can judge whether somebody's a threat to society based on
their past conduct.
Ms. Saldana. If you--if you'll allow me to finish my
answer, Mr. Chairman, I would really appreciate it because I
think the American people have a right to know the full picture
here.
Every decision we make, there is not a single deportation
officer or other agent within ERO who wants to let a dangerous
criminal out in the streets to threaten the public. I can
guarantee and assure you of that. They are law enforcement
officers. And with respect to the ability--we have got to look
at the record as it is. We don't look at one single factor. We
do look at the age of--just like a court of law, the Federal
courts in which I practiced. They look at many different
factors to determine whether to release an individual, and we
are bound by some of the numbers that you threw out by the
Supreme Court in its decision with respect to not being able to
detain people beyond 6 months, typically. And the immigration
courts that set bond and release some of these folks as well.
So that is the complete picture and that's what I can assure
you of is I'm committed, and I have been doing this since I
stepped into this position back in January to keep that number
down and to try to avoid future tragedies like the ones you
have described.
Mr. DeSantis. Point taken. Now, you said that there are
multiple factors, so you can't just look at one thing. So maybe
someone has a blemish on their criminal record, but there's
other factors. You mentioned age. Answer me this, because there
have been people that have been convicted of sexual assault who
have been released, and by ICE's own admission, it wasn't
because they--the 6 months was up. Sometimes that happens, but
there are other people who did not, where they were
discretionary releases. So what other factors would outweigh a
conviction for a sexual assault against a woman or a child, and
why would we want that person in our society?
Ms. Saldana. This Congress and in this elaborate system
that we're talking about has entitled the individuals to bond
and have said things like the age of the criminal conviction,
the nature of the crime----
Mr. DeSantis. No. I understand that. But how does that
outweigh the seriousness of the offense when you're talking
about people who've committed sexual assaults, crimes against
children, crimes against women? That's what I don't understand.
I understand if somebody got a speeding ticket or something,
but some of those I think there's broad agreement in the
American public that that is not something that we want to see
where ICE is facilitating people to be back on the street.
Now, I have I'm over my time. So I appreciate you answering
the questions. I know some of my colleagues will have more, and
I am going to now recognize Mr. Lynch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the way we approach the question, the wider
question of immigration is really based on what narrative that
we use. This committee, this hearing is set up on a narrative
that really looks at illegal immigrants who have committed
heinous crimes, homicides. And so someone using that narrative
will have a very negative view towards immigration policy
because you're looking at that consequence.
There's another narrative, though. I had an opportunity as
part of this National Security Subcommittee to visit, with the
former chairman Mr. Issa, we went to Kandahar, Afghanistan, and
I was honored. I have to say I was honored to be asked to
participate in an immigration--citizenship ceremony. So here I
am at this Godforsaken forward-operating base when about 100
young Marines, men and women, surprised at the number of young
women, took the oath of citizenship for this country. Every one
of them a noncitizen in American uniforms fighting for this
country in a very difficult war zone from 19--and out of those,
about 100 marines, a few soldiers as well--19 different
countries, from Guatemala to Somalia to Ethiopia to Mexico.
And, you know, I was standing there, and we had a chance to
spend the afternoon with these young soldiers and marines, and
I could not help but think about the quote that John F. Kennedy
made famous. He said: Ask not what your country can do for you,
but ask what you can do for your country.
And I'm thinking, these young soldiers, these young
marines, standing in the place of American citizens in a tough,
tough war zone, chasing the Taliban up and down that province--
and they're not even citizens--trying to be--trying to be
American citizens for all the right reasons, if you take that
narrative and you see the good, the good, that is possible by
adopting an immigration policy that actually values that desire
to be part of this country for all the right reasons, you take
a whole different--a much more hopeful view of immigration
policy and what we could accomplish if we got it right.
So, Ms. Saldana, or Director Saldana, I want to ask you
about some of your comments earlier. You were talking about--
look, we all know that if we got sequestration or even the
proposed budget is $500 million below sequestration, which
really cuts into your ability to do your job, and I've seen
numbers that say that 85 percent of ICE's removals from the
United States in 2014 were convicted criminals. So it sounds
like you're meeting your priorities.
I'm just wondering what impact--what impact is this going
to have in going after the, you know, your priority--you said
it was National security. So that's going after terrorists and
those involved in espionage, criminal activity----
Ms. Saldana. Gangs. Those----
Mr. Lynch. So how will this-- tell me a little bit about
how this might affect your ability to do your job and to try to
make sense of this somewhat dysfunctional immigration policy
that we have right now.
Ms. Saldana. Well, I'm glad you asked that question because
we have had a number of things working against us and
increasing our expenses. For example, obviously, the influx of
families, women and children, require even greater services
than others. Those beds are much more expensive than a regular
adult bed that you would have. We have operations that we
conduct because we cannot get people from the State system
immediately with some jurisdictions not cooperating with us. We
have operations we have to conduct where we pull people off of
their regular duties and go out and try to find dangerous
criminals. That not only exposes the officers to safety issues,
but it also can be a very detrimental situation with respect to
the family who is present at the time that the officers show
up. So, to us, even the disruption that occurred back in March,
before March, with respect to not having even any kind of
guarantee with respect to our 2015 budget, it wreaked
tremendous havoc, never mind the 20,000 employees who would not
be receiving a paycheck if sequestration continues in this
manner.
Mr. Lynch. Right. Now, do you do any work with the victims
on the victim side----
Ms. Saldana. Absolutely.
Mr. Lynch. --in these cases, and is that piece going to be
affected as well?
Ms. Saldana. Yes. And I'm glad you mentioned that, because
we often forget, it's not just ERO, but its HSI, our Homeland
Security Investigation side of the house, that is affected by
these budget constrictions. We--and they help us with respect
to these smuggling networks. As I mentioned in my opening
statement, not only do we have to take care of the families
once they get across, but we ought to do the best we can to
dismantle those smuggling organizations that put them at peril
and bring them over into this country. So, yes, sir, that's a
more complete picture.
Mr. Lynch. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. DeSantis. The gentleman's time's expired.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Jordan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Director Rodriguez, President issues his executive order on
November 20 of last year. Court case ensues. There's a hearing
on the preliminary injunction January 15, 2015. Your counsel
represents to the court: No applications for revised DACA would
be accepted until the 18th of February. No action would be
taken on any of these applications until March 4.
Did you know at the time that your counsel was
misrepresenting the facts?
Mr. Rodriguez. No. And I'm not sure I would characterize it
that way, Congressman. The fact was that beginning on November
24, for individuals who were applying for either----
Mr. Jordan. It's pretty clear--if I could just interrupt
for a second, Mr. Rodriguez. It's pretty clear your counsel
said, ``Just to be clear, Your Honor,'' and he reemphasized
that point that no applications going to the 3-years deferrals
would happen until at least February 18--or, excuse me, March
4, and yet the case--isn't it true that you had had 100,000 of
these applications--or not applications, but these actual 3-
year deferrals go out to 100,000 individuals?
Mr. Rodriguez. 100,000 individuals under the original 2012
DACA program who were being granted 3-year work authorizations
rather than two.
Mr. Jordan. Exactly. Exactly.
Mr. Rodriguez. I won't characterize my counsel's comments.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I mean, the judges said it. They were
misrepresented to the judge. I'm saying did you know at the
time that counsel for your side of the case misrepresented that
fact to the judge?
Mr. Rodriguez. I was not aware of the statement made by my
counsel at that time.
Mr. Jordan. When did you learn that there had been a
misrepresentation to the court?
Mr. Rodriguez. I learned that the court believed that there
had been a misrepresentation in March when we first informed
the court in an attempt to be 100 percent clear with the court
that we had in fact granted roughly 108,000 3-year work
authorizations beginning on November 24, long before the
lawsuit was even filed.
And, by the way, Congressman, openly.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah. So you informed the court when?
Mr. Rodriguez. We advised the court, I believe, at the
beginning of March. It would have been something like March 3
or March 4, when of our own initiative in order to be 100
percent frank and clear with the court our counsel took the
initiative to advise the court that we had----
Mr. Jordan. Okay. You advised the court on March 3 or 4,
early March. When did you first learn that there may be a
problem?
Mr. Rodriguez. We in--immediately after the injunction, we
discussed the existence of these 108,000 3-year authorizations,
again, individuals under the original 2012 program. This would
have been sometime in the few days after the injunction was
issued----
Mr. Jordan. I'm looking for a date because you have got to
remember the context, though, Director Rodriguez. We were
having an important debate here in Congress relative to the
Department of Homeland Security funding bill. The judge issues
his injunction on February 16. You're telling us: A few weeks
later, we went on our own, just out of the kindness of our
heart, even though the judge thinks you misrepresented the case
to him, out the of kindness of your heart, you told the judge
sometime early March, but that DHS bill came due on February
27. You said you knew about this shortly after the injunction.
So sometime between February 16 and February 27, you learned of
it. I'm wondering why you didn't tell us right away or tell the
judge right away, which we would have known about and the
American people would have known about.
Mr. Rodriguez. We told the court within a couple of weeks
of the injunction in an effort to be candid with the tribunal,
which our counsel felt that it was their obligation, and which
certainly had I been counsel, I would have had the same
attitude as well. We wanted to make sure that the court
understood that.
Mr. Jordan. All I'm saying is it would have been nice in
the heat of that debate, frankly, debate that the whole country
was having, if we'd have had that information before the
deadline of the DHS bill, which is February 27. You're telling
me you knew there could be a problem, and you decided to tell
the judge, but you waited until after the 27th.
Mr. Rodriguez. Congressman, I'm not sure I agree with the
characterization. The fact is we told--once we understood that
this was an issue that the court may not have understood, we
made the decision to let the court know. It was our intention
at all times to be candid with the court, and what I underscore
is that we were--we had this up on our Web site. This was
included in our filings with the court that the directive was
to issue 3-year work authorizations immediately. That was part
of our initial----
Mr. Jordan. Well, I tell you what would have been a lot
nicer. What would have been a lot nicer is if the counsel for
your side, when they were in front of the judge, would have
told him what you told the court, would have told him, ``Hey,
there's already been 100,000 go out,'' instead of
misrepresenting it to the court and saying, ``That's not going
to happen until sometime in February, sometime in March.'' That
would have been better. But, the fact, that you learned before
the 27th day and waited to tell the judge and, therefore,
Congress and the American people until after the DHS bill, I
think's relevant.
Last question if I could, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Roth, have you looked into this issue?
Mr. Roth. We are in the process of doing the field work on
this, yes.
Mr. Jordan. And what does that mean, Mr. Roth? Is that
going to be a report sometime soon, or when are we going to
have something that--when's your investigation or audit going
to be done?
Mr. Roth. Sure. We're conducting interviews as we speak,
reviewing emails, doing the kinds of things that we would
typically do. My projected timeline is hopefully weeks, not
months, but I can't give you a firmer date than that.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Russell. [Presiding.] The chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Cartwright, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, Mr. Rodriguez, I want to spend a little more time
exploring USCIS' rollout of DAPA and expanded DACA. DAPA
meaning Deferred Action for Parents of Americans. In light of
the Texas Federal Court decision, Director Rodriguez, I
understand you have taken great pains to comply with the Texas
Federal Court's injunction. Is that correct?
Mr. Rodriguez. That is correct, Congressman. Immediately,
literally, this--the court's injunction became known to us
around 11:30 p.m. On Presidents' Day. By 1 o'clock in the
morning we had issued a directive to cease all implementation
of either the expanded DACA policy or the DAPA policy,
including to halt any issuance of 3-year work authorizations.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. So you immediately swung into action
to enforce this injunction. Right?
Mr. Rodriguez. That is correct, Congressman, including
rolling back materials on our Web site, forms, instructions, in
order to absolutely comply in every respect with the court's
injunction.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. Now, I understand that DHS has
admitted that some work authorizations were provided after the
court's injunction was ordered, and your written testimony
makes it clear, ``USCIS also took immediate steps intended to
ensure we ceased issuing 3-year work permits.'' Director
Rodriguez, can you describe what those immediate steps were and
why they didn't work?
Mr. Rodriguez. The concrete immediate step that was taken
was that all of those work authorizations that we're talking
about were in a--what is essentially a giant print queue. What
was supposed to--and so we halted them, and what was supposed
to have occurred is that they should have been essentially
reversed and sent back to the immigration services officers who
were reviewing the case. Instead, there was a miscommunication
which led those print orders to go to the contractor that
actually prints the 3-year work--3- or 2-year work
authorizations, as the case might have been, and they were
printed.
We discovered this in the process correcting other errors
that we had made and immediately notified on our own initiative
both the States and the court. We have advised all of the
affected requesters of the fact that they are getting 2- rather
than 3-year work authorizations. We have required them to
return their 3-year work authorizations. In fact, close to half
of them already have, and are----
Mr. Cartwright. Let me stop you there.
So what you're telling us is that it wasn't that you got
caught or somebody blew the whistle on you, you picked up the
error on your own. Is that correct?
Mr. Rodriguez. Well, let me characterize it. We caught
ourselves.
Mr. Cartwright. Caught yourselves and you reported
yourselves----
Mr. Rodriguez. That is correct, Congressman.
Mr. Cartwright. --is that right?
Mr. Rodriguez. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. And that was all out of an effort to be
candid with the tribunal in Texas.
Mr. Rodriguez. That is correct, and also, frankly, to be
fair with our customers and let them know exactly where they
stood with respect to their cases.
Mr. Cartwright. And then you went to the people that got
the 3-year work authorizations and started to explain to them
that they didn't--they weren't getting 3 years, they were
getting the 2 years, as they supposed to.
Mr. Rodriguez. Each and every one of them, Congressman, was
sent a letter advising them of the error, directing them to
return their 3-year authorization and advising them that they
would be given a 2-year authorization.
As I indicated, we have already recaptured a number of
those 3-year work authorizations and are issuing 2-year
authorizations.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. Well, Director Rodriguez, this
here is Washington, D.C., and we don't blow anything out of
proportion here.
Mr. Rodriguez. Oh, no, sir. Never. Never.
Mr. Cartwright. But, nevertheless, some reports have
indicated that the USCIS intentionally failed to comply with
the Texas Federal Court's injection. Director Rodriguez, I just
want to clear this up once and for all. How would you react to
those criticisms?
Mr. Rodriguez. Congressman, I'm a public servant. I am an
officer of the court as an attorney. I think you have already
observed, we actually owned up to the error that we had made.
That makes it fairly clear that the intent all along had been
to comply with the court's order.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. Now, as it currently stands, are
you moving forward with plans to process DAPA applications at
that facility?
Mr. Rodriguez. In absolutely no respect, Congressman. As I
said, we immediately, literally within minutes, halted all
activities that amounted to the implementation of either the
expanded DACA or the DAPA program immediately upon the court's
injunction. No policies have been developed. No people have
been hired. Nothing has been done to implement those programs.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I thank you for your work, and I
yield back.
Mr. Rodriguez. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes. I do
appreciate your service. And when we have had you here in
hearings before, it is obvious that you serve administration to
administration in attempts to make our system both lawful and
to secure our country.
However, that doesn't necessarily negate the fact that we
still have problems. As Mr. Lynch pointed out earlier about
those that were enlisted on fields of battle to gain their
citizenship, I just might point out, having commanded some
soldiers in foreign fields in that category, they were legally
here in this country and had been properly vetted with no
criminal histories.
And that's the essence of what we're getting at here today
is within the constructs of enforcing the law and doing these
things that we must do, we can't just let policies, political,
regardless of administration, take away our immigration process
and result in the crimes that we are discussing, penetration of
our borders that weaken our national security and could open us
up even to terrorist attack.
Mr. Roth, is it correct that the Department does not
collect and analyze data on the use of prosecutorial direction?
Mr. Roth. That is correct.
Mr. Russell. Can you explain why this is significant?
Mr. Roth. Yes. It's best to do it by example. For example,
if ERO officers go into, say, a house to look for a specific
violent felon, there might be three or four other individuals
that would be susceptible to deportation. By the fact that
those officers exercise prosecutorial discretion on those
individuals means it's really invisible to the policymakers as
to, one, who's exercising prosecutorial discretion and why? Is
it uniform across the country? Should it be uniform across the
country? Are there categories of individuals for, perhaps, we
should not exercise prosecutorial discretion, in other words,
try to refine the policy as we go? It's really a fundamental
sort of precept of good government that you ought to be able to
record and measure the activities that you do.
Mr. Russell. Well, did DHS explain what data it reviewed in
setting those priorities for apprehension, detention, removal
of undocumented immigrants, illegal aliens?
Mr. Roth. They did not as far as prosecutorial discretion.
Obviously, they capture a number of different data points of
information with regard to the number of apprehensions, the
number of deportations, those kinds of things, estimates of the
number of individuals illegally in the United States. But they
do not capture what we think is an important thing, which is
the exercise of discretion.
Mr. Russell. I think on this theme, part of the concern is
that these data gaps weaken our immigration enforcement
efforts. Director Saldana, I have read reports where ICE agents
have complained they have not been able to access alien
criminal history. What is being done to take corrective action
on criminal history record access to make sure that they can
see the problem before it becomes a problem?
Ms. Saldana. And, actually, I've actually sat down and run
through our data points and all the information that an officer
may have available to them at the time of apprehension,
booking, whatever. And there is criminal information that comes
through the NCIC and the FBI database with respect to prior
convictions.
I will say, the inspector general, that we agreed and
concurred that we could be more systematic about our collection
of data. But we do have a lot of information on the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion. The issue, I understood, was it's not
systematic. And that's what we're working towards. In other
words, our lawyers, for example, because prosecutorial
discretion can be exercised at any point of an immigrant's
processing or going through the process, keep a record of when
they exercise prosecutorial discretion.
With respect to detention and bond decisions, that exercise
of prosecutorial discretion is recorded. The issue is and the
reason we concurred with the ultimate finding was we are
currently working--and have been actually for several months--
on systematically recording that information and consistently.
You can imagine a law enforcement officer out there in the
field trying to do his job, knocking on a door at 6 in the
morning and, yes, they may not stop to----
Mr. Russell. I know you have had some efforts in the
Intensive Supervision Program, and that's laudable. But the
problem is what is being done to ensure that the Intensive
Supervision Program is maintained until the immigration status
of the individual is determined? Right now, there have been
identified gaps where that supervision is neglected before
their immigration status is done. And why is that? And what
will you do to correct that?
Ms. Saldana. Well, actually, that's what I'm saying. I
think we have, and I think it was noted in the report, we have,
the Department itself, not the agency, has been working to make
this systematic actually across all the agencies, this
information database, and have committed to working that. I'm
not even sure right now I can remember where the report noted,
the hope is that we can get that completed some time this year.
But that is a huge effort that is being undertaken by our
policy people and our technical people. And I think it's very
well underway. It just takes time.
Mr. Russell. Well, I appreciate those answers.
Unfortunately, as time moves by, we see some drastic
consequences. I am out of time.
And I will now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to spend some
time discussing an issue that is very important to me and to
many Members of Congress and that is the continued detention of
women, children, and infants in prison-like conditions. As you
know, in 2009, the Department of Homeland Security shut down
the Texas, Hutto, a jail-like family facility, because it was
inhumane, because of reports of abuse, and harsh conditions.
So I was surprised in your testimony that you said your
agency is opening up additional facilities. And that's
particularly surprising to me because, as you know, the
American Immigration Lawyers Association has stated that
virtually all of these folks can qualify for asylum because
they are fleeing terrifying conditions of violence, abuse, and
crime, and they have a fear of removal.
You also know that last November, Homeland Security
Secretary Johnson wrote in a memo, and ``Field office directors
should not expend detention resources on aliens who are
pregnant or nursing, who demonstrate that they are primary
caretakers of children or an infirm person or whose detention
is otherwise not in the public interest.''
So, in light of that guidance, I'm asking, why does ICE
continue to expend precious resources to detain thousands of
families en masse, including children and infants, in prison-
like conditions?
Ms. Saldana. Congressman, I want to be sure that I wasn't--
that I didn't misstate something. We do not have more new
facilities that are being opened. We did, we do have Dilley
with additional space that was opened. It's the same
residential center. We have three across the country: One in
Dilley; one in Karnes; and one in Berks, Pennsylvania.
But with respect to your question, we, you know, up until
actually the surge last summer and the spring, we had one
facility essentially in Berks, Pennsylvania, with 100 beds. We
had to get going quickly to ensure that we had someplace to put
these families and the children in sanitary, good, humane
facilities. I've been to both Karnes and to Dilley. I've toured
the entire facilities. This is detention. It's not prison. I
think, in fact, sir, that people have repeated the idea that
there are, there is barbed wire at our family residential
centers and that the guards are armed. One only has to step
into the facility to see that those claims are false.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I think 135 Members of Congress would
disagree with you. On May 27 of this year, I joined them and
signed a letter that said to Secretary Johnson, we are troubled
by the Department of Homeland Security's continued detention of
mothers and children in secure, jail-like facilities. And it
describes some of what happens. We are disturbed by the fact
that many mothers and children remain in family detention,
despite serious medical needs. In the past year. We have
learned of the detention of children with intellectual
disabilities, a child with brain cancer, a mother with a heart
disorder, and a 12-year-old child who has not eaten solid food
for 2 months. We also learned of a 3-year-old child who was
throwing up for 3 days and was apparently offered water as a
form of medical treatment. It was only after the child began
throwing up blood on the fourth day that the facility finally
transferred her to a hospital. This is simply unacceptable. We
cannot continue to hear reports of serious harm to children in
custody and do nothing about it.
So, Mr. Chair, I would like to enter this letter into the
record.
Mr. Russell. Without objection.
Mr. Lieu. I would also like to enter a letter into the
record dated June 1, 2015, from 33 Members of the Senate that
says similar things. And then I would like to quote from this
report, one of many, called ``Locking Up Family Values Again,''
a report on the practice of family detention by the Lutheran
Immigration Refugee Service and the Women's Refugee Commission.
Mr. Lieu. It opens up with a quote from the advocacy
director of Human Rights Watch: Karnes was quite the visit for
me. There's nothing like walking into a prison, and the first
thing you hear is a crying baby, two things that should never
go together, never ever.
So I note in your testimony that you call these facilities
family residential centers. It is so positive sounding. It's
like a place you might see at Disney World. These are actually
jail-like facilities. They should be called family prison
facilities or family detention facilities or family jail
facilities but not family residential centers. And every time
you use that term, you're misleading the American public. So
I'm going to ask you, will you stop using that term and call it
what it is?
Ms. Saldana. No, sir. Have you visited----
Mr. Lieu. Just note, now that you are on notice, every time
you use that term, I believe you will now be intentionally
misleading the American public.
And I yield back.
Ms. Saldana. I'm sorry you feel that way, Congressman. I
would love to take you through to one of our centers.
Mr. Lieu. Me and 135 Members of Congress feel that way and
33 Members of the Senate still feel that way.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman has yielded back.
And the chair will now recognize the vice chairman, Mr.
Mulvaney from South Carolina, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thanks very much. Reset the clock please.
Ms. Saldana, who do you report to?
Ms. Saldana. The Secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security, Jeh Johnson.
Mr. Mulvaney. And then he reports to the President?
Ms. Saldana. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mulvaney. Great. Could we run the video please?
You have a chance to follow along on the video screen for
the next 2 minutes or so.
Let me follow up on a couple different things then. You
said before that there were communities and local governments
that were denying you access. Tell me about that.
Ms. Saldana. This is one of the challenges I mentioned in
my opening statement, sir. And I enlist the help of anybody
that I can get help from on this issue. Because our biggest
priority is criminals, convicted felons in particular, we need
to work with State and local jurisdictions who are apprehending
undocumented workers for offenses against State and local law.
They have them in their custody. We can now communicate with
the State and local jurisdiction and get some notice in advance
through our detainer request to let us know that they're about
to release them because they've served their State custody
sentence and that we can take possession of them because of
their violation of the law, and now we have a convicted
criminal here.
Mr. Mulvaney. But they're denying you the ability to do
that?
Ms. Saldana. Some jurisdictions are.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why?
Ms. Saldana. I can't speak for them. I will tell you it is,
some of them have policies and laws that are----
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you believe that you have--I'm sorry to
cut you off--do you believe you have the legal right to force
them to comply with your request?
Ms. Saldana. We do not have, I cannot say that the detainer
notices are mandatory. They are definitely discretionary.
Mr. Mulvaney. Would it surprise you if the administration
had taken a different position on that in the recent past?
Ms. Saldana. Well, we have argued that, and there's pending
litigation everywhere on this topic. I think you may be
familiar with the Oregon case. But we are trying to work----
Mr. Mulvaney. Would it help you if we clarified the law to
make it clear that it was mandatory that those local
communities cooperate with you?
Ms. Saldana. Thank you, amen, yes.
[video shown.]
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you. That was Thursday, March 19.
Before the papers got printed the next morning, you had
retracted that statement. And you went on to say that any
effort at Federal legislation now to mandate State and local
law enforcement's compliance with ICE detainers will, in our
view, be highly counterproductive. So my question is, after you
gave that testimony, did you talk to Jeh Johnson or anyone in
his office?
Ms. Saldana. Yes, I have.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. I'm sorry, let me be more clear.
Between the time that you gave that testimony and the time you
retracted that statement later that afternoon, did you talk to
anybody at Jeh Johnson's office?
Ms. Saldana. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. What did they tell you?
Ms. Saldana. What did they tell me? They asked me what I
meant by that. And that's what my statement was. It was not a
retraction, sir.
Mr. Mulvaney. Oh, no, it was absolutely a retraction.
Ms. Saldana. It was a clarification of the fact that, I'm
used to the law enforcement----
Mr. Mulvaney. I can play it back again, Ms. Saldana, if you
want to. But everybody here knows it was a retraction. That's
fine. There's nothing wrong with retracting statements. People
do it all the time. But I asked you if you would like some help
in getting the localities to cooperate with you, you said,
``Thank you, Amen, yes.'' And we all said: Great, we think we
can do that.
And that night, you said any effort to do that would be
counterproductive. And I'm asking you, did Jeh Johnson ask you
to change your statement?
Ms. Saldana. He did not.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did anybody else ask you to change your
statement?
Ms. Saldana. Change the--no.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did Jeh Johnson ask you to clarify your
statement?
Ms. Saldana. We discussed a clarification to make sure
people understood that we need to work with State and local
governments to ensure public safety in our communities.
Mr. Mulvaney. So when I asked you if we could help you by
requiring State and local governments to cooperate with you and
you said, ``Thank you, Amen, yes,'' that meant, ``Thank you,
Amen, no,'' is that what you're telling me now?
Ms. Saldana. No.
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you still want us to help you force the
localities to cooperate with you on turning over criminals to
your agency?
Ms. Saldana. Sir, the forcing part is the issue. The
forcing is not going to bring these people to the table. It's
the efforts of all of us to make clear that this new program--
--
Mr. Mulvaney. Would you like us to pass a law that would
require local governments to turn dangerous illegal immigrants
directly over to ICE?
Ms. Saldana. No.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why not?
Ms. Saldana. Because we're in the middle of--not only
myself and our employees at ICE----
Mr. Mulvaney. You have given testimony that says----
Ms. Saldana. May I finish, sir?
Mr. Mulvaney. No. You may not. You have given testimony
that says that one of the reasons you're concerned about the
lack of cooperation is the safety of your agents. If we were to
pass a law that would require towns and cities to turn
dangerous criminal illegals directly over to your agents, would
that make your agents safer?
Ms. Saldana. We're working right now with those State and
local jurisdictions in order----
Mr. Mulvaney. Great answer to a question I did not ask. If
Congress were to pass a law to do that, would your people be
safer?
Ms. Saldana. If you passed a law requiring them?
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes.
Ms. Saldana. I don't know that that can happen, sir,
because we're in the middle of discussions with State and
local----
Mr. Mulvaney. I didn't ask you that. If we did it, would it
make your--we all know the answer, and the answer is yes. I
will get a chance to ask you the last question, the question is
this, apparently either you or Jeh Johnson wants to put the
politics ahead of the safety of your people. And I find that
absolute unacceptable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Russell. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Illinois, Ms. Kelly.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ms. Saldana, would you say
what you wanted to say?
Ms. Saldana. Yes. And that is my interest is in public
safety and the safety of our officers. And if we are allowed a
period of time to work with State and local jurisdictions in
order to accomplish what I hope this committee wants to
accomplish, and that is removing serious criminal convicted
aliens from the United States, then that's what we're working
towards. And that's how we got Los Angeles to say they would
cooperate with us and Contra Costa, as well, in California. And
we're working with several other jurisdictions. Always best,
always best to try to get people to come to the table and
discuss matters than to force things down their throats.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Roth, I have reviewed your report from last month on
the Department's need to strengthen data collection for its
enforcement efforts. I think we all agree that, ideally, DHS
would always be collecting more, not less, data. I would like
to explore how this can best be done when resources may already
be stretched thin. Last November, the Department's memo on
exercising prosecutorial discretion stated, ``It is generally
preferable to exercise such discretion as early in the case or
proceeding as possible in order to preserve government
resources.''
Director, do you agree with that?
Ms. Saldana. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. And can you explain specifically how the use of
prosecutorial discretion helps preserve ICE's resources?
Ms. Saldana. As I testified earlier, I am, up until
December 16 or 22, I was the United States attorney for North
Texas, responsible for 100 counties, working with 100 different
jurisdictions locally, as well as local police departments. I
had the responsibility for over 3,000, the enforcement of over
3,000 Federal statutes as a United States attorney. There's no
way with 100 lawyers that I could bring to bear enforcement of
all those laws.
So part of my job, and it's a difficult part, is deciding
which cases will have the greatest impact on community safety
because I can't take every one of them. That is the very reason
why these executive actions the Secretary announced on November
20 are essential because we have a multibillion dollar budget,
almost $6 billion, but there are 11.5 million people in the
country unlawfully. We have over 2 million in process, at one
stage or another of immigration proceedings. There is no way, I
would think, that this committee would support funding the
removal of each one of those because it would cost billions and
billions of dollars. So prosecutorial discretion is just
essential.
Ms. Kelly. And how frequently would you say a typical ICE
agent exercises this discretion on the job?
Ms. Saldana. Every day it's a part of their job. And they
come across different situations at all times.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Roth, in your written testimony, you said: Given the
shear number of removable aliens and the finite resources
available to remove them, DHS has decided it must focus on
those who pose the greatest risk.
As a former prosecutor, you used prosecutorial discretion
many times, isn't that right?
Mr. Roth. That's correct.
Ms. Kelly. Would you agree that this discretion involves
making judgment calls?
Mr. Roth. Absolutely.
Ms. Kelly. And, Mr. Roth, in writing the May 4 report, did
your office conduct a cost-benefit analysis as to how more
discretion data would improve enforcement outcomes, and why or
why not?
Mr. Roth. We were not able to simply because we don't know
how often prosecutorial discretion is used. I think, as
Director Saldana noted, we know how much is used later on in
the process, when ICE lawyers, for example, take people out of
the system. The thing that we don't know--and we think we
should know, and the Department agrees that they should know--
is how often that discretion is exercised at the very point of
encounter, which, as you know, would be the most cost-effective
way to do it. But until we actually understand what we're
talking about, it's impossible to do a cost-benefit.
Ms. Kelly. So DHS responded to a draft of the inspector
general's report by stating this data project will, ``provide a
framework for measuring and evaluating the Department's
enforcement actions from a range of perspectives.''
Is it fair to say that sometimes the use of this discretion
can be difficult to quantify?
Mr. Roth. The number of times you use the discretion should
be able to be quantified. Now, the reasons that you use it or
the judgment that is used is, obviously, something that will
vary depending on sort of what situation the officer has. But
the raw numbers themselves, and if I could just use an example,
we wrote an audit of the workforce enforcement that ICE does.
And there they do collect statistics. And one of the things
that jumped out at us in that audit was the fact that, for
example, New Orleans 5 percent of the time imposed fines, yet
Chicago did it 35 percent of the time. That raises the obvious
question, how is Chicago different than New Orleans? It might
be perfectly appropriate. But it certainly raises questions
that you want to ask. So until you collect that data, though,
you're not even going to be able to understand which questions
you should ask.
Ms. Kelly. I'm out of time. Thank you so much.
Mr. Russell. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Saldana, do you have any idea how many convicted
criminals have been arrested by ICE this year?
Ms. Saldana. I believe that number is, let's say for 2014,
it's 177,960. About 56 percent of those that were removed from
the country. Are you asking for 2015 thus far, sir?
Mr. Hice. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Saldana. I don't have that readily available but I'm
happy to provide it.
Mr. Hice. I would appreciate that. Would you have any idea
how many have been released this year?
Ms. Saldana. This year we have I think somewhere in the
neighborhood of--actually, I don't have that number, sir.
Mr. Hice. I'm assuming, then, you don't have any
projections this year from previous years?
Ms. Saldana. For?
Mr. Hice. For how many are going to be arrested, how many
are going to be released.
Ms. Saldana. No. Projections?
Mr. Hice. Yes.
Ms. Saldana. No, we don't.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, based on the last couple of years,
there's been over 50,00 released. So it would be my assumption,
then, we will continue down that trend. Last time that we had,
that you appeared here, I had spoken to the sheriff of Gwinnett
County, Georgia, which is one of the top five counties in the
country dealing with the problem of illegals being released in
their county. I was told by the sheriff before coming in here
that his department has had no communication whatsoever with
Homeland Security or ICE before criminals have been released
back into his county. We spoke about that, and you assured me
that you would start informing local law enforcement agents
when criminal aliens are released back into their communities.
Is that system--and, in fairness, you said you didn't know when
that would occur. My question is, is that system in place now?
Ms. Saldana. Well, I think what I said was: It is not
systematic. We have relationships all over the country where
people pick up the phone and call each other.
What I want is a systematic process. That's what I'm always
interested in, in establishing systems and procedures that will
assure that. That's what that Law Enforcement Notification
System is about that I mentioned in my opening statement, LENS,
which we have tested already in Texas, Louisiana, and one other
State, Virginia, I think, those three States. And we plan to
have all the States connected to a systematic notification
system by the end of the year.
Mr. Hice. Well, your comment to me was that your
Department, your agency would be informing local law
enforcement agents and departments when you release criminals
back into their communities. And that is not in place still?
Ms. Saldana. That has begun, sir, in three States, Texas
included, where we have a substantial amount of activity. It
is----
Mr. Hice. When is it going to be completed, I want to know
next time I call one of my sheriffs, that they will be able to
say to me that you contacted them, your Department contacted
them when thieves, murderers, rapists, whatever, have been
released back into their communities.
Ms. Saldana. As I said earlier, by year end, we should have
the entire country covered. And your department will get a
phone call this afternoon.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So you are saying to this committee that by
the end of the year, every local law enforcement agent
throughout the country will be notified before an illegal is
released back into their community?
Ms. Saldana. The way I described it, sir, it is a
notification system that goes through the State. You know, we
can't, I don't know, we have 254 counties in Texas, which is a
large number. What we ask them to do is to connect up with the
State notification system. We give the information to the
State. And the State has already in place----
Mr. Hice. So local law enforcement will not be notified,
the State will. So it will be left to the State to communicate
it abroad?
Ms. Saldana. Yes. And we're discussing it with the
Governors of those States. And people who implement the system,
they're more than happy to do this.
Mr. Hice. Does ICE or any other agency in our government
monitor the activities of criminals following their release?
Ms. Saldana. Many of them are released with conditions,
including supervision, reporting in, ankle bracelets, other
conditions that are imposed in making the decision to release
somebody under those conditions.
Mr. Hice. This is an issue that I think people are sick and
tired, Americans cannot fathom, cannot understand why illegal
individuals in this country who are repeat offenders of crime
are continually released back in their communities. They
shouldn't be in the country the first place, let alone walking
freely in our communities to the tunes of tens and tens and
tens of thousands.
And, Mr. Chairman, I just express my great concern with
this. And I yield my time.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Mexico,
Ms. Lujan Grisham, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm going to talk about a couple of folks in my district.
One young woman, Yuridia Loera was brought to this country when
she was 2 years old. She currently attends the University of
New Mexico, my alma matter. Because of DACA, frankly, she was
able to travel to Nicaragua and volunteer at a nonprofit for
underprivileged children. Now, Yuridia wants to attend medical
school and provide health care to underserved rural
communities. And given that that reflects the entire State and
we are in dire straits currently about making sure that we can
meet just primary care access issues pre-ACA, during ACA, and
the growing number of minority individuals in a minority-
majority State, this is a wonderful thing in a State like mine
and I can tell you in the Southwest in general.
Another woman, Marian Mendez Setta is a senior at UNM and
she's studying psychology and philosophy with a concentration
in pre-law. And maybe she'll go to my law school also at the
University of New Mexico. She comes from a low-income family.
And because of DACA, she's able to work to not only pay for her
school, but she helps her parents out financially as well. I do
the very same for my mother, very strong cultural values in my
Hispanic community.
Now, Chairman Chaffetz, I think, did an interesting thing
in this committee, and we're looking all around us at these
beautiful walls with images of hard-working individuals who are
dedicated to their work and their families and their
communities. Considering that Congress failed to act on
comprehensive immigration reform to ensure that everyone has
the opportunity to work, learn, and contribute to the country,
I support, frankly, the President's actions on immigration.
However, I have heard several concerns about
inconsistencies in how the President's actions are being
applied. Immigration advocacy groups have been tracking reports
concerning violations of the priorities memo. And after
receiving hundreds of phone calls, they are hearing that ICE
field offices may not be applying the priorities appropriately.
Furthermore, on April 15, over 100 organizations wrote to DHS,
Secretary Johnson, expressing similar concern. That letter
states, ``we have received numerous reports indicating that
several ICE offices are failing to comply with the priorities
memo.'' Even people who do not fall under any priority
whatsoever have been removed. Mr. Chairman, I would like to
enter this letter into the record.
Mr. Russell. Without objection.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you.
On top of this, we have most recently heard concerning
reports that ICE may be mining DMV databases to target low or
non-enforcement priority individuals, issues that I heard about
well before I was elected in 2012, not particularly related to
this priorities memo but consistent in patterns and practice
that I find not only very concerning but offensive.
Even as we speak, immigration advocates are fasting in
protest at ICE headquarters just down the street over ICE's
failure to apply prosecutorial discretion in line with the
memo.
Director Saldana, these mounting reports are extremely
upsetting. Can you explain to me the inconsistencies in how the
priorities, frankly, are being applied on the ground?
Ms. Saldana. Yes, of course.
As a matter, again, we're talking about priorities and the
fact that decisions on even arresting, removal, bond are all
made on the basis of these priorities and the judgment of the
person of all----
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Are you arguing that there are no
inconsistencies? Because so far, your statement to me is it's
being applied consistently, correctly, and adequately. I just
want to make sure I'm following you.
Ms. Saldana. No. No. No. I'm sorry, I didn't mean to say
that if I did. What I'm saying is every case is different,
Congresswoman. Every case is different. We have specifically
trained all our folks on the legal side and on the officer side
to look at all the facts and circumstances of that matter. So--
--
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I want to reclaim part of my time. Does
that mean that you don't think that--do you agree that you're
applying the priorities memo effectively? Because I don't think
that you are. And what I really want to know is what you can do
to assure me and this committee of your full compliance.
Ms. Saldana. As an example, the perception is not the
reality. Ninety-six percent of the people we currently detain
in our facilities meet priorities 1 and 2.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I'd have to say that I don't believe
that that's accurate in my community. And I will demonstrate
that in a much more direct way.
And I would like, Mr. Chairman, for that to also be
included as part of the record.
Mr. Russell. Without objection.
Mr. Russell. And the gentlelady's time is now expired.
Votes have just been called.
However. I do believe that we will have time to get through
the next two members' questions.
And, with that, the chair will now recognize the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, today, we are talking about a very emotional
issue, this goes beyond policy and really has to deal with
human life.
I'm very grateful for Mr. Roth, Mr. Rodriguez, and Ms.
Saldana for coming in today. But I do believe that we have got
to look at very closely as far as some of the problems we are
seeing.
The gentlewoman from New Mexico just talked a young lady
from DACA and how it was working out for her. Let me tell you
another example of someone from the--that was released even
after a drug charge, a gentleman by the name of Emmanuel
Hernandez, in my home State of North Carolina, murdered four
people. This was after he was a known gang member and after he
was picked up with a drug offense. He applied for DACA, and his
deportation was halted.
Ms. Saldana, earlier you brought in a book and laid it
there on the desk. The book basically is the Immigration
National Act. And I don't know if you're familiar with section
236-C, which is basically the detention of criminal aliens. Are
you familiar with that section, Ms. Saldana?
Ms. Saldana. Yes.
Mr. Walker. Let's take a look at that. And I'll read what
it says. It says: The Attorney General shall take into custody
any alien who is, A, is inadmissible by reason of having
committed any offense covered in section 212 and is deportable
by reason of having committed any offense covered in section
237. There's four offenses under that: Aggravated felony,
controlled substance, firearm possession, and espionage. That's
custody.
Now let me jump to the section that is No. 2, that's
release. It says: The Attorney General may release, okay,
only--``only,'' very key word--only if the alien satisfies the
Attorney General that the alien will not pose a danger to the
safety of other persons or of property and is likely to appear
for any scheduled proceeding.
Now, what is confusing to many of our American citizens is
why the lack of consistency here. So my question for you today
is, can you guarantee, is it safe that the most serious,
noncitizen illegals and aliens who have been recently ordered
to be deported, will they be removed under the President's
executive actions?
Ms. Saldana. They will, sir. But with respect to those that
are under an immigration court, I can't predict what the
immigration court will do. And, of course, that's a large
portion of the people that come through our proceedings. They
end up claiming some exemption or seeking asylum or something.
Their considerations are with USCIS and with the immigration
courts.
Mr. Walker. But according to the Immigration National Act
that you brought in and the paragraph that I just read under
release, that contradicts what the Attorney General says as far
as grounds to be released. Do you see the contradiction in
that?
Ms. Saldana. We're talking about the mandatory release--
mandatory custody provisions?
Mr. Walker. Yes.
Ms. Saldana. We abide by those.
Mr. Walker. Then please tell me why there is a growing
number, millions of noncitizens continue to remain in this
country illegally, of which some, obviously, are criminals, how
does the Department expect to address this increased danger to
our citizens? Tell me what is being done proactively to follow
basically the letter of the law by the Attorney General.
Ms. Saldana. Let me mention the, again, the, my guidance to
the field on March 13. I've actually visited with all the field
office directors--there's 26 of them, I believe--across the
country and have advised them how it is we're going to go about
our business and with respect to the considerations for any
individual being flight risk and safety, public safety. It's
just like any bond decisions that a court would make. And we
have trained them accordingly as well.
And then I want to point out the fact that I've established
this system back in March which specifically sets an extra
enhancement of supervisory approval over any release of a
convicted criminal that is being considered by a supervisor
with a signoff, by a pool of experts that I have at
headquarters who come in and review all of these releases. I'm
talking about March of 2015. The data that has been quoted has
been information relating to fiscal years 2008 through 2014. I
can't speak for what happened then. But I do know that we take
this very seriously at the agency. And that's why I instituted
that additional supervisory review of release of criminals.
Mr. Walker. Final question before I run out of time here,
what is the recidivism rate for all aliens who were previously
apprehended, subsequently released, and who have committed a
new crime? Do you have that number?
Ms. Saldana. I don't have it with me, but it's very low, I
mean, compared to certainly the recidivism rate in the
general----
Mr. Walker. Would you like to take, is there a round number
that you would like to suggest what it is?
Ms. Saldana. I can't. I won't speculate, sir. I can provide
that number.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Russell. Gentleman or, I'm sorry, the chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from D.C., Ms. Norton. And I would
ask for brevity so that we can accommodate the last two members
here.
Ms. Norton. I will remember that, Mr. Chairman.
There's concern in the District of Columbia because the
D.C. Council passed a law, it allows driver's licenses. There
have been some reports in the papers about ICE's use of DMV
data to initiate removal proceedings against immigrants. I
would have some concerns. And I'm wondering if you can tell me
whether DMV databases are being used for removal purposes.
Ms. Saldana. Not for removal purposes, ma'am. I will tell
you, since I've been in this position, since January, I've had
to run down more allegations and reports in the media that end
up yielding a case quite contrary to that which was reported.
Ms. Norton. You do have access, though, to these databases?
Ms. Saldana. We can check in with the Departments of Public
Safety of the different communities, may be required as part of
an investigation, for example. But not for removal purposes.
Ms. Norton. So you have to be granted them by the
jurisdiction?
Ms. Saldana. I'm pretty sure that it's the department of
public safety itself whatever jurisdiction we're in that
maintains that. And we would communicate with them to see if we
could get that information.
Ms. Norton. And if they wanted to refuse them, they could?
Ms. Saldana. Yes.
Ms. Norton. That's very important to clarify.
Mr. Chairman, I have here and would like to ask be entered
into the record the briefs filed in Texas v. The United States.
There are 15 States plus the District of Columbia that have
filed briefs in this case that say that there would be
improvement in their own economies. And I ask that these briefs
be entered into the record.
Mr. Russell. Without objection.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Saldana, Mr. Walker asked you earlier about the
recidivism rate for aliens who were previously apprehended,
subsequently released, and who have committed a new crime. You
said you do not have those numbers available?
Ms. Saldana. We have looked at them because we had this
question previously. And I just remember that it was
comparative to the regular criminal----
Mr. Carter. All right. Can you provide this committee with
those numbers please?
Ms. Saldana. Yes. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Mr. Chairman, will you note that those
numbers will be provided to us?
Mr. Russell. So noted.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Roth, in your report, you found that ICE field officers
said they might not have access to an individual's criminal
history or their country of origin. Is this correct?
Mr. Roth. The criminal history in their country of origin.
For example, if it's a Mexican national, they may not be able
to have the criminal history that may have occurred within
their country of origin.
Mr. Carter. So what happens when an ICE field agent doesn't
have this history?
Mr. Roth. Well, they're not able to evaluate it in the use
of their discretion.
Mr. Carter. Do other ICE officials have this, that
information?
Mr. Roth. This is a vulnerability that we found during the
course of our fieldwork that we notified ICE of. But my
understanding is largely the answer is no.
Mr. Carter. Why would the field officers not have that
information but some of the other officers may have it?
Mr. Roth. Well, I'm not 100 percent sure as to which
countries and what parts of ICE may have access to that
information.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Saldana, why would some of the ICE field
officers not have access to some of this information?
Ms. Saldana. Well, it needs to be provided by the country--
by the country in question. And some countries are more
cooperative with the United States than others.
Mr. Carter. So we just depend on them to give it to us? We
don't demand that they give it to us?
Ms. Saldana. Oh, we can demand. But there's not much we can
do. I'm working with the Department of State to try to help
with respect to countries that have been recalcitrant in their
cooperation with us to urge them to assist us. I even went to
China a couple of months ago to sign a repatriation agreement,
which is a very notable event, where they agreed to come to the
United States, send two people to the United States to actually
assist with repatriation. So we're making inroads. But,
diplomatically, it's a huge world.
Mr. Carter. I understand. But how can we expect the ICE
field agents to apply prosecutorial discretion without access
to those records? That's a lot to expect out of them, don't you
think?
Ms. Saldana. Yes, it is, sir. Again, as I said earlier,
every decision we make on custody bonds, decisions to remove or
put someone in immigration proceedings is made on the basis of
the information we have available. That's----
Mr. Carter. What if the information is not available? What
do we do then?
Ms. Saldana. With respect to other countries, we can try
MLAT, our procedure through countries asking for information
regarding a person's criminal history. We can try gentle
persuasion. But when push comes to shove, you all have
provided, the Congress has provided for certain punitive
measures to be taken against recalcitrant countries. But that's
something the Department of State is involved in.
Mr. Carter. Do we, so we ask the illegal aliens, we ask
their country for their criminal records?
Ms. Saldana. Yes.
Mr. Carter. But we don't always get it?
Ms. Saldana. Right.
Mr. Carter. And if we don't get it, then we're just--we
can't--we can't use discretion. I mean, I really--you know, we
want to do everything we can to give our field agents the
opportunity to perform their work and to do their duty. Yet, if
we can't get the information, I don't know how we're going to
do that. Would you agree? I mean, that's a real problem.
Ms. Saldana. It is a real problem. And we certainly
appreciate any help this committee can provide.
Mr. Carter. What can we do? Tell us what we can do to help
you.
Ms. Saldana. Well, I mean, I think there are statutes on
the book that provide for working with our countries. And when
they don't cooperate, perhaps going further with respect to
some punitive measures. But that's not something ICE does.
That's something the Department of State is charged with, the
laws that you all, the Congress, has passed with respect to
that.
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, that's all I have today. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back. I would like to
thank our witnesses for taking the time to appear before us
today.
Seeing no further business, without objection, the
subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:50 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
