- FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY DETECTION, RESPONSE, AND MITIGATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY DETECTION, RESPONSE, AND MITIGATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 20, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-157

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-066 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
Mike Flynn, Counsel
Sean Brebbia, Senior Counsel
William Marx, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Minority Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 20, 2016...................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Sanjeev Bhagowalia, Deputy Assistant Scretary for Information
Systems and Chief Information Officer, Department of Treasury
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     8
Mr. Steven C. Taylor, Chief Information Officer, Department of
State
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18
Mr. Andy Ozment, Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and
Communications, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23
Mr. Richard Barger, Chief Intelligence Officer, ThreatConnect,
Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

APPENDIX

Report titled, ``Liberty and Security in a Changing World,''
submitted by Mr. Lieu..........................................    64
LA Times article titled, ``4.5 Million Smartphones Were Lost or
Stolen in U.S. in 2013,'' submitted by Mr. Lieu................    65
Letter for the Record submitted by Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP...    66
Questions for the Record for Mr. Steven Taylor, submitted by Mr.
Hurd...........................................................    69
Questions for the Record for Mr. Steven Taylor, submitted by Mr.
Farenthold.....................................................    83
Questions for the Record for Mr. Andy Ozment, submitted by Mr.
Farenthold.....................................................    87
Questions for the Record for Mr. Andy Ozment, , submitted by Ms.
Kelly..........................................................    91
Questions for the Record for Mr. Steven Taylor, submitted by Mr.
Connolly.......................................................   101

FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY DETECTION, RESPONSE, AND MITIGATION

----------

Wednesday, April 20, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:34 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hurd, Chaffetz, Farenthold,
Walker, Blum, Kelly, Connolly, and Lieu.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology will
come to order. And without objection, the chair is authorized
to declare a recess at any time.
Good morning, everyone.
Every day, Federal agencies face a barrage of attacks on
their information systems from a number of different actors.
Attacks on both the public and private sectors consistently
reveal one common truth: No one is immune.
In December of last year, Juniper Networks announced that
malicious code had been placed in its ScreenOS software leaving
a gaping vulnerability in one of its legacy products. This
particular vulnerability may have allowed outside actors to
monitor network traffic, potentially decrypt information, and
even take control of firewalls.
Within a matter of days, the company provided its clients,
which include various U.S. intelligence entities and at least
12 Federal agencies, with an emergency security patch.
DHS and other law enforcement agencies acted swiftly to
notify Federal agencies of the breach in Juniper's security
advisory. Both of their actions may have averted a potentially
devastating breach of sensitive data. This is just one
sophisticated example of the attacks that U.S. companies and
their Federal clients face on a daily basis.
In January of this year, the committee sent letters to the
heads of 24 Federal agencies requesting an inventory of systems
running the aforementioned software. Additionally, the
committee asked for an update of their progress in installing
the corresponding security patch.
Of the 12 agencies affected, 3, including the Department of
Treasury, took longer than 50 days to fully install patches and
mitigate the threat posed by this vulnerability. This is
absolutely unacceptable.
The inability of Federal agencies to maintain a
comprehensive view and inventory of their information systems
and to respond to Congress in a timely manner cannot be the
status quo.
Last December, Congress passed landmark information-sharing
legislation, the Cybersecurity Act of 2015, which creates a
voluntary cybersecurity information-sharing process to
encourage public and private sector entities to collaborate and
share information. Moreover, the bill established the
Department of Homeland Security as the sole portal for
companies to share information with the Federal Government.
With their newly codified role, I look forward to working
with Dr. Ozment and DHS on how to strengthen their own posture
and ensure that they possess the necessary technical tools to
detect and mitigate threats and disseminate threat information
within the Federal Government. Only by fostering this framework
where government and private entities are able to freely share
knowledge of security vulnerabilities, threat indicators, and
signatures can we be sure that our network defenses are getting
the best intelligence available.
In addition, we must continue to learn from the private
sector. Industry leaders like ThreatConnect and FireEye are
consistently pushing the envelope in what is possible in
cybersecurity. The government should not seek to compete with
them, but rather they should harness these engines of
innovation, learn from them, and safely cooperate with them
under the guidance of good sense and personal liberty.
I hope that this hearing will serve as a starting line for
a larger conversation on attribution. Various international
groups and state-sponsored actors are constantly attempting to
steal military secrets and expose the personally identifiable
information of American citizens and we cannot stand idly by
while this happens. I believe that attribution is a form of
deterrence.
This hearing presents an opportunity to learn how Federal
agencies can improve their overall cybersecurity postures,
share more timely and relevant information, and work with the
private sector in a way that benefits all involved, while
respecting the institutions of commerce and privacy.
I welcome our witnesses and look forward to hearing your
testimony today.
I would like to yield to the chairman from the great State
of Utah, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. And Mr. Hurd, I thank
you for your leadership on this issue. You are such a valuable
part of our team in making this happen.
But to those that are in the Federal Government, we've got
to up our game. I was elected the same time as President Obama
was. Starting in 2009, if you look at the expenditure on the IT
budget, the Federal Government has spent more than $525 billion
on IT and it doesn't work. It doesn't work.
And so I see that the President has a proposal, he needs
another $3 billion. As if $525 billion wasn't enough, he needs
$528 billion in order to actually solve these problems. I have
a hard time believing that we're just 3 more billion away from
actually solving this.
I understand the predicament that we're in because as best
I can see on a macro level, we are spending about 70 percent of
our $80-plus billion a year now on legacy systems. And it is
difficult, to say the least, on making that transition from
those legacy systems to newer, more progressive, more secure
networks and using the basic software.
I got to review a document from the Department of Justice.
Was on WordPerfect. WordPerfect was a great company back in
1990. They were a Utah company, and had a good product, but
they still are using WordPerfect at the Department of Justice.
And I'm sorry, with all due respect to Corel, it maybe is not
the most up to speed and very difficult to share with others.
And it just begs the question of why in the world we
continue to have to teach people how to use COBOL. We have some
that I have heard are using punch cards still. I mean, it's
unbelievable how far behind we are. And yet, I don't think it's
for a lack of funding.
It is just unexcusable for, in my mind--it is just
inexcusable, I should say--inexcusable that we need a patch and
it takes 50 days to do it. Fifty, really? Come on. Patching a
vulnerability should be priority one and should be done within
the day. There is no excuse for waiting nearly 2 months to
patch what is known as a vulnerability.
At the Department of Education, it's something Mr. Ozment,
I hope, would look at personally, because the inspector general
was able to go into the Department of Education and look into
their system, surf around for 3 days, and come out undetected,
despite their deploying EINSTEIN, which begs the question of,
with all due respect to the inspector general, I'm guessing
they are good, but they are probably not as good as the
Russians, the Chinese, the others that do this type of thing
for a living.
And so I do agree with Mr. Hurd that one of the things we
have to talk about is how to fight back. And attribution, just
flat-out acknowledgment and pointing the finger at who is doing
what, might be a form of deterrent. But I do think it's one of
the big questions--we won't answer it today--but I do think
it's a big question for those of us in Congress, how do you
fire back? You know, if somebody fired a weapon on us we could
fire back at them. But if they're attacking us online, how do
we fight back? And I don't know the answer to that.
But we need all of your help here today. We have got a lot
on the line, a lot of personal information, a lot of
vulnerabilities for the country itself. And so we thank you for
your expertise and your commitment. We want to be part of the
solution, not part of the problem, not just fire arrows. We are
supposed to be oversight, but then government reform. And we
can, I think, help you solve these problems, because this is
the first time in the Congress we have actually had a
subcommittee focused on just information technology.
And so we are going to highlight the problems, but our next
step is, how do we solve those? And, collectively, we need to
come together in a bipartisan way and help you accomplish that
and achieve that. So that's the spirit in which we do this.
I thank the gentleman. Thank you for the time. I yield
back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman.
And now this subcommittee in 17, 18 short months has done,
I think, a lot of good work in government reform and
identifying the problem. And part of that is because of the
bipartisan nature in which we do that. And we are able to do
that because of the leadership of the ranking member on the
Subcommittee on Information Technology, Ms. Kelly from
Illinois, and I would like to recognize her for her opening
statement.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing on how Federal agencies detect, respond, and mitigate
the growing number of cyber threats they encounter each year.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here.
The Federal Government and the private sector are facing a
volume of cyber attacks that just a few years ago would have
been unimaginable. According to a new report by security firm
Symantec, 54 zero-day vulnerabilities were discovered in 2015,
more than twice as many as in 2014. Compared to the previous
year, in 2015, the instances of ransomware increased by 35
percent.
We need to ensure that the Federal Government has the
resources necessary to respond to these vulnerabilities and
threats. Agencies are spending up to three-quarters of their
information technology budgets maintaining legacy systems that
were never designed to deal with today's cybersecurity risks.
Adding to the problem is the increasing difficulties agencies
are having in filling more than 10,000 vacant cyber positions
across the Federal Government.
As Tony Scott, the chief information officer for the
Federal Government, has said, and I quote, ``We have a broad
surface area of old, outdated technology that is hard to
secure, expensive to operate, and on top of all of that, the
skill sets needed to maintain those systems are disappearing
rather rapidly.''
But we are making progress in fixing that. I, along with my
colleagues on this subcommittee and Ranking Member Cummings,
were original cosponsors of Congressman Steny Hoyer's
Information Technology Modernization Act. The act would
authorize the creation of an Information Technology
Modernization Fund to help Federal agencies upgrade their aging
information technology systems. Over the first 10 years the
fund would help facilitate upgrades to $12 billion worth of
civilian IT programs and make sure the Federal Government has
the most effective, secure IT infrastructure possible.
Legislation like the ITMA sends a clear message that
Congress understands the challenges facing our Nation's Federal
IT systems. But there is more to be done. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today when their threat response
processes in place, and I look forward to working with you, Mr.
Chairman, to do what's needed to ensure that we keep the
Federal Government secure from the growing number of cyber
threats.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to thank the ranking member for her
comments.
We will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
Mr. Hurd. Now I'd like to recognize our panel of witnesses.
I'm pleased to welcome Mr. Sanjeev Bhagowalia. He's the deputy
assistant secretary for information systems and chief
information officer at the Department of Treasury. Mr. Steven
Taylor, chief information officer at the Department of State.
Dr. Andy Ozment, assistant secretary for cybersecurity and
communication at the Department of Homeland Security. And Mr.
Richard Barger, chief intelligence officer at ThreatConnect
Incorporated.
I would like to welcome you all.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. So please rise and raise your
right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
And let the record reflect the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes, and your entire written statement will
be made part of the record.
Mr. Bhagowalia, we will start with you, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF SANJEEV BHAGOWALIA

Mr. Bhagowalia. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
Treasury's approach to the detection and mitigation of
cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
Treasury relies on technology to meet our mission of
serving the American taxpayers and acting as a steward of the
national economy. Cybersecurity is one of the top priorities of
Treasury, not only for the CIO, but also for the Department and
bureau senior leadership. We are continuously and incrementally
improving in management oversight over the IT environment,
including cybersecurity. We are leveraging synergy
opportunities across the enterprise through authorities in law,
like FITARA and FISMA, to more effectively use our people,
policy, processes, technology, and governance in cyberspace.
Detecting and mitigating vulnerabilities in our environment
before they are exploited by our adversaries is an essential
component in Treasury's ``defense-in-depth'' strategy.
I have divided my testimony into two parts. The first part
will explain how we tackle vulnerability mitigation of the
Department, and the second part will outline how we participate
in the governmentwide Federal cybersecurity community.
Part one, vulnerability detection, reporting, response, and
mitigation within Treasury. As you know, Treasury is a large,
geographically and technically diverse enterprise with bureaus
having widely varying missions requiring widely varying IT
environments. While Treasury bureaus are empowered to make IT
decisions necessary to execute their individual missions and
carry out operational security functions within their
environments, the Treasury CIO is accountable to ensure that
those decisions properly consider security implications and
evaluate risk and vulnerabilities.
Treasury has aligned our departmental cybersecurity
strategy with the five-part NIST national Cybersecurity
Framework and the Cybersecurity National Action Plan, CNAP, to
ensure common objectives across the enterprise.
Vulnerability detection. IT companies, government agencies,
security researchers, and others identify thousands of security
weaknesses each year. Critical vulnerabilities are a far
smaller number, in hundreds. Vulnerability detection requires a
multidimensional approach involving asset management, automated
tools, monitoring of communication channels, and human
analysis. The foundation of good comprehensive vulnerability
detection is strong asset management.
To this end, Treasury has policies in place requiring
bureaus to perform regular asset and vulnerability inventory
scans using automated tools. Treasury maintains a central
Department-wide security operations center that operates around
the clock. It's called the SOC. The SOC monitors classified and
unclassified government channels, as well as open source and
industry channels, for news of critical vulnerabilities.
In response, reporting, mitigation of known
vulnerabilities, we follow the maxim that cybersecurity is
about risk management. Bureau IT organizations undertake risk
analysis for each vulnerability and schedule testing and patch
deployment as appropriate. A risk analysis may result in
several mitigation approaches, such as patching, instituting
compensating security controls, and migrating to a new software
or hardware solution. Treasury and its bureaus start by
remediating vulnerabilities on assets with the greatest risk
exposure first and then moving systematically to remediate the
remaining assets.
The recent Juniper vulnerability offers an example of this
process in action. Table 1 in my written testimony illustrates
how 57 affected devices across Treasury were remediated from a
time and risk perspective. Treasury coordinated an
enterprisewide response to the Juniper vulnerability within a
couple of hours of receiving the information from open source
vendor channels and DHS. Treasury fixed 25 percent of the
patches within a day, 84 percent within a week, and 86 percent
within 2 weeks, and 93 percent 7 weeks. But if you look at it
from a risk lens, we fixed 40 out of the 57 devices,
representing 100 percent of high-risk devices, within 6 days.
Of the remaining 17 low-risk devices, 13, or 76 percent, were
completed by February 4, and the remaining 4 devices were
completed over the next 10 days.
A detailed analysis determined that the configuration posed
low risk of the exploitation of the vulnerability because the
devices were not directly connected to the Internet, were not
directly affected by the vulnerability, and each had multiple
layers of compensating controls in place.
So a challenge faced by large agencies in complying with
governmentwide mandates to address particular vulnerabilities
is the need to balance operational and security risk. In many
cases the device must be patched as part of a complex
operational system with several legacy components that may not
be compatible with the security fix. So we respectfully request
and suggest that factor should be considered in reporting.
Could we have done it a little bit faster? Yes.
Part two, Treasury's role in governmentwide vulnerability
detection, response, and mitigation. I would like to thank DHS
for the leadership role in coordinating Federal cybersecurity.
Treasury fully participated in the EINSTEIN program and looks
forward to EINSTEIN 3A. The CDM program led by DHS will help us
move as the entire U.S. Government from federated compliance to
integrated continuous monitoring and mitigation.
Treasury is an enthusiastic participant in the CDM program.
We expect CDM will improve situational awareness regarding
vulnerabilities and will move us to better automation of
tracking in real time.
In conclusion, while Treasury has established a solid
procedural and operational foundation to identify and mitigate
vulnerabilities, our adversaries are constantly changing their
methods. I see two opportunities where congressional support
could aid our efforts.
First, hiring and retaining cybersecurity staff remains a
challenge. We ask for continued support to streamline hiring
and offering appropriate incentives to attract and retain that
talent.
Second, we ask for some consideration in the fiscal year
2017 budget request for a cybersecurity enhancement account
which will enable us to keep pace with the rapidly evolving
adversaries through targeted and accountable spending.
Thank you for your attention to this important matter. I
appreciate this opportunity to testify today, and I will be
glad to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bhagowalia follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Taylor, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN C. TAYLOR

Mr. Taylor. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly,
distinguished members, thank you for inviting me to testify
about the Department of State's cybersecurity program.
The Department of State, as the lead U.S. foreign affairs
agency, has over 70,000 employees in our 275 overseas and 30-
plus domestic locations. Like all government agencies and
businesses, particularly organizations the size of the
Department, we face a dilemma. The Department relies on the
Internet and email to conduct our day-to-day operations,
communicating with U.S. and foreign citizens and organizations
about a wide variety of issues. We use these tools to support
passport and visa applications, to communicate about foreign
policy initiatives, and to conduct the day-to-day business of
the Department.
We also know that email and the Internet are avenues
through which our networks and databases can be attacked. As a
breach of our own unclassified email system in 2014
demonstrated, our adversaries see information handled by the
Department and many other U.S. Government agencies as a
desirable target. Annually, we experience millions of attempts
to breach our networks and gain possession of our information.
Protecting our information as we face increasingly
sophisticated, frequent, and well-organized cyber attacks is a
top priority for the Department of State. The Bureaus of
Information Resource Management and the Diplomatic Security
share the role of defending our networks through our joint
security operations center and through collaborative long-range
planning.
Alongside our partner Federal agencies, we've developed
increasingly robust defenses as the sophistication and
intensity of these threats increases. The foundation of our
cybersecurity framework is the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act, or FISMA, along with OMB guidance and the
National Institute for Standards and Technology guidelines. But
we go far beyond these guidelines to protect our network and
data while protecting privacy and civil liberties.
The Department of Homeland Security serves as a first line
of defense by filtering our traffic through the EINSTEIN system
which detects and blocks cyber attacks on Federal agencies and
through its trusted Internet connections and continuous
diagnostics and mitigation initiatives. In addition, we monitor
our networks with an extensive defensive toolset.
We also make great efforts to educate our network users so
that they, themselves, are defending our systems. Annually, the
Department of State employees must complete security and
privacy awareness training. In addition, network users must
answer a security challenge question prior to logging on to the
systems each and every day.
We amplify the effectiveness of our defenses through
partnerships with US-CERT, the Department of Homeland Security,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the National Security
Agency, U.S. Digital Services, and other agencies in the
private sector. Our partners in the intelligence community,
DHS, and other agencies in the private sector perform
penetration testing to ensure our defenses are capable of
withstanding persistent attacks. They also provide us with a
steady stream of information about probable sources, methods of
attack, and recommended countermeasures.
We recognize that intrusion is possible even with the best
defenses. Today we train and prepare for a wide range of cyber
threats. Some can be contained by removing a hard drive, while
others may require that we take a system offline. We are
constantly working with our partners to defend against the
known and evolving threats.
Looking to the future, we are creating a safe zone between
our data and the Internet through segmentation of our networks,
by reengineering our business practices, and leveraging cloud
services. The most powerful and promising tools for our defense
are effective risk management, our public and private
partnerships, clearly defined agency roles, effective
information sharing, employee education, and of course next
generation technology.
We appreciate the support on cybersecurity issues, and we
look forward to working with Congress and our partners to
defend our critical information and systems. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Taylor.
Dr. Ozment, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDY OZMENT

Mr. Ozment. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today.
Recent compromises clearly demonstrate the challenge facing
the Federal Government in protecting our systems and networks
against sophisticated, agile, and persistent threats.
Addressing these threats is an important shared responsibility.
Today I will focus on how we protect Federal civilian
departments and agencies. It is important to note that each
agency is responsible for managing its own cybersecurity risk
under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act, or
FISMA 2014. My organization assists agencies in performing that
risk management through four lines of effort.
First, we provide cybersecurity protections where it is
effective and cost efficient. This baseline is principally
provided by two programs. The EINSTEIN program detects and
blocks cyber attacks outside of agency perimeters, and the
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM program, provides
tools for agencies to identify and prioritize vulnerabilities
within their networks.
Second, we measure and motivate agencies to implement best
practices through risk assessments and targeted guidance.
Third, we serve as a hub for cybersecurity information
sharing between the government and the private sector through
automated means whenever possible.
And fourth, we provide incident response assistance to
agencies.
The committee is well aware that cybersecurity
vulnerabilities are all too common. My organization serves a
key role in helping agencies resolve significant
vulnerabilities.
Upon learning of a new vulnerability, our first priority is
to rapidly promulgate actionable information to our partners.
When the vulnerability is particularly critical, we hold an
emergency interagency coordination call. These calls allow DHS
to quickly convey key information to chief information security
officers across the Federal civilian government.
Additionally, we share information through secure portals
managed by our National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center, or NCCIC.
After disseminating information about a significant
vulnerability, DHS at times collects information about
governmentwide remediation progress. This information is used
for two purposes: to understand the prevalence of a particular
vulnerability across government and to drive individual
agencies to more quickly implement required mitigations.
Currently, this data-collection process is largely manual,
but the CDM program will fundamentally change this paradigm.
Through the CDM program, DHS will provide civilian agencies
with tools to monitor their internal networks. CDM will allow
us to shift from current manual methods of collecting
vulnerability data to automated data collection.
We have provided CDM Phase 1 tools to 97 percent of the
Federal civilian government. Agencies are now deploying these
Phase 1 tools on their networks. But this is not a simple or
easy process. Deploying new technologies across 23 agencies and
over 2 million users is a significant undertaking. We will see
incremental progress over the next year and expect the first
agency data to be available in early fiscal year 2017.
It is also important to note what CDM will not do. The
first phase of CDM will detect vulnerabilities in workstations,
servers, network infrastructure, and operating systems in
devices like routers. But other devices, like printers, will be
identified by these tools, but will not be assessed for
vulnerabilities.
Perhaps most importantly, CDM relies on individual agencies
to rapidly deploy these sensors across their networks and to
use CDM data to, in fact, address the identified
vulnerabilities.
Even after learning of a vulnerability, agencies have
varied capabilities to fix the problems. We can also provide
agencies with technical assistance and consultation upon
request. These services help agencies mitigate complex
vulnerabilities and design more secure systems and assets.
We appreciate the help of Congress in passing several key
statutes for Federal cybersecurity over the past 2 years,
including modernizing FISMA and enacting the Cybersecurity Act
of 2015.
This year, the fiscal year 2017 President's budgets funds
several activities that will significantly enhance our ability
to manage vulnerability detection and mitigation across the
Federal civilian executive branch.
First, the fiscal year 2017 budget funds a further
acceleration of the CDM program and a new CDM phase focused on
securing high-value data on agency networks.
Second, the budget provides resources for additional
personnel to help agencies remediate complex vulnerabilities or
to design more secure systems.
Finally, the budget funds more proactive assessment teams
using the same techniques as malicious hackers, known as red
teams.
With the help of Congress, we will continue driving towards
additional automation and deploy the resources required to
support expedited remediation. This must be a shared effort.
DHS, our partner agencies, and Congress must join together to
ensure that vulnerabilities are rapidly mitigated before
sensitive information or government services are placed at
risk.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Ozment follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Dr. Ozment.
Mr. Barger, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD BARGER

Mr. Barger. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear here
today.
My name is Rich Barger. I'm the chief intelligence officer
and cofounder of ThreatConnect, a Virginia-based security
company. I lead our research team. It's responsible for
tracking existing and emerging threats, to ensure that our
software platform is uniting security teams, their processes,
and their technologies to bring together a cohesive unity of
effort so that organizations can more efficiently conduct
intelligence-driven security operations.
ThreatConnect was founded in 2011 and our platform launched
in 2013. Since then, we have seen 40 percent of the Fortune 100
use our platform and amassed over 9,000 global users.
Today my testimony will focus on fragmentation as the root
cause behind our continuing struggle to detect, respond to, and
mitigate modern threats. The four key areas I will discuss are
people, processes, technologies and community.
Our customers within both public and private sectors often
express the same problem, but they do so in different ways.
Fragmentation across their security operations is both their
biggest frustration as well as their biggest risk. Whether they
are a global financial services firm, a U.S. energy company, or
a Federal agency, the fissures that exist across people,
processes, and technologies create the very footholds into our
networks that give malicious actors access to our finances,
sensitive personal data, and corporate intellectual property.
Now, it's important to understand that information security
is heavy work. There is no easy button. There is no silver-
bullet solution. Today's network defenders face a gargantuan
task of protecting networks that were not originally designed
with security in mind.
In terms of security teams and practitioners, as we
increase our numbers of individuals and teams required to work
together, organizational agility, transparency, and situational
awareness will often suffer, making us our own worst enemy. Too
often as an organization's domain expertise and institutional
memory is scattered across these diverse teams, share drives
and emails, it is often rendered functionally inaccessible.
Fragmentation also exists across the executive staff, from
C-suites to boards. There is a communication deficit which
negatively impacts leadership's ability to interpret and
prioritize core challenges and subsequently leads to
ineffective decisionmaking.
This brings us to process. There is no one-size-fits-all
approach. Enterprises, much like snowflakes, are made of the
same elements but uniquely configured. Different business
objectives drive different business processes and
multidisciplinary security operations reflect a company's
overarching sector, vertical, legal, and regulatory
requirements.
In a lot of cases the answer to, ``Why do you do it this
way?'' is simply, ``We've always done it this way.'' It's much
easier to advocate for a new tool or more head count.
Optimizing process seems mundane and intelligible by
comparison. But this is the dirty little secret. Developing
coordinated intelligence-driven processes is the linchpin to
identify, protect, and respond to threats in an efficient,
measurable way.
In terms of technology, security teams worldwide feel that
they spend too much time wrangling their various security
solutions. Instead, they should be delivering that much-needed
breathing room for these overburdened teams. Instead, these
solutions often consume additional resources, and many are not
designed to be interoperable. Better orchestration of security
systems creates a combined-arms approach that allows the sum of
the parts to yield mutually supporting effects against threats.
The first three areas, people, processes and technologies,
are internal to the enterprise. The last source of
fragmentation is at the community level, outside the
enterprise. Sharing today centers around atomic indicators of
compromise.
Now, this is a good start, but we need to do more of it and
we need to also include sharing of the recipes that created the
indicators in the first place. So let's continue to evolve
today's baseline sharing practices to our broader goal of
cross-sector coordination and collaboration.
In conclusion, the disconnect between expectation and
reality that fragmentation presents is a catalyst which is
elevating the priority of enterprise security within the
corporate structure. This rise must continue, and organizations
must be properly incentivized to look at enterprise security as
a critical business function.
The security professionals of tomorrow must be educated and
enabled to meet the current demand of security talent, and the
market must drive the need for interoperable security
technologies. The gap between compromise and detection is not
closing, and that is why we are committed to reducing that
thorny reality of fragmentation across both public and private
sector security operations.
I thank you for your time, and I look forward to any of
your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Barger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
And I would like to recognize first, for the first set of
questions, my colleague from the great State of Texas, Mr.
Farenthold. He is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I'm going to start with you, Mr. Ozment.
The FBI for years has been pushing for encryption backdoors
so they can easily access device content. However, security
experts, including Ash Carter and NSA Director Admiral Rogers,
as well as former leaders from the intelligence community, have
all said that encryption is essential to national security,
cybersecurity, and economic security.
What is your take on the call for back doors? Do you think
that makes us safer or less safe, and why?
Mr. Ozment. Thank you, sir.
The administration has highlighted a number of times that
this is a very complicated issue with legitimate and important
perspectives on both sides of the issue. We do have law
enforcement concerns and the need to access data from malicious
adversaries, whether they be terrorists or criminals, to deter
and catch those individuals responsible for malicious actions.
At the same time, from a cybersecurity perspective, we want
more broad and secure encryption and other technologies to be
widely disseminated.
I would reflect the administration's position here that we
do need a national conversation on this issue, and I think it's
important that Congress has taken this issue up and has focused
on it.
Mr. Farenthold. All right.
Mr. Barger, do you have a take on that?
Mr. Barger. So the encryption issue is a very, very
complicated subject. I would encourage the government to
consider how they should be able to conduct investigations in
striking a balance between privacy and also the need----
Mr. Farenthold. We see in the case of the San Bernardino
terrorist's iPhone that the FBI hired a hacker to break into,
and they, the FBI, won't tell us how they did it. Haven't they
discovered a cyber vulnerability in iPhones that needs to be
disclosed so it can be patched?
Mr. Barger. Well, I don't necessarily know the situation,
the sources and methods which they applied to that, but it
seems that they have found a creative workaround to the
environmental conditions in which they were forced to operate
and have been able to carry their investigation forward.
Whether or not that was used for a specific vulnerability, I
wouldn't know.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, let's shift a little bit here to
the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act. And since DHS is
kind of the hub, as you say, for that, what kind of success are
we having on that? Are you tracking how many attacks have been
shared that way and whether companies are actually applying the
information that's being shared there? Do we have some numbers
on any successes or failures there?
Mr. Ozment, that's clearly in your alley.
Mr. Ozment. Thank you, Representative.
So we have, as you know, that Congress passed this act in
December of 2015, and gave DHS some fairly aggressive
deadlines. I'm proud to report that we did meet those deadlines
and the Secretary of Homeland Security formally certified that
the system was live on March 17 of this year.
We will grow the system incrementally. We are not going to
reach all of the American economy in just a few months. I'm
very happy with our rate of growth to date. We have 14 non-
Federal entities currently connected to our server and 82 who
are in the process of connecting the server who have signed our
terms of use.
So there's clearly an interest in doing this. It does
require the other participant to build some IT infrastructure
on their side. So it's like we've built a phone system and we
have a phone. They also have to acquire a phone before they can
call us.
Mr. Farenthold. So you've been up and going a month now. Is
that correct? Roughly a month?
Mr. Ozment. That's right.
Mr. Farenthold. So have there been any threats shared? I
mean, do you have a number?
Mr. Ozment. We have shared over 2,000 indicators to the
private sector and we have received additional indicators that
the private sector did not allow us to share onward to other
companies but that we did share internally within the Federal
Government.
It is important to note that an indicator does not equal an
incident. And so a company or government agency can learn about
an indicator from a failed attack just as they can learn from a
successful attack. So these do not all represent incidents.
They represent ``be on the lookout for this bad guy'' activity.
Mr. Farenthold. And one of the big concerns with the act
was the sharing of personally identifiable information. How
much personally identifiable information are we seeing coming
and going with this?
Mr. Ozment. We have multiple layers of protection to
protect privacy. First, companies are required to vet what they
share themselves. We have some automated mechanisms to prevent
inappropriate or incorrect information from being shared. And
then there are a few types of information that would require
human review.
The way that we block in an automated way inappropriate
information from being shared is that we just don't accept it,
so it's not even possible to send it to us. So I can't tell you
how many of those blocks have occurred. I can tell you that our
human review has not identified any inappropriate information,
to my knowledge.
Mr. Farenthold. I will dive into this a little bit deeper
if we get a second round of questioning. I see my time has
expired.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Kelly, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
According to its Web site, the United States Computer
Emergency Readiness Team, US-CERT's role is to, and I quote,
``leads efforts to improve the Nation's cybersecurity posture,
coordinate cyber information sharing, and proactively manage
cyber risk to the Nation.''
Dr. Ozment, can you explain what that means?
Mr. Ozment. Absolutely. So the US-CERT is a part of the
NCCIC, our National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center. They have three broad roles shared by my
larger organization. First is to promulgate best practices,
help companies and Federal agencies understand what do they
need to do to protect themselves?
Second, is to share information about what the adversaries
are doing so that those companies and agencies can adapt their
defenses to the changing behavior of our adversaries.
And third is to respond to incidents. US-CERT will respond
to incidents, whether in the private sector or Federal
Government or State, local, and tribal and territorial
governments. We do that either by going on site, which we try
to minimize because of the expense and overhead of doing it, or
we can help remotely, sometimes just by analyzing the malicious
software that was used in an intrusion, other times by giving
more customized help to the situation.
We prioritize the victims that come to us for help based
upon our national risk. But we really encourage companies to
reach out to the Federal Government, whether law enforcement or
through us doesn't matter, we will connect it on the back end,
and let us know about incidents so that we can come and help.
Ms. Kelly. So if an government agency's computer is hacked
and you say that part of your effort is to respond, does that
include forensic analysis? What all does that include when you
respond?
Mr. Ozment. That's right. It includes--well, let me take a
step back. Our role is different from law enforcement, and by
analogy, every cyber incident is like an arson in the physical
world. You want to have both the police and the firefighters
responding to the incident.
Our role is similar to that of the firefighter. We want to
help a victim figure out where is the bad guy on their network,
how do they get him off the network, work together to push that
bad guy off the network, and then improve their defenses so
that they are not just compromised again immediately
thereafter.
Then we take--well, all throughout that process, we take
what we learn in this one incident and we broadcast it to other
sectors, other companies, other agencies so that everybody can
learn from the incident and make sure that they are themselves
not victimized by the same approach that the adversary used in
this case.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Now let's turn to government contractors.
As you know, the biggest cyber intrusions of 2015 involved
government contractors. Anthem is the largest provider of
health insurance to government employees and it was hacked.
KeyPoint is a provider of background investigation services and
it was hacked, leading to the breach of OPM's network. What
role did US-CERT play in the company's responses to those major
cyber attacks?
Mr. Ozment. I want to be careful not to speak to individual
companies because we keep the confidentiality of our customers,
if you will. But we have responded to attacks at both private
sector companies, contractors, and Federal Government agencies.
Depending on the situation, our role has been to analyze the
malicious software, figure out, how did they break in and what
did they once they got there? It has been to provide
remediation advice: Here are the types of security measures you
can put in place to ensure that this doesn't happen again. And
to help them kick the bad guy off their networks.
In an incident you often find a malicious actor, or you see
traces of them on, say, one computer, and that's how you figure
out that you've been compromised. But if you just kick them off
that one computer, you can't be confident that you fully
removed them from your network. So the first thing you have to
do is look throughout your network, watch the bad guy, stay
silent and watch the bad guy, see who they are talking to and
where else they are on your network. You have to do that for a
period of time so that you can be confident that when you kick
them off you've gotten them entirely off your network, and we
help victims with that as well.
Ms. Kelly. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Barger, when talking about the type of information
forensics can provide, could it include information on the
identity of future victims as well as how those victims might
be attacked?
Mr. Barger. Absolutely. Being able to gather information
about an attacker, how they move, basically their genetic
makeup, their capabilities, their intent, these fingerprints,
essentially, can be telltale traces of how they do what they
do. And to Dr. Ozment's point, you can leverage that intel gain
and loss for everything that they show you. You can harness
that information to then democratize that across your customer
base and better understand who it is, what they're after, why
they're after it, and over time that develops a great picture
when you can get feedback from various other individuals or
organizations that are affected by it to develop a much clearer
information intelligence picture.
Ms. Kelly. Okay, thank you. Looks like I have run out of
time.
Mr. Hurd. The distinguished gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Walker, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, panel, for being here today.
Jumping right into questions for Dr. Ozment here, what
participation rates have you seen from the private sector? Can
you speak to that just for a moment?
Mr. Ozment. Yes. We have, as you would expect, varying
participation based on both the sector and also the program
that we're talking about. We have a very wide uptake of the
bulletins and advisories that we send out advising companies
about security risks and mitigations. We have something like
100,000 individuals signed up to receive those. And these tend
to be the security individuals operating within a company.
Mr. Walker. Right. What engagement have you seen from the
Federal sector?
Mr. Ozment. Federal sector, we also have pretty universal
participation in our programs. And it is worth highlighting
that as of about a year ago Federal departments and agencies
are required to report incidents to US-CERT, part of my
organization.
Mr. Walker. Sure.
Mr. Bhagowalia, is that correct?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walker. All right. How effective has the Department of
Homeland Security been in notifying your agency or notifying
other government agencies?
Mr. Bhagowalia. I think they have been very effective and
things are improving. As you know, the threats have been coming
at us in increasing frequency over time. Obviously, as the
threats keep on coming at us, we work together with them, but
we also work with other intelligence community agencies.
Together, it's a community basically working together to make
sure we are improving.
Mr. Walker. Thank you.
Mr. Barger, kind of the same question. How effective has
DHS been in notifying the private entities?
Mr. Barger. I can't think of, like, one security company
that probably doesn't leverage the information that DHS puts
out, whether it be on specific vulnerabilities or active
threats. In many cases, that information serves as a seed in
which we leverage and then continue to leverage private sector
sources and methods to gain a better understanding of what we--
--
Mr. Walker. The world of cybersecurity is fairly new for
all of us in the last decade or so. And to use your analogy,
Dr. Ozment, you were talking about an arson situation where you
guys are the firefighters. But also, you guys are kind of the
end all, kind of the central authority when it comes to all of
this.
Can you speak a little bit, because I'm concerned that if
you're going to be the central authority in this, I do believe,
to go back to your analogy, that it's not just the
firefighter's part, the investigation part, but what role do
you have in the policing of it as well? Because I don't want
there to be any gaps here, because I do feel like you have a
role to maybe funnel information to both segments. Would you
mind taking a minute to speak to that?
Mr. Ozment. Absolutely. This is a team sport, both in the
private sector and in government, and so we do partner very
closely with Federal law enforcement agencies, particularly the
FBI, the Secret Service, and Homeland Security investigators.
Those agencies do prosecute cybercrimes and are very aggressive
in reaching out to victims to help them figure out who did this
and ideally prosecute the perpetrator.
And we often--we find out about incidents and with the
permission of the victim we share that with law enforcement.
They do the same. And so we may not find out directly from a
victim. We may find out because the victim talked to law
enforcement who then told us.
Mr. Walker. The larger point is, we want to make sure that
we are getting this right since this is relatively new, and
your role with the law as the law says, CISA says, you guys are
the central authority in this. So it's very important that the
communication is exactly where and what it needs to be and to
whom this information needs to go to.
You know, we don't want this to be the IRS or the EPA where
there's decades of dysfunction. We have a chance at the ground
level to make sure that the proper channels of communication to
all the various departments or players in this is very
important. I guess that's why I'm emphasizing this.
I have got one more thing before I yield back. This could
be to Mr. Taylor. Mr. Bhagowalia may want to respond as well.
Modern cybersecurity best practices require a much
different approach to information security than the Federal
Government has done before, as we talked about this as being
brand new. Placing a premium on information sharing, continuous
network monitoring, and ensuring continuity of operation plans,
these, I guess, plans are in place when a breach or degradation
does occur.
So here's the question, okay? How are your departments
modernizing to keep pace with these best practices and shifts
in approach?
Mr. Barger, would you address that?
Mr. Barger. In terms of the----
Mr. Walker. Best practices shift in approach when it comes
to this information.
Mr. Barger. The best practices in terms of vulnerability
management where sharing?
Mr. Walker. Sharing information, yes, networking.
Mr. Barger. So communities have different looks and feels,
different participants, different requirements, and so being
able to understand who your audience is, what their needs and
their requirements are, helps foment more user growth, user
engagement and participation in that community. So not a one-
size-fits-all approach in that regard.
Mr. Walker. Well, my time has expired, so I will yield back
to the chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Lieu, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Ozment, are you familiar with this document
commissioned by the administration called ``Liberty and
Security in a Changing World'' in 2013? It's a report and
recommendations of the President's Review Group on Intelligence
and Communications Technologies?
Mr. Ozment. I am familiar with it, sir, yes.
Mr. Lieu. And I'm going to read to you recommendation 29,
which says, ``We recommend that, regarding encryption, the U.S.
Government should fully support and not undermine efforts to
create encryption standards; not in any way subvert, undermine,
weaken, or make vulnerable generally available commercial
software; and increase the use of encryption and urge U.S.
companies to do so in order to better protect data in transit,
at rest, in the cloud, and in other storage.''
Do you agree with that recommendation?
Mr. Ozment. Sir, the issue of encryption is a really
challenging one. And as administration officials have
highlighted a number of times, we have to weigh the balances of
our law enforcement and counterterrorism needs with our desire
and need to improve cybersecurity across the private sector and
government. So we are calling for a national conversation on
this topic so that we can plot a way forward together
essentially.
Mr. Lieu. So do you agree or disagree with recommendation
29?
Mr. Ozment. I think it is more complicated than one can
simply agree or disagree to. I think we do--it is a decision--
--
Mr. Lieu. Let's be pretty specific. Do you believe that the
U.S. Government should not in any way subvert, undermine,
weaken, or make vulnerable generally available commercial
software? Do you disagree with that?
MrOzment So, sir, I think in the--there's a lens here that
any attempt--there are some people who perceive that any
attempt to have court-ordered access to devices would be viewed
as weakening software. If that's what you're referring to,
that's really where I do think we need to have a national
conversation to figure out what are our goals as a Nation.
Mr. Lieu. I'm going to, with the permission of the chair,
enter this document into the record. I just note that this
document was really written from the angle of U.S. national
security, and I think the proper frame for this debate is there
is apparently some disagreement within the administration
between law enforcement and U.S. national security. And my own
view is we should not sacrifice U.S. national security, nor our
economy, so that some law enforcement investigations can be
made easier.
Now, let me ask you another question. Are you familiar with
Signalling System No. 7 in a cell phone network, also known as
SS7, and the flaws associated with it?
Mr. Ozment. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. And as you may know, hackers of foreign
governments that can exploit SS7 can listen to phone
conversations of cell phones as well as acquire text messages
in real time. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Ozment. There are vulnerabilities that allow those
accesses. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. Do you have a recommendation how to fix that?
Mr. Ozment. These vulnerabilities were really first
publicly highlighted in 2014. I think it's important to note
that they are design vulnerabilities. So essentially, as the
system is designed, you cannot fix it, per se. What you can do
is carriers can monitor their networks for suspicious activity
and then block that suspicious activity.
When these vulnerabilities were disclosed, we reached out
immediately to the carriers. We are not a regulator. We do work
with the carriers through a voluntary partnership. The carriers
have assured us that they are taking this seriously and are
looking for malicious activity.
But, frankly, I do share your very deep concern about this
and I was concerned by the fact that the hackers you
collaborated with on ``60 Minutes'' were so readily able to
exploit that network. And so we are using this opportunity,
frankly, to reach back out to the carriers and really push them
to highlight progress.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. Would you agree that if a person using
a cellphone had end-to-end encryption for the text messages or
end-to-end encryption for their voice data, that that would
mitigate this problem?
Mr. Ozment. It would mitigate some aspects of this problem.
If that were implemented, the other aspects, such as the
ability to track location, would not be impacted.
Mr. Lieu. Got it. Thank you.
I forget, Mr. Chairman, if I requested to enter this into
the record? Did I ask that? Maybe I did.
Mr. Hurd. Without objection.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. Thank you. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Dr. Ozment, how long have you been at DHS?
Mr. Ozment. I have been at DHS for approximately 2 years
now.
Mr. Hurd. Well, I would like to thank you for your service.
I know the job that you have is difficult, and I think you have
had an exemplary time at DHS, and I'm looking forward to
continuing to working with you in the next few months.
My question, I would like to drill down on the Juniper
breach. The ScreenOS, there were several versions that were
hacked, 6.30 version 17 through version 20. Were any of the
versions that were vulnerable to the breach, were they
supported by Juniper? Were security patches supported by
Juniper, are you aware?
Mr. Ozment. I'm not entirely sure. I believe that at least
a number of those were out of service and no longer supported,
certainly not all of them.
Mr. Hurd. So when something is out of service, that means
the vendor does not provide patch updates, or this is saying,
``Hey, you are operating on your own. We are not responsible
for keeping this up to speed.'' Is that correct?
Mr. Ozment. That's correct.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Bhagowalia, my question for you. Fifty-seven
devices had the Juniper vulnerability. Is that correct?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir, they were affected by the release
versions in question in the ScreenOS, yes.
Mr. Hurd. And do you agree that the vulnerable versions of
the ScreenOS software that is provided by Juniper is not
supported by a vendor, the security updates were not supported
by the vendor?
Mr. Bhagowalia. We didn't know about whether it is
supported by the vendor, but we, obviously, the moment we got
the information----
Mr. Hurd. No, no, look, I'm not questioning about the--we
can talk about the four devices that you thought were low
vulnerability. My question is, why were you using versions of
Juniper software ScreenOS that was no longer supported by the
vendor? And if I'm not mistaken, please correct me if I'm
wrong, the vendor stopped supporting that software in 2014,
2013, 2014. Why was the Department of Treasury still using
software that wasn't being supported by the vendor?
Mr. Bhagowalia. I would have to get back to you on the
exact details as to how many of those devices were late on that
version that was not supported with 2014. We, obviously, work
continuously with not only DHS, but with the vendor itself----
Mr. Hurd. Well, but DHS doesn't have anything to do with
supporting----
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. --patching for a software.
Mr. Bhagowalia. No, it doesn't, but we are sharing----
Mr. Hurd. And the vendor has made it very clear that they
are not going to continue to support that software. So what are
you working with the vendor on?
Mr. Bhagowalia. The vendor usually works with us to kind of
figure out if there are any challenges with particular versions
of software and so on and so forth. We have not looked at it or
been advised of any particular devices there that were behind.
But nevertheless the point is, we should, obviously, be----
Mr. Hurd. You are the CIO for Treasury, correct?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Hurd. How much software are you using in the Department
of Treasury that is not supported by a vendor?
Mr. Bhagowalia. We keep tabs on a lot of the legacy
versions, that is----
Mr. Hurd. Do you have a number? How many systems are you
running----
Mr. Bhagowalia. We have 329 systems, sir, overall in
Treasury.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. And how many of the 329 systems that you
are running are systems provided by a vendor that is no longer
supporting that version of the software that you're using?
Mr. Bhagowalia. It's a small percentage. I'll have to get
back the exact number.
Mr. Hurd. Please get back with a specific number.
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir, I will. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Threat mitigation--threat assessment--or damage
assessment is probably the most accurate number--of the 54
systems that were using the Juniper's software ScreenOS, what
did the hackers, attackers, have you done a damage assessment
on what was possibly stolen?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, we've obviously looked at the devices,
and which there were two versions. Obviously, one had the
administrative access and one had the VPN. We looked at both of
those devices and seen whether there was anything going on in
those devices themselves. We looked at the risk analysis of
that. We also, obviously, made sure that those devices did not
have any lateral movement and other things like that.
We're doing more in this area. We're putting some other
countermeasures just to double-check, for example, using third
parties to see if there's anything else going on in there.
Mr. Hurd. So you identified 17 of the 56 systems as high
threat? Is that correct? Fourteen?
Mr. Bhagowalia. No, sir, 40 of the devices, out of an
overabundance of caution, we put at high risk. Only 4 out of
the 57 were really connected facing the Internet. The rest were
internal facing.
Mr. Hurd. Of those four that were facing the Internet, what
kind of systems--what kind of information was traversing those
systems?
Mr. Bhagowalia. So one was--it was like, for example, it
was on an isolated Internet connection at one of the locations,
like Mint. Another location----
Mr. Hurd. Right. So the Mint, like where we make money?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir, but it was not connected to the
corporate LAN. It was sitting outside in a public-facing sort
of Internet.
Mr. Hurd. But it's still connected to the Internet, right?
So are you implying that that's not a significant
vulnerability?
Mr. Bhagowalia. No, sir, we don't. We take cybersecurity
very seriously.
Mr. Hurd. So in your damage assessment, who did you think
potentially took this information?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Well, there was no information that we are
aware of that has been taken, and we have looked at it very
carefully. We, obviously are obviously concerned if there's
anything that's an external attempt. But there were multiple
layers of security in terms of what we were watching. And out
of the version that we had, nothing was taken.
Mr. Hurd. So you don't think anything was taken. But based
on this vulnerability, you don't have to exfil data, right? If
you're able to read--if you're able to decrypt encrypted
information, then if you're capturing that encrypted network,
the encrypted traffic traversing the network, you don't have to
exfil it. So how would you know if something was taken or not?
Mr. Bhagowalia. So, for example, the four devices that are
in question, they do not participate in the VPN connection at
all. So there's no risk to that. So even if that was taken out,
there was no issue there.
They are connected between three levels of firewalls, in
addition to what's already at Juniper. They are configured in
such a way without giving the configuration away. Since admins
have special access to that, we were pretty confident, and we
did a detailed risk analysis, and that's why we took a little
bit of time to kind of, to your question, to really look into
detail and make sure there's nothing going on.
We absolutely appreciate a concern. We've also read your
article, and we also know that this vulnerability was quite
serious. We looked at it, and there was nothing that we can
see. But we're also going further and making sure that we're
bringing in other experts. And so far one of the vendors--one
of the vendors who was going to be briefing today, Mandiant, we
think is very, very good, is one of the other folks, and
amongst others, that we're looking at bringing in.
Mr. Hurd. Well, my time has expired, but there will
definitely be several more rounds of question.
I would like now to recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, on what is, I think,
one of the most important topics we can be addressing here in
Congress with respect to our future.
Mr. Taylor, can you explain what the Consular Consolidated
Database is, briefly?
Mr. Taylor. Thank you for the question, sir. Briefly----
Mr. Connolly. Well, because I've only got 5 minutes.
Mr. Taylor. I appreciate that, sir.
The Consular Consolidated Database is a number of
databases, actually. I think the total is around 18. It handles
various activities, such as visa issuance, passport issuance,
and that sort of thing. It manages our consular workload.
Mr. Connolly. So hundreds of millions of records?
Mr. Taylor. Hundreds of millions of records, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Hundreds of millions of records. Would you
agree, Mr. Taylor, that makes it a juicy cyber target?
Mr. Taylor. We've identified it certainly as a target and
as a critical system for the Department.
Mr. Connolly. And on March 31 of this year there was a
report that an internal review revealed lots of vulnerabilities
in the CCD? Is that correct? There was an ABC News report that
said you did.
Mr. Taylor. Right. The ABC News report was referring to,
sir, the process that we go through for all our significant
systems, which is penetration testing and a host of other types
of tests that we run against our system on a regular basis. So
through that process, yes, in fact, we identified
vulnerabilities. That's the point and purpose of the
penetration testing. And we're well on our way to reconciling
those and remediating it.
Mr. Connolly. In response to the ABC story, the Department
officially sort of took issue with those reports on the
severity of the vulnerability and referred to it, the
vulnerability of the CCD, as in the lowest threat category.
Can you put that in perspective? I mean, how many
categories are there at the State Department in terms of
threat, cyber threat?
Mr. Taylor. If I could, sir, I'd rather try to answer the
question through the way we look at risk mitigation, and that's
to look at the probability as well as the potential damage
associated with the threat.
The probability was very low, but, obviously, clearly,
given the type of private information that's available on that
system and the quantity, even with a low risk, we take that
very, very seriously. In fact, I mean, we meet on this on a
weekly basis with the under secretary and with the deputy
secretary and with the senior leadership in Consular Affairs to
track the progress against our remediation efforts.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Well, the reason I think it's important
is because one of the concerns I've got with respect to cyber
throughout the Federal Government is you look for--if I were a
hacker or up to no good, I'd look to low-hanging, vulnerable
fruit. And we, this committee, this subcommittee, has found
lots of that in what might look ostensibly like an attractive
target, Department of Education. Huge database, lots of
information in it, and potentially ripe for the picking. Which
is why we think implementation of FITARA is so important and
because we've got to sharpen up our ability and make wise
investments and so forth.
Let me ask you while I've got you, Mr. Taylor, I've just
gotten back from China, and on this particular trip there were
probably 20 Members of Congress, Senators and House Members,
Republicans and Democrats.
I mean, everybody was told when we got there, you do
understand that any device you bring will be compromised,
period. Is it routine for the Department of State to provide
counsel to Members of Congress when they're traveling to places
that have a known reputation with respect to cyber?
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, sir, for the question.
I understand the question, but to be honest, it's a little
outside of my wheelhouse. I'm not sure if those briefings take
place. I would expect that Congress would receive those
briefings either through our Diplomatic Security or another
entity in State. It really isn't within the purview of the CIO
responsibilities to do that.
Mr. Connolly. I mean, you work for the State Department.
Mr. Taylor. I do, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Yeah. Well, maybe you can take it back with
somebody whose purview it is.
Mr. Taylor. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. But it just worries me that a whole branch of
government is unwittingly putting itself at risk. And remember
I've got messages here from the State Department, from the
White House, from lots of other Federal agencies, all of which,
if I bring this to Beijing, is going to be compromised.
Mr. Taylor. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. And it just seems to me a prudent measure for
the executive branch to--if it isn't--to be more proactive in
not only discouraging, but strongly providing guidance, quite
explicit guidance, to Members of Congress, rather than having
it be on our own. I mean, what could go wrong with 535
individuals and their spouses traveling hither and yon with
devices that are official that could be compromised?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. It might be outside your purview, Mr. Taylor,
but we both work for the U.S. Government and are concerned
about U.S. security, and we're talking about cyber, and this is
a big issue I think in your wheelhouse. So I would appreciate
your cooperation in going back to whoever's purview it is in
the Department and maybe beefing up our protective preemptive
measures.
Mr. Taylor. Yes, sir. I understand the question, and I will
certainly take that back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Now I'd like to recognize Mr. Blum for 5 minutes.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Hurd.
And I'd like to thank the panelists for appearing here
today to talk about this most important issue.
Mr. Barger, in your testimony you state that information is
less a technical issue and more of a cultural issue. To me,
this gets at the very importance of building trusting
relationships. I'm from the private sector and trust is so
important. Without trust, it's hard to run an effective
business, trust between employer and employee, trust between
the company and its vendors, trust between the company and its
customers. Trust to me is ultra-important. And it gets to the
importance of your statement of building trusting relationships
between parties to ensure effective information-sharing
practices.
In your opinion, is there a trust deficiency between the
private sector and the public sector when it comes to the
sharing of threat intelligence?
Mr. Barger. In terms of efficiencies, I believe sharing in
general within public sector as well as within the private
sector is still somewhat new, and everyone's feeling around the
edges to figure out how to best approach it. I think the
Information Sharing Act of 2015 kind of helped break the ice
and give folks a renewed interest and focus in that area.
In terms of private sector sharing, we find organizations
are still challenged internally with communicating effectively,
let alone some of the more advanced moves of sharing across
parties or Bank A sharing with Bank B. But there's interest to
get there.
I think DHS and some of their initiatives are good starting
points where there's a centralized area where folks can go. The
private sector has a thirst for information, and so as much
information you can send our way is always appreciated.
Mr. Blum. There is a willingness in the private sector, I
agree, and I hear that time and time again. Is there something
the government, the public sector, can be doing to help
facilitate this? Because there is that willingness, I agree
with you.
Mr. Barger. I think timeliness of reporting can help. I
think there's optics and perceptions as to how much value
information is coming out of the government in terms of the
flash to bang. There's many cases where the private sector will
be a little--a few steps ahead of the government in terms of
sharing some information, and then several weeks or months
later you'll get an FBI flash bulletin or a DHS report which
echoes some of the same details you already know.
However, there's also instances where, like I pointed out
earlier, where the information that may come out of DHS or FBI
will serve as a feed or will shore up a loose end that the
private sector may have not have necessarily figured out or
understand fully, but that then fills in some of the blanks.
Mr. Blum. I hear from the private sector also sometimes the
government is viewed as a black hole. And they deploy a fair
number of assets, time, people's talent, to obtain information,
share it with the government, and never hear back, never hear
back. And that to them is a problem, and I'd say it probably is
a problem. You know, was the problem resolved? Was it helpful
or not? They just want to hear back.
Any ideas there on what we can do to have a two-way
communication street here versus, ``Give me, give me, give me,
and, hey, don't ask what happened with it''?
Mr. Barger. Correct. I am part of that group of folks who
shared information into the black hole, if you will, and have
wondered, was this effective, do you need more? But what
happens is over time, when you don't hear back, you just say,
really, what's the point of me continuing this if I don't
really see the value?
Mr. Blum. Exactly. Exactly.
Mr. Barger. So having a thumbs-up or a thumbs-down or quick
``got it'' is always helpful and I think lends to what you're
talking about is improving that sharing relationship and that
trust.
Mr. Blum. Very good.
I'll yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. I'd like to recognize Mr. Lieu for another round
of questions.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Question for Mr. Barger, sir. Are you familiar with the SS7
flaw?
Mr. Barger. I am not.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. That's fine. I will now go to Mr. Ozment.
In February of this year, The New York Times published an
article quoting Defense Secretary Ash Carter, and he is quoted
in there regarding back doors as saying the following: ``Just
to cut to the chase, I'm not a believer in back doors or a
single technical approach. I don't think it's realistic.'' Do
you agree with his statement?
Mr. Ozment. I think part of the challenge here is an
argument about what constitutes a back door or not. You know, I
think what I have heard from law enforcement agencies is that
they hope for a solution that allows them court-ordered access
without introducing vulnerabilities. I think if you are to
enter----
Mr. Lieu. Let me just stop you there.
Do you believe it's technologically possible to put in a
back door only for the good guys?
Mr. Ozment. I think there are solutions that add--that make
that possible.
Mr. Lieu. Just give me one.
Mr. Ozment. However, to get to our point, I think any time
you add a solution, you add complexity. And every time you add
complexity, you increase the risk of compromise.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Do you know how many smartphones were lost or stolen in the
U.S., let's say, in 2013?
Mr. Ozment. I do not.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. According to an article in the LA Times,
about 4.5 million smartphones were lost or stolen.
If hackers could hack into a smartphone, they could access
all sorts of data on Americans. Wouldn't you agree that it
would be important that if government finds a flaw in
smartphone encryption that they let the manufacturer know about
it so we can protect American consumers if their cell phones
are lost or stolen?
Mr. Ozment. There is a process for deciding whether or not
to disclose vulnerabilities that the government finds. My
organization's role in this process is to advocate for the
broad sharing of vulnerabilities, because that does increase
the cybersecurity of our Nation.
There are other perspectives that have to be viewed in that
process, law enforcement intelligence perspectives, but the
administration has gone on record to highlight that the
process, the strong default, is to share information to
increase the security of devices and systems.
Mr. Lieu. So through this process the way the FBI was able
to hack the recent iPhone in the San Bernardino case, that may
be released to Apple at some point. Am I understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Ozment. If the FBI did, in fact, use a vulnerability it
would go through this process and could potentially result in a
release. But I don't know of the specifics of this, whether or
not the FBI used a vulnerability in this case, so I would have
to defer to the FBI on that.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Before I forget, Mr. Chair, could I enter into the record
this article, ``4.5 million smartphones were lost or stolen in
the U.S. in 2013,'' from the Los Angeles Times?
Mr. Hurd. Without objection.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Mr. Barger, let me ask you a similar question. Do you agree
with Defense Secretary Ash Carter's statement that we should
not have back doors in encryption?
Mr. Barger. I think that, again, introduces a very complex
conversation. I think that we need strong encryption. As a
member of industry, I would be very concerned and challenged, I
guess, with any sort of approach by the government to weaken
anything or weaken security or encryption of any sort of
product or solution that we delivered. So I would say no.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Farenthold from Texas is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I would like to follow up on a line of questioning the
chairman had about legacy systems. We talked about some of the
legacy and unsupported systems in the IRS. We've had hearings
where various government agencies are still running pre-Windows
98 or Windows 98, again, not supported by Microsoft, the
security patches are not coming up.
Dr. Ozment, do you have any idea the scope of this problem?
Mr. Ozment. I think this is a major problem for the Federal
Government. It's something that is concerning to me.
I'll tell you that we do scan agencies externally, so the
systems they have connected to the Internet, and we look for
critical vulnerabilities. We do consider an unsupported device
to be a critical vulnerability.
And some of our most challenging discoveries in that
process are unsupported devices, particularly at smaller
departments and agencies who may lack the resources or the
expertise to upgrade these very legacy systems. I think this is
a major risk for the government. And I do believe that any
approach that we can take to upgrading and replacing legacy
systems is a good approach.
Mr. Farenthold. And the National Institute of Standards
publication 800-40 lays out guidance for agencies on enterprise
patch management and states that it would be, quote, ``ideal''
to deploy patches immediately so as to minimize the timeframe
systems that are vulnerable. You know, obviously, immediately
isn't possible. We've got a couple--we've got the State
Department and Treasury Department here. How good are you guys
at getting this out? I mean, what is immediately for you? A
security patch comes out, how long does it take you to get it
out, Mr. Taylor?
Mr. Taylor. So our security patches, we look at it two
ways, critical threat patches and typical required patches. So
for our critical patches--we begin immediately, I want to be
clear about that--we have a 3-day timeline to deploy a patch
worldwide, to all locations worldwide. We meet that with
approximately 98 percent success rate.
Mr. Farenthold. And how are you all doing at Treasury?
Mr. Bhagowalia. We obviously take the most critical patches
first, sir, and we move on it. And as you saw in my testimony,
we fix those in 5 days, 6 days. For the rest of the enterprise,
we work with the bureaus to make sure those critical patches go
first. As far as the medium and low patches, they take a little
bit more time. And we also are, obviously, looking at
operational risk, making sure those systems are a continuing
mission. And then we schedule that, and then the report, the
bureau CIO's report, back to us.
So the answer is it's ongoing. As to exact numbers, I can
get back to you and give you the exact numbers.
Mr. Farenthold. All right.
And, Dr. Ozment, in May of 2015, it's my understanding that
the Secretary issued a binding operational directive requiring
all agencies to mitigate critical vulnerabilities on their
Internet-facing devices within 30 days. That seems like an
awful long time to me, but before I go criticizing how long it
is, how much success do we have getting them done in 30 days?
Mr. Ozment. I would agree with you that it is a somewhat
generous amount of time. I would highlight that, to the points
that my colleagues have made, the criticality of the patch and
the type of system will dictate timing. There are systems that
are more complicated than your normal desktop operating system
that do take additional time. And since we were doing a one-
size-fits-all policy, we had to be somewhat generous.
Even with that somewhat generous timeframe, when we
started, when we released this directive, there were over 360
Internet-facing systems with critical vulnerabilities in them.
I view that as the backlog, what we started with, because of
course new vulnerabilities are discovered all the time.
We reduced that backlog, not as rapidly as I would like for
the government to have reduced it, but we are now down--we
have, obviously, eliminated that backlog. Even right now we
have 39 vulnerabilities across the government that are critical
but have been unpatched for more than 30 days. There is good
news in that, which is when we started we were over 360, and,
clearly, not enough attention was being paid on it.
Mr. Farenthold. I mean, are these some obscure operating
system or ultracomplicated software or are we just not running
Windows update?
Mr. Ozment. The majority of these are now legacy systems at
small agencies that are struggling to manage their IT and to
find the budget to replace these legacy systems. These have
been the toughest nuts for us to crack.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. I am loathe to ask what you
think Congress could do to help with that, because I suspect
the answer will be: Give us more money. But is there something
besides give us more money that we can do in Congress? And then
I'll yield back after your answer.
Mr. Ozment. You know, I would like to highlight that
Congress has been incredibly helpful to date. The recent
legislation passed in both 2014 and 2015 has been very
important. This type of attention is very important.
I do think that one of the challenges that agencies
consistently have is when you replace a legacy system, you
often have to operate that system for a period of time even as
you're paying to build the new system. So you do functionally
need to pay for two things at once for a period of time.
The IT modernization bill sponsored in part by
Representative Kelly, the ranking member, would really assist
with that, because it would essentially give you that fund to
temporarily support the building of a second system even as you
operate the original, older system.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. The ranking member from Illinois is recognized
for 5 more minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Bhagowalia----
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kelly. --Mr. Taylor, this question is for both of you.
As the people with ultimate responsibility for the security of
your agencies' computer networks, I imagine that you would
welcome any information that would help you with cyber defense.
If a company that plays a critical role in your agencies'
mission was hacked, would knowing how that hack happened help
you to do your job?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes. We work with a lot of vendors, and we,
obviously, work very closely with them. I believe the cyber
climate, the way things are in the prevailing world, we work
together as a team and we look out for each other. We are all
in the boat together. And that's the way we want to manage
this.
We share information also across not only the government,
not only with DHS, but with the law enforcement and the
intelligence community. I myself Came from the law enforcement
intelligence community. And I can tell you that--and I have
come from industry--we are in a different world now, and the
adversary is growing in sophistication, volume, brazenness, and
impact and frequency.
So if that's the case, the only way we can do this together
is to work together and make this thing happen. So absolutely,
ma'am.
Ms. Kelly. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you for the question.
Partnership is the basis of our cyber defense. We learned
that in 2014 when we had our challenges with our unclassified
email. We reached out to DHS. We reached out to NSA. We get
wonderful support from the FBI. We support and established a
joint operations center for cyber. So we have folks from
interagency there sitting with us 24/7, 7 days a week, 365 days
a year.
We receive threat and mitigation information from just a
host of partners. It would not be possible for the Department
of State or any other agency to successfully defend our systems
without support, without continuing information, both threat
information and mitigation information, private sector and
public. We recognize that. As I said, that's a keystone for us.
Ms. Kelly. What means do you have--and this is for both of
you--to learn about the details about a hack of one of your
contractors? How do you learn about that?
Mr. Bhagowalia. We work very, very closely, first of all,
with our vendors in terms of our governance, that they have to
tell us what's going on, and I think in that regard, we watch
that. We monitor classified and unclassified channels,
including vendor community, from our security operations center
that looks for that. We work with the US-CERT, NCCIC, and DHS,
who gives information to us. We work on the Federal CIO Council
where we are all sharing information as a sort of a network of
CIOs and also CISOs.
We also work within our folks and our staff who have sort
of an organic network. And I don't want to underplay the
importance of that organic network that's looking and looking
out. So I think we're doing a pretty good job there.
Ms. Kelly. And, Mr. Taylor, you would agree with----
Mr. Taylor. Absolutely. We actively maintain our
relationship with our vendors. I travel regularly, we meet with
them regularly.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Ozment, just two quick yes or noes. Are government
contractors required to share detailed forensic analysis about
attempted or successful cyber attacks, yes or no?
Mr. Ozment. Not in general. There may be some specific
contracts where that's required.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Are government contractors required to
notify the FBI if they are the victims of a successful cyber
attack? Yes or no?
Mr. Ozment. Again, not in general. There may be specific
contracts.
Ms. Kelly. Are there examples where US-CERT has offered its
services to government contractors who were hacked and the
company declined the offer?
Mr. Ozment. Not to my knowledge. I don't believe so.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. All right then.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Bhagowalia, some very basic questions, and I
apologize for not knowing the answer to this.
At Treasury, what floor does the Secretary of Treasury sit?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Main Treasury, third floor, sir.
Mr. Hurd. And where do you sit?
Mr. Bhagowalia. I sit in one of the buildings next to the
Main Treasury.
Mr. Hurd. Do you have budgetary and operational control?
I'm assuming there's a CIO specifically for IRS, right?
Mr. Bhagowalia. There's a separate CIO for IRS, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Does that person report to you?
Mr. Bhagowalia. No, he does not. Reports to the
Commissioner. But he has a dotted line under FITARA that I have
given him some CIO commitments that he has to report with me
and work with me.
Mr. Hurd. But isn't part of FITARA to empower you to have
control over the entire organization?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir. The Department has the authority,
and I'm working very closely with the bureau's CIOs to make the
mission happen.
Mr. Hurd. CDFI, what is that?
Mr. Bhagowalia. It's one of the consolidated funds that is
a smaller program that sits within the departmental offices.
Mr. Hurd. So earlier this year or late last year, we sent a
letter, this committee sent a letter to every agency asking for
an update or asking for a review of legacy hardware and legacy
software. And thank you, you get back to us. And I know I asked
a question earlier about old systems. I have eight pages worth
of information. Some of the software, when we asked when was
the last date of support, the answer was ``unknown'' because
the vendor is no longer in business.
Some of the other software stopped being supported in 2007.
And then we asked the question: If no longer supported by
vendor, how is it supported? The reply was: Unsupported, IRS
assumes expired product risk.
Now, I'm not going to go through each one of these. But my
question is, do you, as the CIO of Treasury, have the authority
to go through, identify which one of these are high risk, and
figuring out why and moving away from unsupported software?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, the bureau CIO and I do, I have the
authority, and we look at using what they call critical POAM
item, and they have to report to me as to whether they are
testing and is there enough security, that there's any
vulnerability, if there's anything critical. And they have
signed to that and I can--I, obviously, check and verify that.
If they have not done that, I have the authority to turn it off
and so do they. And, obviously, this particular system I'll
have to take a look at----
Mr. Hurd. No, look, we're going to get into a much larger
conversation at some other point about this. But some of these
systems that stopped being supported in 2013 deal with software
to manage cell phone communications, right? So this is--to me,
that would be a high priority vulnerability or a system that
should be of high priority to ensure that--and, again, the
Federal Government shouldn't be in the business of providing
support to products. We should be upgrading and buying the
latest version. So I'm more interested in making sure you have
the authorities in order to solve these problems.
Dr. Ozment, how much, you know, with the new cybersecurity
rules that DHS has, how much influence do you all have in
telling another department or agency, ``Hey, guys, you all need
to sort this out''?
Mr. Ozment. The new authorities that Congress has provided
us and, frankly, the congressional attention on this issue have
really dramatically helped us more deeply engage with
departments and agencies. We focus on working collaboratively
with those departments and agency, essentially because when
they trust us, we can accomplish more together. And we also
look at OMB holding agencies accountable. And together, we
really work to improve----
Mr. Hurd. Dr. Ozment, do you have a list of all the
unsupported software that's being used across the 24 CFO
agencies?
Mr. Ozment. I do not, but I'll be honest with you, I want
that--I will have that when CDM phase one is deployed.
Mr. Hurd. Copy.
Mr. Ozment. And I want an automated list of that. I don't
want a manual data----
Mr. Hurd. Good. Copy.
Mr. Barger, should enterprises be concerned with using
software that is no longer supported by a vendor?
Mr. Barger. They should. Unfortunately, organizations over
time will set up systems that just become systems of record,
that they just cannot pull these systems out, that they age
within the organization, both within public and private sector.
It's not just one sector or the other. So it's a very hard to
necessarily pull them out. If you consider some medical devices
are FDA regulated, so if you were to patch them, in some cases
you change that regulation.
And so there's these very nuanced details in accepting risk
in and around these nuanced systems of record that could be
supporting command and control or medical systems. And so there
can be creative workarounds that are put in place, be it
policies or solutions, that can help manage that risk a little
better.
Mr. Hurd. No, thank you for that.
And my next question kind of shifting gears slightly. Can
you do--can an enterprise do proper damage assessment without
understanding who the threat actor was?
Mr. Barger. So as a former analyst, I am always
appreciative of as much information as possible so that I can
use that and form the basis to make better decisions. So I
think maybe to your point around attribution, that sort of
information, always helps to understand what the adversary's
motivations are, because that can frame how I respond and
subsequent decisions down the line, be it technical or
nontechnical type response.
Mr. Hurd. So would this be a fair statement, that
understanding who the attacker is, we would better--we can do
better damage assessment?
Mr. Barger. Absolutely. It's an integral part. I mean, one
of the first questions everybody asks when you're the bearer of
bad news and there's a breach is: Who did it? Or why? The boss
always wants to know that. And so understanding that can,
again, help frame how you respond and the decisionmaking cycle
afterwards.
Mr. Hurd. When it comes to the Juniper ScreenOS breach, do
you have opinions on who was responsible?
Mr. Barger. These are personal opinions and not necessarily
rooted in fact, but just reading, casually reading----
Mr. Hurd. The record reflects that.
Mr. Barger. Roger. Okay. So if you look at the type of
vulnerabilities potentially introduced for the term in which
they're reporting that, I could think of a handful of nation-
state entities that would leverage key weakening and an
administrative back door for core infrastructure. And that core
infrastructure is kind of one of those more strategic areas of
the domain, if you will, the contested domain, that if you lay
up in there, you can do quite a bit in terms of----
Mr. Hurd. So let's talk about the nature of the Juniper
ScreenOS breach. Source code was manipulated, correct?
Mr. Barger. From what I understand, correct.
Mr. Hurd. And code was inserted in the source code used for
ScreenOS. Is that your understanding?
Mr. Barger. From what I understand, correct.
Mr. Hurd. How difficult is it to do that?
Mr. Barger. I would imagine if it were, for me, putting on
a bad guy hat, that I would have to have a significant
understanding of how that system works as well as a very robust
quality assurance capability to make----
Mr. Hurd. But when you're designing software protecting--
ensuring that your source code cannot be seen, is a pretty--
that's a pretty key--that's a key software development.
Mr. Barger. Correct. That's what I was driving at, is that
there had to have been a robust team that would be able to make
sure that that implant or that key weakening was not detected
for the term that's being reported.
Mr. Hurd. Could Juniper have protected its source code
better?
Mr. Barger. I don't know enough about their development
process and their internal security to be able to say that,
but----
Mr. Hurd. So based on your experience and your--this is
your personal observation--it was a state actor--it was an
entity supported by a nation-state?
Mr. Barger. I would certainly think that a criminal or
ideological group probably wouldn't have necessarily the
resources or the motivation to leverage that type of attack.
Mr. Hurd. Why are--and maybe, Dr. Ozment, this is a better
question directed to you--who is responsible in the Federal
Government for attribution?
Mr. Ozment. We look to the intelligence community, so the
Director of National Intelligence for attribution.
Mr. Hurd. So DNI is the one responsible for making
attribution. Even in a case when it's a breach of a private
sector entity?
Mr. Ozment. That's right.
Mr. Hurd. But that private sector entity could make it
aware, right? Because if a private sector company is hacked,
they usually--they will bring in--they'll probably reach out to
some Federal Government agencies, whether it's DHS--it should
be DHS now, after the Cybersecurity Act of 2015. They're going
to bring you in. They're probably going to hire another company
that does incident response and threat mitigation. But are
there barriers from having the company that's hacked from
articulating who they believe was responsible for the breach?
Mr. Ozment. No. Any company could point to anybody if they
had a view on the perpetrator.
Mr. Hurd. Why--and this is my opinion now--I feel like in
this case of the Juniper ScreenOS hack people have been
reticent to do attribution, even general attribution. Do you
have an opinion on that, Dr. Ozment?
And, Mr. Barger, I'm going to ask you the same question.
Mr. Ozment. You know, I don't, other than to say that the
government has historically been--has used attribution in a
fairly relatively few cases. And so I don't view it as unusual
that the government has not attributed this particular
incident. That's it.
Mr. Hurd. Copy.
I will now recognize my friend from California, the
distinguished gentleman, Mr. Lieu, for another round of
questions.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My understanding is that Juniper was invited to testify,
but they refused to come. I just want to note for the record
that I--well, let me first ask questions.
Mr. Ozment, is Juniper a government contractor?
Mr. Ozment. I don't know for sure. I would assume that they
are. I do want to highlight that they're a victim here and that
from our perspective we ask all IT vendors to give us advanced
notice when they are making a major patch so that we can
amplify their patch announcement and make sure that it reaches
the public and private sector, that everybody who knows needs
to know about it.
In this case they did notify us in advance that they were
developing a major patch. I think they did a very responsible
job of this, and I salute them for working hard to make sure
that all of their customers were aware of this vulnerability
and helping us amplify their message as well.
Mr. Lieu. I note for the record that Juniper had their
systems breached. I find it disrespectful that they did not
come here to testify and it insinuates that they have something
to hide.
So let me ask some questions for Mr. Bhagowalia. I'm trying
to understand your agency's response to the breaches of
Juniper.
My understanding is that within 1 week, 48 out of 57
affected systems on Treasury's network were patched. Is that
correct?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. But for the other nine, it took, from my
understanding, another 2 months. What's the reason that it took
that amount of time?
Mr. Bhagowalia. We made a risk-based decision, and we found
that out of those devices--first of all, anything--only 4 of
those 57 were Internet facing. Everything inside had many
layers of firewalls. We found that of those devices, a certain
amount had--did not even have the VPN vulnerability as such. So
we looked at that and made a risk-based decision as one of the
bureaus to delay the patch. And the others were mitigated in
terms of compensating controls that they had in place. So it
was done a little bit later.
Obviously, in retrospect, one could look at balancing
mission and risk, and we could have gone a little faster, but
it was basically a low risk for the devices that were done
after the first week.
Mr. Lieu. So when I patch something on my computer it's, I
don't know, a few minutes. Are these very complicated patches?
Are these something that takes a long time? I'm trying to
understand why it just wouldn't have been done rather quickly.
Mr. Bhagowalia. Yes, sir. Let me just say, as an engineer,
we obviously, obviously, look at first what is the risk
analysis as to what the thing is. We understood the details of
this once we were told what the thing was and exactly what the
vendor was saying and what DHS told us. We went and looked at
what the risk analysis is, is it in our network?
We looked at where they were facing. A lot of these
configurations, without giving them away, we have multiple
layers of firewalls and protection and proxying and all kinds
of various means that allows sort of a maze of things that we
do to basically confuse anyone from getting in.
And third, you know, five of those device didn't have the
VPN vulnerability. So even if there was nothing to decrypt, we
actually covered that.
So it just, if you look at it in isolation, obviously, one
can only always look at something being a little faster, but we
always balance operational risk. Because think of it has a
neighborhood, gated community, and then you get in, and then
you've got multiple layers of firewalls and a backbone network
that had one or two of these devices between many layers just
to get into that. And beyond that, there were various firewall
subdivisions and these were deeply imbedded inside those
firewall divisions. So to get to those would require a lot of
compromise before someone gets in.
So we looked at that, and based on that, it was made--a
risk-base decision was made. And in addition to that, I would
just add that we are actively using other kinds of red teaming,
should I say, penetration testing, and we are also looking at
some hunt operations to make sure there's nothing in there. We
are aware of some of these nation-states, and I think in this
case we have not seen anything.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Ms. Ozment, you're familiar with the ransomware attacks on
hospitals, some of which were in southern California?
Mr. Ozment. I am, sir.
Mr. Lieu. And do you have a sense of how many hospitals
have been hit with ransomware attacks in the last year or last
few months?
Mr. Ozment. I don't have those numbers in hand, but we have
certainly seen an increase in ransomware, not just the health
sector, but across the Nation.
Mr. Lieu. If this is something we could follow up with your
office to see if you could let us know about how many attacks
we're experiencing?
Mr. Ozment. Absolutely, sir. Will do.
Mr. Lieu. Great. Thank you.
And then let me just conclude with a comment.
In this case, Juniper made firewalls to try to prevent
important information from going to foreign governments.
Juniper is not the victim in this case, as the witness from DHS
had said. The U.S. Government and the American people are, and
we need to view this in a whole different lens, that when
products are made to try to protect the U.S. Government and
they fail, the companies that made those products are not the
victims. They failed. And I think we just need to put this in
proper perspective. The victims here are the U.S. Government,
the American people.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Dr. Ozment, is DHS MPPD built and organized to deal with
the problems of the future?
Mr. Ozment. It is not, sir. And we have proposed a
reorganization that we would very much appreciate support of
the Congress in performing that reorganization.
Mr. Hurd. And, again, I'd just like to point out, I think,
when it comes to the Juniper breach, I think DHS played an
important and key role in organizing the government's response
to this.
I still have a problem with attribution. And, Dr. Ozment,
can attribution play a deterrence role?
Mr. Ozment. I think it absolutely can. You know, depending
on the circumstances, actual attribution could be used to play
a deterrence role. In other circumstances the threat of
attribution may play a deterrence role. I do think it depends
on the particular actor and the dynamics of the relationship,
but it can absolutely be a tool for deterrence.
Mr. Hurd. Copy.
Mr. Bhagowalia, would you like to know who was responsible
for or have some idea of attribution for this Juniper breach?
Mr. Bhagowalia. Absolutely, sir. You know, we have,
obviously, been reading all the news and watching various
channels, but we'd love to know.
Mr. Hurd. Now, Mr. Taylor, I know the Department of State
wasn't affected, because you didn't have any of the ScreenOS
software running on there.
But does anybody on the panel like to make any comments on
attribution?
Mr. Barger.
Mr. Barger. To your point about attribution serving as a
deterrent, we conducted research into a specific series of
attacks that had been targeting entities within the South China
Sea for quite some many years and put out an attribution
product with the assistance of some of our partners. And,
basically, after this attribution product was released, we
basically saw no more activity from it. Not to say that they
are done forever, but I do believe that it can slow down,
mitigate active threats as well as enter into the adversary's
decisionmaking cycle as to how important this sort of thing is
on the world stage and how to recognize those.
Mr. Hurd. I appreciate that.
And, Mr. Taylor, we have--I have extended my time on too
many occasions, but I'd like to let you know that there was a
report that the Department recently--Department of State
recently detected a vulnerability within its own systems, and
we're going to provide you all with some questions that we
would like to have answered on the record. And one of those
questions is I hope that information has been shared with DHS
in order to communicate that across the rest of the Federal
infrastructure.
Mr. Hurd. Barring no further business, I'd like to thank
our witnesses for taking the time to appear before us today.
And if there's no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
