- THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

April 15, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-66

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-567 PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2017
________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Katie Bailey, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Government Operations
Chris D'Angelo, Professional Staff Member
Jack Thorlin, Counsel
Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 15, 2016...................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Nina Olson, National Taxpayer Advocate, Internal Revenue
Service
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. James Buttonow, Chairman, Electronic Tax Administration
Advisory Committee, Internal Revenue Service
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53

THE TAXPAYER ADVOCATE ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS

----------

Friday, April 15, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:37 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Meadows
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Meadows, Jordan, Walberg, Carter,
Grothman, Maloney, Plaskett, and Lynch.
Mr. Meadows. The Subcommittee on Government Operations will
come to order. And without objection, the chair is authorized
to declare a recess at any time.
I want to thank you both for coming. We have a few other
things that are going on, so we'll have members coming in and
out.
We are here today obviously to examine the taxpayer
advocate's 2015 annual report. The taxpayer advocate is a
statutorily required--she is statutorily required to provide a
report to Congress and must also identify 20 of the most
serious problems facing the American taxpayer. So I look
forward to hearing from my friend, Nina Olson, the taxpayer
advocate, about how to better serve the American taxpayers by
overcoming these problems.
I would, on a personal note, just say thank you, Ms. Olson,
for coming to western North Carolina to advocate on behalf of
the taxpayer. And really to hear the concerns of so many, it
was very refreshing, well-received, and it just shows that you
are going the extra mile to get that input.
I would also like to thank you for your dedication to, you
know, working to protect the American taxpayer. This was on
full display when you came to my district for the town hall,
but it was also interesting to see the other information that
was helpful to understand about tax administration.
As far as this year's annual report, I would like to note
that, as we look to spend considerable time discussing the
Future State plan that is currently being developed by the IRS,
this plan will lead to a greater electronic tax administration
and online service for the IRS. We obviously have a witness
here from Greensboro, North Carolina, to talk on those issues.
And these are a positive and important trend for the
American taxpayer. However, we want to make sure that we have
the responsibility to ensure that these are done in a safe,
secure manner that protects the information and rights of the
taxpayer.
So I would welcome comments of the taxpayer advocate on
this topic, as well as yours, Mr. Buttonow, the chairman of the
Electronic Tax Administration Advisory Committee. Your
expertise in the area of tax administration will provide a
valuable insight as Congress conducts the oversight of the
IRS's Future State plan.
The taxpayer advocate report also discusses troubling
trends in two important areas: improper payments of the earned
income tax credit and the difficulties administering the
Affordable Care Act. The EITC is one of the largest and most
important tax credits available to low-income taxpayers, and
the taxpayer advocate reports that noted an estimated 27
percent--that is right, 27 percent--of the $65 billion in EITC
claims result in improper payments. This is roughly $17.5
billion and potentially a massive waste. We will look forward
to hearing more from the taxpayer advocate about what is being
done to reduce the improper payments with regard to the EITC
payment program.
Regarding the ACA, the IRS has seen massive overpayments by
individuals of the individual mandate penalty fee. Last year,
approximately 412,000 taxpayers overpaid by an average of $123
per return. The IRS needs to help taxpayers understand
precisely what is their penalty for payments under the ACA.
The taxpayer advocate also noted that the businesses face a
complicated calculation to establish their obligations to pay
the employer-shared-responsibility payment under the ACA. We
have heard from constituents in my district as it relates to
that complex issue as well. The IRS has not issued any clear
guidance to help them calculate that payment obligation.
Furthermore, the taxpayer advocate reports that the IRS's
employees who will handle those complex cases lack the
specialized training needed to do their job effectively.
So in short, the ACA has imposed burdensome requirements on
the American taxpayer, but the IRS is not doing enough to help
the public understand and comply with the law.
I look forward to hearing from both of our witnesses today,
and I want to thank each of you for coming.
Mr. Meadows. And I will now recognize Ms. Plaskett as the
ranking member providing an opening statement instead of Mr.
Connolly. So she is now recognized for her opening statement.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to you. Thank you so much for being here with
us.
I first want to thank Mrs. Olson, Mr. Buttonow, for the
work that they do and for being here today. I sincerely believe
that the work that you both do on behalf of taxpayers and
Congress is vitally important, especially this time of year
when millions of Americans are filing their taxes and, you
know, frustrating. And I personally--I think I have little
stomachaches during this time of year, what about you, Mark?
Mr. Meadows. Without a doubt.
Ms. Plaskett. I hear from my constituents--and I know, Ms.
Olson, you hear from people all over the country--who find
themselves this time of year frustrated and stressed. I
appreciate the forums you have been holding around the country
listening to stakeholders and taxpayers alike so that we can
learn what their concerns are and how we can look for
solutions. That is fantastic.
Many of these frustrations stem from having a difficult
time getting through to a person at the IRS, whether it is the
long wait times for calls or not having a call answered at all.
Unfortunately, this less-than-robust service is not unexpected.
When Congress slashes the inflation-adjusted budget of the IRS
by $1.2 billion, I do not know what we expect to happen to
taxpayer services.
Ms. Olson, you address this in your report stating, ``The
national taxpayer advocate has been recommending against
significant reduction in the IRS's budget because reductions of
this magnitude harm taxpayers.''
Because of the budget cuts Congress has imposed, the IRS
has cut staffing and now has 13,000 fewer full-time permanent
employees. Because of the budget cuts, IRS's IT systems are
totally obsolete. Some of the systems date back to--I thought
this was a typo when I saw it--but it says Kennedy
Administration. These systems are so old that young IT
professionals and recent college graduates do not want and do
not know how to work on them. The IRS cannot find people who
can code in the old languages that run these systems. This is
absolutely unsustainable.
The IRS has outlined its plan to modernize its IT systems,
create efficiencies through online taxpayer accounts in its
Future State Initiatives. Congress needs to fund this
initiative so that we can reverse this trend of degrading
taxpayer services because of the cuts we have made.
Congress approved $290 million in additional funding for
fiscal year 2016, which was a step in the right direction, but
we need to make strides, not mere steps. But online customer
service is not a one-size-fits-all solution for the country.
There are millions of taxpayers who do not have access to or
feel comfortable doing financial transactions online still. The
IRS needs to take this into account.
Ms. Olson, I understand you have some concerns about this
plan, and I look forward to hearing from you today. And the IRS
needs to take these concerns into account when moving forward.
The IRS needs to be transparent and engaged with taxpayers and
Congress as they develop the Future State Initiative.
You also raised an excellent point, Mrs. Olson, when you
state, ``In this environment of more work and inadequate
funding, it is easy to bash the IRS. This bashing in turn can
produce a bunker mentality in the IRS that makes it wary of
sharing things with the public until they are absolutely
finalized. But that means the IRS will almost certainly miss
things and get things wrong precisely because it hasn't engaged
the public and floated proposals publicly before they become
set in stone.''
You also recommend Congress assert our oversight authority
and insist the IRS come sooner rather than later to explain the
specifics of the Future State Initiative. You also state--and I
am going to quote you again--``It is important that these
hearings be kept separate from the hearings Congress has
conducted in recent years over actual or perceived IRS
shortcomings. Letting us see their plans and their initiatives
and their thoughts on moving forward, not just having hearings
about what specifically they're doing.''
I feel like you were speaking directly to this committee,
were you not, Ms. Olson? I call on my Republican colleagues to
heed this advice and to bury the hatchet so that we can work
together to improve taxpayer services for all of our
constituents.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman for her comments. And
I want to follow up just very briefly on that. It is very easy
when we start to look at problems in the Federal Government to
paint with a very broad brush all Federal employees. Ms. Olson,
you know I had the opportunity to visit some of the employees
at the IRS. It is part of a longer process where not only do we
visit them here but throughout the country, as you and I have
discussed.
And so I want for the record today for all those IRS
employees to know that the vast majority of them want to serve
the American taxpayer not only in a professional manner but in
one that is indicative of customer service that would be
highlighted in the best of the private sector. So my hat's off
to the hundreds of thousands of Federal workers who each day
show up. I am committed in a bipartisan way to make sure that
we address the real problems and focus in on that. And that is
the reason for this hearing today. And yet at the same time
applaud those who day in, day out show up to work very
diligently on behalf of the American taxpayer.
So I would like to say that we will hold the record open
for 5 legislative days for any member who would like to submit
a written statement.
We will now recognize our panel of witnesses. I am pleased
to welcome Ms. Nina Olson, the national taxpayer advocate at
the Internal Revenue Service; and Mr. James Buttonow, the
chairman of the Electronic Tax Administration Advisory
Committee at the Internal Revenue Service. Welcome to you both.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify, so I would ask you to please rise
and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Meadows. Thank you. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses answered in the affirmative. You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion and questions, we
would ask that you limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes, but
your entire written statement will be made part of the record.
So I would like to recognize you, Ms. Olson, for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF NINA OLSON

Ms. Olson. Okay. Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member
Plunkett--Plaskett, and distinguished members of the
subcommittee, thank you for holding today's hearing on the
national taxpayer advocate's 2015 Annual Report to Congress. In
the report I identified the IRS's Future State plan as the
number one most serious problem for taxpayers, and I will focus
on that issue in my testimony today.
I will start with a simple but foundational question. What
is taxation about? To my mind, taxation involves taking money
from one person and applying that taking to the greater good of
many if not all. That is an extraordinary thing to ask of
people. A tax system depends on taxpayers being willing to
offer up their hard-earned or saved dollars and let their money
be applied to everyone's or someone else's benefit.
So the central question in tax administration is how do we
promote that willingness? What does the tax administrator need
to do to maintain and expand taxpayers' willingness to pay
their taxes? The answers to these questions should drive both
the current and future state of the IRS.
Taxpayers are experiencing many problems today because the
IRS lacks adequate resources to assist them. Since fiscal year
2010, we estimate the IRS's budget has been reduced by about 19
percent on an inflation-adjusted basis. That is a huge
reduction for any organization, particularly one as labor-
intensive as the IRS.
This year, Congress has given the IRS an additional $290
million, which is very helpful, and I am hopeful Congress will
continue to provide additional funding in the coming years to
ensure our nation's taxpayers receive the assistance they
deserve.
Budget constraints have greatly influenced the IRS Future
State plan that envisions how the agency will operate in 5
years and beyond. A central component of the plan is the
creation of and reliance on online taxpayer accounts. The IRS
believes online accounts will produce significant cost savings
and enable it to substantially reduce its expenditures for
telephone and in-person assistance.
The crux of my disagreement with the IRS boils down to
whether taxpayers will ultimately use online accounts as a
substitute for personal service or whether taxpayers will use
online accounts as a supplement to--for personal service.
While I have long advocated that the IRS offer online
account access to taxpayers, I believe the IRS is wrong in
assuming online accounts will substantially reduce taxpayer
demand for telephone and face-to-face assistance for many
reasons, including that millions of taxpayers do not have
internet access.
Millions of taxpayers with internet access do not feel
comfortable trying to resolve important financial matters over
the internet, particularly in the face of massive security
breaches on online government systems. And many taxpayers are
not cookie-cutter, thus requiring a degree of back-and-forth
discussion that is better suited for conversation and that
taxpayers will insist upon. Therefore, it is critical the IRS
not develop future plans based on assumed cost savings that may
not materialize.
The IRS likes to say it needs to provide the same type of
service that financial institutions provide to their customers.
Well, the results of the most recent annual survey conducted by
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shows
that--and I quote here--``While mobile banking users are
utilizing technological platforms at a high rate and on a
consistent basis, they have also maintained connections to
their banks through the more traditional branch and ATM
channels.''
Yet despite this evidence of consumer behavior in the
financial sector, for several years now the IRS has been
reducing face-to-face taxpayer service options at its taxpayer
assistance centers, and it has recently decided to switch to an
appointment-only system at all of its TACs by the end of 2016.
The TACs, which were previously known as walk-in sites, will no
longer accept walk-in taxpayers. And the IRS is conducting a
pilot under which it will not even accept tax payments from
walk-in taxpayers.
In short, the IRS is failing to meet the needs of many
walk-in taxpayers for personal assistance, and I find the
notion of declining to accept tax payments from walk-in
taxpayers inexplicable and baffling for a tax collection
agency.
The results of the appointment-only TAC pilot show 20
percent of the taxpayers had to wait between 13 and 41 days to
obtain an appointment and 5 percent had to wait more than 41
days for an appointment.
In my written testimony, I describe how taxpayers who
arrive at a TAC without an appointment are being treated. I am
also concerned that as taxpayers give up and stop going to the
TACs because they are not provided--providing adequate
assistance, the IRS will use the data of declining usages to
justify further reductions in in-person service.
For many years and in many areas, the IRS has made more
services more difficult to use and then touted the declining
usage of that service as a basis to cut the service further and
to eliminate it entirely. To me it--that's disingenuous.
I believe the IRS must--the Future State must adopt as its
north star the needs of the vast majority of taxpayers who are
willing to comply with the laws. I use the word ``willing''
here deliberately because it includes taxpayers who may not now
be in compliance. These are taxpayers who want to comply but
for one reason or another are not able to. My point here is
that rather than designing tax administration around the small
minority of taxpayers who are deliberately evading payment of
tax, we should design our rules and procedures to make it
easier and clearer for the willing taxpayers to comply.
In my opinion, any Future State plan will fail unless the
IRS changes its focus to prioritize taxpayer assistance and
does a better job of listening to taxpayers and their
representatives about what it takes to maintain and enhance
voluntary compliance.
Thank you, and I'll be glad to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Olson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Ms. Olson.
Mr. Buttonow, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES BUTTONOW

Mr. Buttonow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you----
Mr. Meadows. If you will push that red button right in
front of you, or it will be red once you push it.
Mr. Buttonow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
subcommittee for holding today's hearing on the national
taxpayer advocate's 2015 Annual Report to Congress.
The taxpayer advocate and her office are critical voices to
the rights of all taxpayers in the improvement of tax
administration. Each year, the taxpayers' best friend, Nina
Olson and her team, take a very productive approach to reducing
taxpayer burden while increasing overall voluntary compliance.
The IRS Electronic Tax Administration Advisory Committee,
or ETAAC as we're known, was formed by law in 1998 to make
strategic recommendations to Congress on how to improve overall
tax administration through electronic means. In short, we are
objective, outside digital strategy consultants to the IRS.
In the past few years, ETAAC has been focused on two big
challenges in tax administration today: first, the
proliferation of tax identity theft; and second, the inadequate
levels of taxpayer service at the IRS caused by an antiquated
customer service model. The committee believes that a key
solution to both of these problems is a more innovative
digitally enabled IRS. Much of this is outlined in the IRS's
Future State Initiative.
Now, to address the urgent problem of tax identity theft,
the IRS commissioner has formed a security summit, which is a
coalition of State and industry leaders. ETAAC applauds this
collaboration with industry and the--for the IRS in working
together with this important group to find solutions.
Authenticating taxpayer identities is absolutely foundational
to a digitally enabled IRS, and the Security Summit is working
towards some innovative solutions to this challenge.
But today, I'm going to focus on the Future State of
taxpayer service at the IRS. Now, first, let's take a look at
where we are today. Now, for most taxpayers interacting with
the IRS, it's not quick, it's not easy, and it's mostly done by
paper and phone. Most taxpayers have no idea about their tax
information or their status at the IRS, and when they do have
to interact with the IRS, they're often greeted with long wait
times and extended answer periods. Now, these are big problems,
especially for the 43 percent of taxpayers who have to interact
with the IRS outside of filing a tax return.
Now, the IRS's current state and their history, quite
frankly, could leave us feeling quite pessimistic about the
near-term possibility of modernizing taxpayer service. But the
IRS has committed to a digitally enabled taxpayer service model
with its Future State Initiative. The IRS Future State vision
aligns with ETAAC's vision of how taxpayers should be served by
their tax administrator.
Now, an ideal taxpayer experience allows taxpayers to fully
understand their tax obligations, have transparent access to
their tax information and status with the IRS, and allows the
taxpayer to effectively and securely interact with their tax
administrator in the way that they want to be served. Now,
these are big statements, but they're not revolutionary. In
fact, the Future State mirrors the customer service experience
that most financial institutions and many other companies
already provide today.
So what will the Future State mean for taxpayers? First, it
will mean transparency when there's hardly any today. Taxpayers
will get information customized to their circumstances,
including their specific tax responsibilities. The Future State
will also mean real-time taxpayer service, so it'll allow
taxpayers to securely interact with the IRS online.
Now, what about taxpayers who want or need to deal with the
IRS in person or by phone? Now, these taxpayers, they're not
left behind. It's true that increasing numbers of taxpayers
prefer interacting online. When the IRS creates digital tools,
it can meet their expectations. But importantly, by doing so,
the IRS will also free up phone lines and IRS employees for
taxpayers who really need and prefer human interaction. The IRS
will meet taxpayers where they want to be served whether it's
online, by phone, by chat, by taxpayer assistance center, a
VITA site, or a low-income taxpayer clinic, or through a tax
professional.
Now, let me sum it all up. The Future State of the IRS
enables technology as part of a holistic taxpayer service
strategy. The Future State embraces digital solutions to allow
the IRS to maximize its limited resources. It creates targeted
capacity to serve all taxpayers they way they want to be
served. ETAAC endorses the digital service components of the
IRS Future State plan.
Now, to take it a step further, we have abdicated to
Congress that the IRS actually accelerate these plans, but this
won't be easy. We know that the IRS has many obstacles to
overcome, and this includes satisfying all of us that the
security of taxpayer information comes absolutely first.
So on behalf of the ETAAC, thank you for inviting us to
testify on this important topic on the Future State of the IRS.
I'd be happy to take any questions from the subcommittee.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Buttonow follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you so much.
The chair recognizes the vice chair of the Government
Operations Subcommittee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for a series of questions.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And probably the
three of us being here indicates that we don't fear the IRS,
right?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walberg. So then why are we here? No, I certainly agree
with the points you made about the general IRS employee
attempting to do their job but a difficult job.
Ms. Olson, 2015 is the first year that the IRS has to
implement a number of measures that are targeted with the
Affordable Care Act, for example, one of those being the
employer shared-responsibility payment. Your report suggested
that the IRS doesn't know which employees are going to be
responsible for evaluating employers so those employees
probably will not have adequate training if I understand the
report. Let me ask you, what complexities will the IRS
employees face in determining which employers must pay the
employer-shared responsibility payment?
Ms. Olson. I think there are a lot of questions about what
employees are going to be included in some very complex
calculations to determine who is covered, who should be
covered, and then who isn't covered. And that all goes into the
calculation of whether the employer is going to be penalized.
And the penalty is very, very stiff and very steep. And our
concern has been that we have heard from a lot of employers
about the complexity of these determinations, and that they
have not been able to get answers in the way or with the speed
that they need to get them.
This is a new initiative, but I think this is where
transparency and engaging with the population that's going to
be penalized is--should have happened a long time ago and needs
to happen now and really needs to heed them, what their
concerns are.
Mr. Walberg. Do you see any efforts toward that direction?
Ms. Olson. I think people are trying. I think that it's not
as open as I would like. I also think some of it is that the
IRS isn't the only one involved in this. You know, they're
getting information from other areas. The law is very complex,
and there are lots of government agencies involved.
It's getting better, but we want to see more engagement,
and we want to see more guidance, even if it's put out there in
a temporary format.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Another area with ACA is the workweek,
the hours, 30 hours----
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Walberg.--provisions that is there. IRS, from your
report, has failed to issue formal guidance about calculating--
--
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Walberg.--full-time employees for the Employer Shared
Responsibility Act. Has the IRS offered a reason why it will
not help employers, especially when they can't use the Web site
and the information on the Web site as a defense----
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Walberg.--for failure to----
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Walberg.--do it the way the IRS then says they should?
Is there a reason why they won't help employers to understand
their obligation?
Ms. Olson. I have not heard a reason, and we really focused
in on that 30-hour calculation because that's what we heard a
great deal from employers. You know, they need to have some
certainty in a way they'll accept and answer as long as they
have an answer so that then they can do their own programming.
There's a whole domino effect to this guidance. You know, once
you get it out there, people have to program their own systems.
They have to do their assurance processes and things like that.
And people are doing the best they can and they're worried
that they will be penalized and the penalties won't be abated
if they show good-faith effort. And we're trying to identify
the issues and raise them to the IRS and get them to engage
with the community.
Mr. Walberg. Well, certainly, guidelines ought to be a
defense----
Ms. Olson. You would think so.
Mr. Walberg.--if they have attempted to follow it.
Ms. Olson. Yes. If you--and if you tried----
Mr. Walberg. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--to follow what was generic out there on the Web
site, that goes to the penalty abatement. But again, why would
you want to put an employer in the position of having to ask
for penalty abatement when they could have avoided the penalty
in the ----
Mr. Walberg. Right, in the first place.
Ms. Olson.--beginning if they had the guidance?
Mr. Walberg. Yes. On the individual shared-responsibility
payment issue, you have indicated that in tax year 2014
approximately 412,000 taxpayers overpaid the penalty associated
with a failure to apply. The average, you stated, was $123 per
return. What percentage of taxpayers had to make the individual
shared-responsibility payment?
Ms. Olson. Pardon? What----
Mr. Walberg. What percentage of taxpayers?
Ms. Olson. You know, I don't know the answer to that. I--
it's in my testimony. It's in my annual report. I can get you
that.
Mr. Walberg. We have 412,000 taxpayers. I was just
wondering what percentage----
Ms. Olson. Of them all----
Mr. Walberg.--of those----
Ms. Olson.--I--actually, I don't know the answer to that--
--
Mr. Walberg. Okay.
Ms. Olson.--but I can give you that----
Mr. Walberg. If we could get that, that would----
Ms. Olson.--percentage.
Mr. Walberg.--be great.
Ms. Olson. Yes. You know, those overpayments were--a lot of
them were driven by software not asking taxpayers to identify
their exemptions. And so they were actually exempt from having
health insurance, but they didn't ask, and so--the software
didn't ask, and so they didn't tell anybody. And that's also
true that some of the preparers didn't ask.
We were able to work with the software companies to get
some of those programs changed for this filing season, and
we'll be looking very carefully at those overpayments to make
sure that it doesn't happen again.
Mr. Walberg. Well, thanks for looking. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
So, Ms. Olson, one quick follow-up question. Is the
guidance ambiguous enough that the IRS should consider a waiver
of penalties until we get the guidance more specific?
Ms. Olson. My personal opinion is that this law is so
complex that for the first year we should be very, very lenient
and only apply a penalty where there's truly egregious, in-
your-face ignoring of basic requirements, that this is a
learning process and we have to have a partnership with the
tax--the employer population so that we can identify the
issues, get clearer guidance out there, use this filing season
as a dry run. That is how I would have approached it.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Thank you, Ms. Olson.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for a series of questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
both of the panelists for your willingness to help the
committee with its work.
I did have a question that was raised earlier about the
Affordable Care Act. A big part of the funding mechanism for
the Affordable Care Act was the so-called Cadillac tax. Now,
the Cadillac tax applies to generous health care plans, a lot
of union health care plans. I am a former union president
myself, so I have served as a trustee of the health care plan.
The tax is about a 40 percent tax. It applies to both the
employer and the employee. Now, Congress in its wisdom delayed
the implementation of the Cadillac tax until 2020. However, the
limit stays the same, so thousands and thousands, probably
millions of more people will be in that Cadillac tax category
when 2020 rolls around. So for every dollar over the limit, you
will pay a 40 percent tax, so 40 cents for every dollar you put
into your health care over the limit. And it is prorated for
employer and employee, so the employee is going to have pay
more on tax, this Cadillac tax, and the employer. I read it
more closely. And then the tax itself, the penalty is taxed, so
it really comes out to like a 58 or 59 percent penalty on every
dollar spent over that limit.
I am just wondering, do employees and employers know that?
Do the health care plans----
Ms. Olson. I think that's some of the----
Mr. Lynch.--I mean----
Ms. Olson.--problem with the Affordable Care Act. There are
so many moving pieces in it that getting education out about
all of these issues is very difficult. I have not looked at the
statute specifically to see whether it's indexed for inflation.
Mr. Lynch. It is not.
Ms. Olson. Then that would be something that we----
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--seriously need to----
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Ms. Olson.--look at.
Mr. Lynch. We asked Mr. Gruber, Jonathan Gruber, who was
one of the architects of this plan, and he explained that it
was not adjusted for the rate of inflation because they wanted
more and more people over time to be captured by that tax.
And, you know, I will confess I am a former union attorney
and union president. In my history I have dealt with a lot of
union plans not only for the ironworkers but for the Teamsters
and the wardrobe workers. And so all of these plans are going
to be--and a lot of these big companies like Gillette and
Raytheon and all--funny, the people who sat down with their
employees and worked out a plan for their health care plan, the
people who did the right thing, they are the ones that are
going to be hit with this tax. And it is a huge, huge problem,
and it is multiplied because of the amount of the tax and now
we have delayed it so more and more people are going to be
captured.
And I am just wondering from the IRS position, are we
educating consumers about that because when it hits, it is
going to be like a tidal wave. It is going to wipe out a lot of
health care plans. I am just wondering if we have contingency
plans for that event?
Ms. Olson. I think this is something that, because it is so
far off, it is not something that the IRS is thinking about
messaging, and yet----
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--on the other hand, if you are really trying to
drive people's behavior, you should be starting the messaging
now so that it----
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--sinks in and they can make the plans to not be
hit in 2020.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson. You know, I also----
Mr. Lynch. The dilemma is that costs of health care keep
going up----
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Lynch.--and you are telling people you want them to
spend less--employers and employees, you are telling them,
because of the tax, you want them to spend less on health care.
Ms. Olson. Right.
Mr. Lynch. And so, you know, it is tough to reconcile----
Ms. Olson. From the taxpayers' perspective, not indexing
it--and I understand the policy reasons for why you wouldn't--
but it's like the alternative minimum tax----
Mr. Lynch. Right, exactly.
Ms. Olson.--you know, it's so----
Mr. Lynch. More and more people get captured.
Ms. Olson. It's so irrational when----
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--the taxpayer sees that number coming up and
they think they've held their withholding and everything like
that, that you can have all the policy reasons in the world,
but it feels profoundly unfair to the taxpayer.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Mr. Buttonow, do you have any comments on
that?
Mr. Buttonow. Just I think I could echo was--I could echo
what Nina says. And the ACA has got so much complexity to is,
is that when you're dealing with the IRS, they're like what's
urgent now. And so what's urgent now----
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Buttonow. What--what's urgent now, you know, after a
while, you know, you look at what's urgent now, you fall behind
on some things. And when you talk about falling behind on some
of the individual shared responsibility of the--with the
employer shared-responsibility penalty, you're looking at maybe
the IRS should employ some of their administrative relief items
like first-time abatement or such like that so that it gives
taxpayers some relief because, you know, taxpayers are getting
caught up on this--not voluntarily being caught up on this.
They're just a victim of not knowing what to do. So----
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Buttonow.--you know, in order to promote voluntary
compliance, by all means, I think you should give them a waiver
the first year.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. All right. Fair enough. Thank you both. I
yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
being here. We appreciate you being here. This is obviously
very important to all of us and all Americans.
Ms. Olson, in your 2015 taxpayer advocate report you list
the right to a fair and just tax system as a taxpayer right.
You would agree to that, right?
Ms. Olson. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Do you agree that a fair and just tax system is
one that ensures that the tax credits only go to those who are
qualified to get them?
Ms. Olson. Absolutely. Taxpayers need to know that, you
know, everyone is paying the right amount of tax, and that
would include not getting credits that aren't--they are not
eligible for.
Mr. Carter. So it is inclusive in a fair and just----
Ms. Olson. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter.--tax system that tax rebates aren't going to
people who shouldn't be getting them?
Ms. Olson. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Okay. In the report that we referenced earlier,
the report stated that improper payments constitute 27 percent,
27 percent of the $65 billion that were handed out annually
through the earned income tax credit. That amounts to $17.7
billion of improper payments----
Ms. Olson. That's----
Mr. Carter.--$17.7 billion----
Ms. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Carter.--of improper payments. How do filers obtain
improper payments? How does that happen?
Ms. Olson. These improper payments come in when taxpayers
fill out their tax return and claim the earned income tax
credit. And the payments can occur for--overpayments can occur
for many reasons. It can be that they are incorrectly stating
their income. They can be claiming a child that they are not
eligible to claim because that's where most of the
eligibility--that's the eligibility requirement, to have a
qualifying child. The law is very complex and it's easy to fall
afoul. There are a percentage of those payments, although no
one really knows, that are attributable just to out-and-out
fraud, whether it's that there's a preparer involved saying,
okay, here, you claim somebody else's child or a taxpayer
decides that they're going to claim somebody else's child----
Mr. Carter. Okay. Well, let me----
Ms. Olson.--but----
Mr. Carter.--Let me ask you specifically. Is it possible--
in your research has it indicated that illegal immigrants have
received some of these improper payments from the earned income
tax credit?
Ms. Olson. It should not be possible because if they're----
Mr. Carter. But does your research indicate that it
happens?
Ms. Olson. I do not see that as--the IRS does not see that
as a major issue because for the earned income tax----
Mr. Carter. But----
Ms. Olson.--credit----
Mr. Carter. Not as a major issue, but is it----
Ms. Olson. No, but ----
Mr. Carter.--an issue?
Ms. Olson. I do not think it is because, for the earned
income tax credit, you have to have a Social Security number
and use that on the return. You cannot use an ID----
Mr. Carter. But we're not naive enough to believe that
there aren't fraudulent Social Security numbers out there.
Ms. Olson. There are Social Security numbers that people--
identity thieves are using, and if someone who's an
undocumented person or an illegal immigrant as you call it, you
know, files a return with someone else's Social Security
number, that is identity theft and----
Mr. Carter. I understand----
Ms. Olson.--we have----
Mr. Carter.--and I--I am sorry.
Ms. Olson. Yes, okay.
Mr. Carter. I don't mean to interrupt but, you know, I
don't know that we are necessarily going to agree on this. But
I want to ask you, is it possible for an illegal immigrant who
is given or granted protection or protected status--for an
illegal immigrant who is granted protected status under
President Obama's Executive actions, can they obtain the earned
income tax credit?
Ms. Olson. If they have a Social Security number under that
program that's authorized for work----
Mr. Carter. Is it possible to get a Social Security number
under that program?
Ms. Olson. I don't know the answer under that program, but
if under that program they could get a Social Security number
authorized for work, they could claim the earned income credit
under the law.
Mr. Carter. So the answer to my question, can an illegal
immigrant who is granted protected status under President
Obama's Executive orders obtain the earned income tax credit,
the answer is yes?
Ms. Olson. If they have a Social Security number authorized
for work. That's the requirement that's--in the earned income
credit, you have to have a Social Security number authorized to
work, your spouse has to have a Social Security number
authorized to work, and your child that you're using has to
have a Social Security number authorized to work.
Mr. Carter. Okay. As I understand it, improper payments of
the earned income tax credit have increased since 2005.
Ms. Olson. They've actually----
Mr. Carter. They have increased from 2005 to the present
day.
Ms. Olson. There may have been an increase. I thought it
was fairly stated----
Mr. Carter. Is it possible that that increase can be
attributed to illegal immigrants?
Ms. Olson. My personal opinion is not. That's my personal
opinion.
Mr. Carter. Do any of the studies indicate----
Ms. Olson. None of the IRS----
Mr. Carter.--and back up your personal opinion?
Ms. Olson. None of the IRS studies indicate that. I'm just
telling you what--the sources of the error for the earned
income credit, the majority of the errors are attributable to
overstated income.
Mr. Carter. I understand, but I am specifically interested
in illegal immigrants who are getting this, and all I want to
ask you, my final question is is the administration
addressing--or the IRS, are you addressing this at all?
Ms. Olson. The IRS is certainly looking at undocumented
persons, persons who don't have Social Security numbers getting
credits that they shouldn't be getting.
Mr. Carter. I----
Ms. Olson. They are certainly looking at that.
Mr. Carter. I would certainly hope so because as we started
out this conversation, a fair and just tax system would
certainly involve that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes himself for a series of questions. And
depending on votes, they are supposed to call votes here
shortly. We will see whether Mr. Lynch and I have a series of
second questions.
Mr. Buttonow, let me come to you. You know, with the
electronic filing and that being your expertise, do you see
that electronic filing has increased the likelihood of identify
theft at the IRS?
Mr. Buttonow. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. I need you to hit your button.
Mr. Buttonow. Absolutely. I think what it--it's one of the
elements that enabled it, right? So, you know, electronic
filing and fast refunds have come about, it offers the
opportunity for tax ID thefts to beat the IRS to the refund. So
they'll get the refund quick, long before the IRS has the
ability to go ahead and verify them as a taxpayer.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So if electronic filing has
increased the likelihood of identify theft, further going more
digital, as you mentioned in your opening testimony under the
Future State plan, would that exacerbate the chances of
identity theft?
Mr. Buttonow. It could. It very well could. But if you
adopt industry standards of authentication, it may in fact
actually work in the opposite.
One thing that we don't have in our system today is we
don't verify taxpayers before they file. Anybody can come and
go, right, offering the opportunity for identity thieves to
take someone's identity and go with it.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Mr. Buttonow. If we were able to authenticate taxpayers
before they filed, we would know who they are----
Mr. Meadows. All right. So ----
Mr. Buttonow.--to offer an opportunity ----
Mr. Meadows. So in that you make your living, I guess, with
taxpayers being able to file electronically, is that correct?
Mr. Buttonow. Actually, I don't file one tax return a year,
so no, I don't make my living on----
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Mr. Buttonow.--the e-file.
Mr. Meadows. Well, your group does. I mean, I guess
you're----
Mr. Buttonow. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--representing a group----
Mr. Buttonow. Yes. That--yes. I mean, and generally, we're
in favor of e-filing, right? That's the mandate the ETAAC has
had since 1998 where our original goal was to get the IRS when
they were at 15, 20 percent e-file rate to 80 percent, and
we've gone past that 80 percent goal.
Mr. Meadows. Right. So if that is your goal and you have
private stakeholders that are making a profit based on that and
the potential danger is that because of that new model that
we're getting additional taxpayer identify theft. The hard
question is is what liability or what protections does the
private sector have versus the Federal Government? And that is
the fundamental question we have to have. Is this all the IRS's
responsibility or is there a responsibility for the preparer/
authenticator, as you have just mentioned?
Mr. Buttonow. Well, I think it's a shared effort, right?
I----
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Mr. Buttonow.--think it's a shared--it's definitely a
shared effort. And that's what the Security Summit is looking
to do is to find where software companies can go ahead and put
in those additional authentications, and they have done that.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Mr. Buttonow. But I--but understand that that, you know,
detection at the back end of it is still ultimately just
detection. Prevention would be a better method.
Mr. Meadows. I understand that. So the last question I have
for you is what impediments are you finding that would stop the
private stakeholders from assisting the IRS with that
authentication process?
Mr. Buttonow. The IRS's willingness to do so, right? So----
Mr. Meadows. So you are saying they are not willing to do
so?
Mr. Buttonow. Well, I--so there's--it--the IRS is clearly
obviously the tax administrator. Them dealing with private
industry is--I mean, obviously, they're doing it more and
more----
Mr. Meadows. But this Future State plan calls for more
electronic filing and everything to be online--well, not online
and transparent but online and digital in its nature so that we
go what we call to a virtual customer service rep versus a real
customer service rep. So you are saying that they are not
willing to help the stakeholders authenticate?
Mr. Buttonow. Well----
Mr. Meadows. Because that is a pretty bold statement. If it
is true, we need to address it, but that is a bold statement.
Mr. Buttonow. No, what I am saying is is the IRS needs to
view industry as a partner, right?
Mr. Meadows. And they don't?
Mr. Buttonow. Well, it's a tenuous relationship, right? So
you definitely need to look at--if you want the best technology
out there, I'm not sure that looking inside the IRS to
understand that is the best place, right? In order to be able--
--
Mr. Meadows. So how can Mr. Lynch--let me cut you off there
because I am running out of time. How can Mr. Lynch and I
assist you with the IRS to make sure that it is a hand-in-glove
approach versus a--as you--I think your adjective was
contentious. Did you say contentious?
Mr. Buttonow. It's tenuous.
Mr. Meadows. Tenuous, okay.
Mr. Buttonow. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Wrong word, but go ahead. Tenuous.
How can Mr. Lynch and I help you there?
Mr. Buttonow. Well, I think by encouraging the IRS to work
with industry. I mean, some--there are some barriers to going
ahead and working with industry on some of the disclosure rules
that make it a barrier for sharing information. So there needs
to be a partnership, a true partnership between the industry
and the IRS when it comes to all things technology. The IRS
can't expect to be a technology leader out there. There is many
other people--many other companies and many other developers
out there who are technology leaders.
Mr. Meadows. Yes, they are still programming in COBOL so
I----
Mr. Buttonow. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--understand that.
Mr. Buttonow. I----
Mr. Meadows. Well, I have run out of time. I thank you. I
have got some questions for Ms. Olson, but I am going to go to
Mr. Lynch and recognize him for a second series of questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, we have recounted some of the weaknesses in the
IRS system, you know, lack of personnel, that has diminished of
recent years, lack of communication between the taxpayer and
the IRS, the risk of ID theft through filings. Do we have any
idea how many false tax returns get filed every year?
Ms. Olson. Oh, there are millions.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Okay.
Ms. Olson. And I have to say that----
Mr. Lynch. All right. You don't need to get into that.
The complexity of the system as well, the health care
information component that has come in recently, and then the
infrastructure weakness as well. I understand some of the
programs that the IRS is using date back to the Kennedy
Administration, which is sad.
I am just worried about--not just worried about, but I am
worried about the presumption of compliance, you know, within
the American people. And I think most people pay their taxes,
try to do the right thing. I know there are countries where
that is not the norm. I know Greece is very, very low
compliance, you know, with tax laws. Nobody pays--well, very
few people pay their taxes. Mostly the government employees pay
their taxes because the government takes it out right away.
And I am just wondering, you know, with all these
obstructions that I am listing here, are we going to see a
lower rate--is there a trend now that you shouldn't pay your
taxes? You should get off the grid? Is that something that
might result because of all of these factors, Ms. Olson?
Ms. Olson. I think that particularly last year's filing
season when we had such a low percentage of the phone calls
answered by the IRS, you know, that--or when you won't take a
payment in a walk-in site ----
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--you know, this is sending a message that we're
just--we can't deal with you, and a taxpayer would say, well,
if you can't deal with me, I won't deal with you.
The problem with that is the IRS will eventually find you
and it'll be very unpleasant when that happens.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson. And I think, you know, my concern is about the
future. It's a combination of where we are today. We've got
this bright picture of the future, but our technology is so far
behind today. And we're just talking about, you know, a
customer account, but the data into that customer account has
to come from about 200 different case management systems. And,
you know, there are employees today who can't see into this
system when they're trying to talk to a taxpayer on the phone
and you have to call somebody else to get the answer to that.
So how that's going to merge in an online account, this is
very, very complex.
In the meantime, you also have the percentage of taxpayers
who don't or won't use these accounts and for very good
reasons.
And the other issue that I have about the online account
is, as we try to protect the security of the taxpayer--and we
should set very high standards for that verification because we
can't have one leak. I mean, that would be horrible, and the
impact on compliance would be huge.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Ms. Olson. But if we set it high, we will have people drop
out. The IRS right now is testing a version of the online
account with IRS senior management and non-bargaining unit
employees. So these are people who are fairly sophisticated
financially. Fifty percent of those volunteers could not get
through the online account the first time around.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, that is not good.
Ms. Olson. Fifty percent.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Thank you. Thank you for answering my
question. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. Ms. Olson, I want to come back to a few things
that have been mentioned today, but one of the things I heard
when you were in western North Carolina was that we have a
greater need for personal contact, that even with the online
tools that may be here, that when that interaction, when there
is a letter that comes from the IRS, that there is a desire to
have not only a personal contact but just someone who can
manage the system. And the frustration that I heard in the room
was of hours of holding of just trying to get a real person
somewhere who can answer the question. And then when they
called back that they don't leave enough detail that it
actually leaves kind of this--they pass the football back, but
they are not sure who they are getting the pass from. Was that
input in North Carolina different than what you have heard in
your other panels across the country?
Ms. Olson. We have heard this consistently. You know, we
have heard both from taxpayers and practitioners that they want
to talk to the IRS. For a taxpayer, they don't understand the
notice that they've received, and they want to hear from the
IRS what it means. And that would be true whether they get it
electronically or they get it, you know, in the mail.
For the practitioners, they did say that they would find
the online accounts very, very helpful because then--because
they could look at the background, they could go online to
their tax--their client's account, see what's going on in it,
but then they would want to call the IRS.
They would also use the account to monitor what happened
after they talked to the IRS and the IRS said we'll do X. So it
could get rid of some phone calls and, you know, might get rid
of two phone calls out of every, you know, transaction, but
they still for that critical what are you--you know, let me
tell you this, let me hear from you, they want that
interaction.
Mr. Meadows. So obviously part of that is a resource issue.
Ms. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. Part of it is not a resource issue; it is a
commitment issue. And the reason I say that is I heard about--
you know, in your testimony you talked about having to schedule
an appointment for walk-up centers. Now, we all love the fact
that we need an appointment, but the other part of is is that
what is perplexing to me is you have a willing taxpayer willing
to give some of their hard-earned dollars to the IRS and show
up and they are saying we can't take the payment because you
don't have an appointment. Is that correct?
Ms. Olson. That's correct.
Mr. Meadows. Is that not insane? I mean, you know, I have
worked in collections. I won't make you comment on whether that
is insane or not----
Ms. Olson. I'm perfectly fine commenting on it. It is
insane. I don't understand the policy. I think it says to the--
the taxpayer is standing there saying what?
Mr. Meadows. So we have heard a little bit about a
directive memo that would suggest on what--as people try to
comply where there is this compromise and they are saying,
okay, here is my down payment. It is my understanding in the
past if they are not up to speed on all their tax returns, we
have taken that money and we have held it and said you need to
get caught up, and once you get caught up, we will be able to
agree to this. Is it true that now when someone comes in with a
check and a compromise that if they are not caught up that we
are sending the check back to the taxpayer? Is that true?
Ms. Olson. Yes. The IRS released a memo this week saying if
you file an offer and compromise and you give us your down
payment, we--and you're not in compliance with all your tax
returns, we are sending the money back to you, we are sending
the offer back to you and saying get in compliance.
Mr. Meadows. So I will ask a second time, is that not
insane?
Ms. Olson. Yes, it is insane.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So we have American taxpayers who are
willing to pay their taxes, albeit maybe reluctantly, but they
are willing to do it, and we have the IRS who is giving the
money back or refusing to take the money because they don't
have an appointment.
Ms. Olson. Yes, that makes no sense.
Mr. Meadows. That should be headlines. I mean, I don't
understand why we would do that.
So what can Mr. Lynch and I and Mr. Jordan and I do with
Commissioner Koskinen to help him perhaps see the error of
their ways? What would you recommend?
Ms. Olson. I think raising this in this hearing has
certainly done a lot, but I honestly think that the IRS needs
to do a better job when it makes these decisions of analyzing
the consequences of these decisions and not just look at we're
saving money because we're not handling these in-person
contacts that are $60 per contact. You may have spent $60, but
you might have brought in $5,000 by serving that taxpayer in
that walk-in site. And that's the not the analysis that's
happening, and that needs to be asked for.
Mr. Meadows. Would you be willing to give this committee in
the next 45 days or so your recommendations on what legislative
fixes that you would recommend? Or actually, I am asking you to
do that.
Ms. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. And so if you would be willing to do that,
what I would like to do is to make sure inn a bipartisan way we
address that. There are a number of others. I think they are
about to call votes. I am going to recognize the gentleman from
Ohio for a series of questions so if----
Ms. Olson. Thank you. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Olson, thank you for being here and for the work of
your office.
Are you familiar with the--we had earlier this week the GAO
here in this committee room talking about the $385 billion
annual tax gap that exists. You are familiar with the GAO's
report?
Ms. Olson. I haven't read their most recent, but I'm very
familiar with the tax gap and the----
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And would you agree that that is a pretty
accurate figure they have put on it? I mean----
Ms. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Jordan.--the gentleman here from the IRS, frankly,
agreed with GAO's finding.
Ms. Olson. Well, I think that that data comes from the IRS,
you know----
Mr. Jordan. So you think it is right?
Ms. Olson. So it's as correct as you can--it's the known
tax gap. There's an unknown tax gap----
Mr. Jordan. Yes.
Ms. Olson.--criminal activity, things like that, but yes, I
think people--there's a general consensus that's the figure.
Mr. Jordan. And obviously all the Americans who pay their
taxes would expect that all the revenue should be generated and
that they would get the type of service that, you know, they
need or expect from their government. And that is maybe not
happening because of the failure to collect all the revenue
due.
Ms. Olson. We have looked at the tax gap as a surtax on the
taxpayers who are paying their taxes.
Mr. Jordan. Exactly right. And GAO had 112 recommendations
to the IRS that would help deal with this significant tax gap.
And our understanding is that the IRS has only implemented 53
of those 112 recommendations. Is that your understanding?
Ms. Olson. That, I think, is what the report said, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And obviously, that, too, seems to be not
reflective of what is best for taxpayers, the failure of the
IRS to implement all their recommendations.
And the chairman was just talking about this appointment
issue, which I didn't know about, which is, as you said a
couple times, I think, is crazy. I think the term you used or
the chairman used was insane. Did any of the 112
recommendations deal with that issue?
Ms. Olson. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Jordan. So there should be 113 at least then?
Ms. Olson. Sounds like it.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Okay. The one thing I am concerned about
is an IRS that won't implement 112, now 113 recommendations
that make sense, that will help taxpayers, treat them with the
respect they deserve, is focused on something that I think
potentially can harm taxpayers, harm their most fundamental
liberties. And that is this whole geolocation stingray
operation. Are you familiar with what stingray technology does?
Ms. Olson. I have a high level of understanding. I'm not
detailed----
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
Ms. Olson.--level, but I understand what you're talking
about.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And the witness who was here earlier this
week said that he believes--we posed a number of questions to
Mr. Dalrymple, who frankly couldn't answer many of them but
said he would get back with us. But one thing he did offer to
the committee was that he believes 37 times this technology,
which without a probable cause warrant was used on American
taxpayers and----
Ms. Olson. By the IRS.
Mr. Jordan. By the IRS, yes. I mean, good point, there are
other agencies using it, too, I believe without Fourth
Amendment probable cause type of warrants. And that the IRS is
currently in the process of purchasing an additional stingray
unit, additional technology at the cost of several hundred
thousand dollars. Do you believe that is in the best interest
of taxpayers?
Ms. Olson. I don't know that I have enough information to
answer that question. I need to know who is going to use it and
what are the protections for using it. And I don't have the
knowledge about that. If it were not being--if it were
available to anyone on the civil side of the IRS as opposed to
the criminal side and due process protections and court orders
were not being expected----
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask the question this way----
Ms. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Jordan.--Ms. Olson. Of those 112 recommendations that
GAO made to deal with the $385 billion tax gap that we now know
should frankly be 113 recommendations based on the discussion
between you and the chairman, do any of those 113
recommendations encourage the IRS to purchase an additional
stingray technology unit?
Ms. Olson. Not that I know of.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. That is my understanding, too. But,
potentially, at least potentially you would agree with me that
this stingray technology infringes on the very taxpayers you
are supposed to be advocating for, infringes on potentially
their most fundamental liberties?
Ms. Olson. I have a lot of concerns about its use. I share
your concerns.
Mr. Jordan. I thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, all of
the panelists, and thank you to the ranking member.
The IRS is developing the taxpayer experience of the future
of virtual taxpayer assistance through individual online
accounts. It will replace the personal interaction for digital-
savvy taxpayers. So, Ms. Olson, you write in your report that
this plan has been driven by a really important consideration,
and that is the lack of appropriate funding and continual
cutbacks to the operations of the IRS. In your opinion, does
the plan have the potential for making the agency more
efficient and saving money for the future?
Ms. Olson. I personally don't think so. I think it will
create a lot of rework for itself.
Mrs. Maloney. And if you were to move forward with this
program, is it important or is it necessary for Congress to
make a lot of contributions or contribute substantially to the
cost of it or----
Ms. Olson. Well, it's going to require some significant up-
front cost, revamping----
Mrs. Maloney. Like about how much----
Ms. Olson.--whole systems.
Mrs. Maloney.--do you think?
Ms. Olson. I really couldn't give you that estimate. I
think it's--parts of it are in the President's budget
proposals, things like that, that--but it is, you know, just--
because we have systems that are still in COBOL, because we are
just very archaic in our systems, to pull something off like
this, to have it really an integrated system is going to cost a
lot of money, a total----
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Ms. Olson.--reengineering of the IRS IT.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Buttonow, most recent annual report to
Congress from your organization makes the observation, ``Future
challenges require digital transformation at the IRS,'' and you
state, ``The IRS needs to transform its taxpayer services and
compliance capabilities for the efficiency through digital
tools.'' It's been reported that some of IRS's systems date
back to the Kennedy Administration. Will those systems support
the transformation that you're talking about, Mr. Buttonow?
Mr. Buttonow. Yes, ultimately. Now, this is not going to
happen overnight. I mean, what the IRS needs to do is build--if
they want to have an online presence, an online taxpayer
service, they need to start iterating on that now, which means
give us a solid plan of what the details are and start
improving on each iteration. So as the IRS develops its
capabilities, those systems that support those capabilities
will need to be upgraded.
Mrs. Maloney. The IRS Commissioner John Koskinen
acknowledges the responsibility to serve all taxpayers,
including those who prefer personal over digital interaction.
And I guess I will ask this question to both of you. Is there
anything that you have not seen in this plan that you believe
should have been included to improve taxpayer services?
Ms. Olson. Well, my--again, my disagreement with the IRS is
that the--we all agree that an online account is vitally
important. My disagreement is that the online account is not
going to substitute for in-person, you know, or phone
assistance, that personal contact. It will supplement it. And
as I said in my testimony, the Federal Reserve has borne that
out in its surveys over the last 5 years that people who are
digital mobile banking users visit their branches on average
three times in the month before the survey by 87 percent. I
mean, it's an extraordinary percentage. People want multiple
choices. And they will use the online account, they will also
use the phones, and they will also do face-to-face. And we
should provide that to them. And I don't see that in the plan.
Mr. Buttonow. And I would----
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Buttonow?
Mr. Buttonow.--agree with all those statements. I don't--
this is not a replacement. This is absolutely not a
replacement.
Now--but we need to go online. The IRS needs to go online,
it needs to serve taxpayers where they want to serve. There's
increasing preferences as the millennials come online. They
want to deal digitally. Tax professionals who file 57 percent
of their returns out there, they want to interact with the IRS
digitally just for basic information.
Now, when it gets to more complicated areas of tax
administration, things like compliance, then I think there's a
higher opportunity where people want to go ahead and talk with
the IRS, but they should be able to interact with them online
also.
Mrs. Maloney. I agree with you. It is certainly the way of
the future. Everything is online, particularly with----
Mr. Buttonow. Your State is a great example of it.
Mrs. Maloney.--the younger generation.
Mr. Buttonow. Right.
Mrs. Maloney. They communicate almost entirely online and
read online. They are not even reading normal newspapers.
Everything is online. So I feel it is a way we have to move and
go towards.
Is the IRS moving towards going online or not?
Ms. Olson. That is definitely its view of the future.
Mrs. Maloney. But right now, can you interact online? Can
you----
Ms. Olson. No, you cannot.
Mrs. Maloney.--ask--you know, certainly, basic questions--
--
Ms. Olson. You can find----
Mrs. Maloney.--should be answered online.
Ms. Olson. You can find out where your refund is. They--the
IRS last October took off the only service it had where you
could email a question and have someone answer it back to you.
Mr. Buttonow. Yes.
Ms. Olson. So even as it's moving forward, it's moving
backwards.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman. I thank both of you
for your testimony. They have called votes, and we have only
got a few minutes left, and so I think we are both going to
skip our closing remarks and just say thank you so much for
being here today.
If there is no further business before the committee, the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:47 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
