- THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY REFORM ACT SCORECARD 2.0

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY REFORM ACT SCORECARD 2.0

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 18, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-159

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-068 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
Julie Dunne, Senior Counsel
William Marx, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Minority Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 18, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Steven I. Cooper, Chief Infomation Officer, U.S. Department
of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     9
Ms. Dawn Leaf, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of
Labor
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15
Mr. Michael M. Johnson, Chief Information Officer, U.S.
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    22
Ms. Renee P. Wynn, Chief Information Officer, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28
Mr. David A. Powner, Director, IT Management Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    38

APPENDIX

Opening Statement of Mr. Meadows.................................    82
FITARA Scorecard documents for the record........................    85

THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY REFORM ACT SCORECARD 2.0

----------

Wednesday, May 18, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology, joint with
the Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:04 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William Hurd
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology]
presiding.
Present from Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd, Walker, Blum, Kelly, and Lieu.
Present from Subcommittee on Government Operations:
Representatives Meadows, Jordan, Walberg, Buck, Carter,
Connolly, and Plaskett.
Mr.  Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology and
the Subcommittee on Government Operations will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
at any time.
We believe votes are probably going to be called around
2:20, so we are going to try to get through as many of the
opening statements as we can before we have to take a break and
come back for the questioning.
So thank you for being here and good afternoon.
Earlier in this Congress, the Subcommittee on Information
Technology and the Subcommittee on Government Operations began
a joint effort to hold agencies accountable for implementation
of FITARA. Our oversight on this issue is part of an ongoing
effort to reform the state of IT in the Federal Government.
FITARA can play a key role in ensuring broader authorities
for agency CIOs and a reduction of waste, fraud, and abuse. I
think it is important to keep that broader goal in mind as we
discuss today's grades.
The intent of grading agencies is to provide an objective
measurement of progress and challenges. Some agencies continue
to do better than others. Today, I am pleased to see moderate
improvement in the grades from the first scorecard.
The overarching goal is for Federal agencies to transition
to deploying modern technology rather than spending funds on
outdated systems. Technology is a wonderful thing. It should
reduce errors, save taxpayer money, and be a tool to help
agencies accomplish their missions. It should not be a burden.
To agency CIOs looking to improve your score, I would say,
three things.
First, understand that the grade is a snapshot in time. The
committee realizes, in many cases, the situations CIOs find
themselves in developed long before they got there and are the
result of decisions made by people who are long gone.
Second, the risk assessment transparency metric is entirely
within the CIO's control. GAO reports validate the common-sense
conclusion that major IT projects carry much more risk than
agency CIOs are currently acknowledging to Congress and the
American people. I would encourage CIOs to take a good look at
the risk ratings they are assigning to projects on the
dashboard.
And third, there are millions of dollars' worth of savings
still on the table for data center consolidation. GAO has
reported that agencies have closed over 3,000 of about 10,500
data centers and achieved $2.8 billion in cost savings rate.
Most of these savings are attributed to just four agencies,
including Commerce, who I believe is going to talk about that
today. So there is much more in terms of savings left
available. GAO calculates plan savings of around $1.5 billion
per year from consolidating data centers.
For those advocating for billions of additional funding to
help modernize IT, I would suggest that savings from data
center consolidation might be a better place to look than a new
appropriation.
Under FITARA, CIOs now have a proper seat at the table. No
longer are technology and cyber issues confined to tech geeks
in some backroom. In the digital age, IT issues are front and
center. They are central to what government does and how it
does it.
This committee intends to focus on ensuring the men and
women in these CIO positions are qualified, accountable, and
empowered to make decisions and lead within their agencies. The
American taxpayers deserve agency CIOs who understand the value
proposition of the cloud rather than CIOs who believe their
agencies are so special that a proprietary mainframe database
is needed.
Congress requires accurate and complete data, and answers
from agencies, rather than conflicting numbers and obfuscation.
Ultimately, taxpayers deserve a government that leverages
technology to serve them rather than one that deploys
unsecured, decades-old technology and keeps sensitive
information in nonencrypted databases.
We are not there yet, and we have a long way to go, but I
am cautiously optimistic that we are moving the needle in the
right direction.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Now, I would like to recognize Ms. Kelly, the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Information Technology from the
great State of Illinois, and my friend, for her opening
statement.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Chairman Meadows and Ranking Member
Connolly. I know they will be joining us shortly.
Today's hearing is the third in a series that our
subcommittees have held to learn how agencies are implementing
the requirements of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act. As was noted, during November's
hearing, these hearings help us ensure that agencies are
hitting the required benchmarks as we move toward a more
efficient, modern, and secure Federal Government.
At the last hearing, we released a FITARA scorecard
assessing agencies' implementation of four of the seven
initiatives required by the act. Today, we release an updated
FITARA scorecard measuring agencies progress in the areas of
data center consolidation, IT portfolio review savings,
incremental project development, and risk assessment
transparency.
I am looking forward to discussing the grades received by
the four agencies here today.
Since the last scorecard, I am encouraged to see that out
of the 24 agencies that are covered by FITARA, seven have shown
improvement in their overall grade, and others have improved in
individual categories.
Looking beyond the grades, let me say that I have been
encouraged by the responsiveness of most agencies and the
progress in FITARA implementation to date. I especially want to
recognize, as the chairman said, the Department of Commerce's
work in exceeding their goal of saving $222 million through
fiscal year 2016 in data center consolidations. I hope to see
this effort to continued.
Government-wide data center consolidations alone have
realized $1.3 billion in savings, and we are expecting to save
an additional $8.2 billion by 2019. These are good first steps,
but it is clear that there are obstacles to overcome in
implementation.
This new scorecard shows that numerous agencies have hit
roadblocks and others have fallen behind in implementation. I
look forward to addressing these challenges today, also.
I'm especially interested in hearing how agencies plan to
stick to their FITARA implementation plans as a new
presidential administration takes charge next year. No
transition is seamless, so I look forward to learning what
steps your agencies are taking to ensure a transition that will
continue the progress we have made so far.
We all know what is at stake here. The Federal Government's
IT acquisition process isn't just an inefficient use of
taxpayer money. It is also a security risk. Too many agencies
are still reliant on outdated legacy systems. With each passing
year, these systems cost more and more to secure and maintain.
FITARA not only helps Federal agencies save money in IT
procurement, it also helps them make smarter IT investments.
Quite frankly, FITARA implementation is a change that the
Federal Government has sorely needed.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying today. I know
that an overhaul of your IT acquisition and management is not
an easy task, so I look forward to hearing how your agencies
are handling the challenges in implementing FITARA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
I would like to now recognize the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Government Operations, Mr. Meadows, for his
opening statement.
Mr.  Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership on this particular issue.
I'm going to keep my remarks very brief. They are about to
call votes here shortly.
So in doing that, I think it is more important that we
emphasize the fact that FITARA is not a law that was passed
with no expectation of implementation. We are going to continue
to follow up and continue to have these types of hearings.
We are hearing news that two of our witnesses hopefully
have plans that are either on their way or very close to being
done, so I applaud you for those efforts.
Really, this is more about accountability. For us, we want
to see progress. We are going to work with the GAO on a number
of fronts.
As we look at that, it is going to be a critical component
of what we look at. I have already been talking to
appropriators on a number of fronts. I'm willing that, if you
are willing to do a good job, I am willing to be your advocate.
So I want to just stress that.
But thank you. I will submit a written statement for the
record, Mr. Chairman.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, sir.
I now would like to recognize Mr. Connolly, the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on Government Operations, and the
architect of FITARA, or, as most people like to call it, the
Connolly-Issa bill.
Mr.  Connolly. You are my very favorite chairman.
[Laughter.]
Mr.  Connolly. I've always thought that, except for Mr.
Meadows. It is kind of a tie. Both wonderful human beings.
Thank you, Chairman Hurd, Chairman Meadows, and my friend
Ranking Member Kelly.
I welcome this latest joint subcommittee hearing to examine
the implementation of FITARA. I'm particularly grateful to my
two colleagues on the other side of the aisle.
They made a promise we weren't going to let this go. Unlike
Clinger-Cohen, we were going to stick with this, and we were
going to provide oversight. And they have kept their word. And
the four of us operate seamlessly. I think that is good for the
United States Government.
I think, in partnership with the executive branch, we can
make a big difference on something that may seem deceptively
uninteresting, but that actually can help transform agencies
and how they do business and save lots of dollars for our
taxpayers.
Today, we release our second scorecard on FITARA. As I
stated at our last hearing, the scorecard is not intended to be
a scarlet letter on some agency's back. It is meant to
incentivize agencies to improve management of Federal IT
investments and to create metrics so that we can look at
progress.
On the initial scorecard issued prior to December 31, for
all agencies to have FITARA implementation plans, it was
understandable that we some grades on the lower end of the
scale. We were just beginning. Ds and Fs outnumbered As, Bs,
and Cs more than 2-to-1. Today, we are pleased to see a very
marked improvement in the latest scorecard with higher marks
now out numbering lower ones.
Seven agencies improved their overall grades, including the
Department of Energy, one of today's witnesses, which jumped
two letter grades.
I also want to commend the Department of Commerce for its
work on data center consolidation, a very critical part of
FITARA. It originally set the goal of saving $222 million and
actually reported $260 million in savings, an example to which
other agencies ought to inspire.
While the Department of Energy and the Department of Labor
are performing well on some aspects of the scorecard, I would
note both agencies only recently received OMB approval--
recently, I think it's in the last 24 hours, but all right,
good--for the initial implementation plan. Obviously, we expect
to hear more from those agencies today about why their plans
were delayed and what actions they are taking to advance those
important IT management and acquisition reforms.
It is also encouraging to see the Department of Energy
reporting all three of its major IT projects meeting the
incremental development benchmark for delivering functionality
every 6 months.
Similarly, I want to applaud the Labor Department for its
realistic evaluation of the risks present in its IT projects.
The department rated nearly three-fourths of its projects as
high-risk, earning it high marks for risk assessment
transparency. I know Dave Powner and GAO are looking for
realistic assessment of project risks and what they entail.
Accurately calculating and reporting project risk is a
continuing challenge. Agencies currently report two-thirds of
their IT investments pose low risk. Based on GAO's more
thorough reviews of those projects, that risk, we believe, is
understated.
Accurately capturing the risk so we can respond to it and
anticipate problems is one of the pillars of FITARA. It is a
management concept, so we look forward to hearing more from GAO
on how to address that challenge as we move forward.
I also want to hear from today's witnesses about whether we
are accurately defining IT investments and how that may affect
implementation of reforms.
For example, neither the Commerce Department nor NASA
includes spacecraft or satellites in their reporting. Surely,
those systems fall under the IT umbrella, so we would like to
hear their thoughts about that.
It is also puzzling that the government agency with
arguably the most innovative and technologically demanding
mission continues to receive the lowest marks on the scorecard,
NASA. NASA has not reported anything under incremental
development and received failing grades for the other three
metrics. For example, it says that it plans to spend $731
million on major IT investments this year, but reports none of
those projects are high-risk. That stretches credulity, and we
want to talk about that today.
Mr. Chairman, before closing, let me share an example of
one agency doing the right thing, though it might not have been
reflected in its initial grades. As my colleagues will recall,
the Department of Transportation scored at the lower end in
certain areas, but CIO Rich McKinney actually demonstrated that
he gets what we are trying to deal when we put a freeze on IT
acquisitions for 90 days at the end of last year because he
discovered component agency CIOs did not have a good handle on
what their agencies were spending.
We want more CIOs exercising that kind of new authority
under FITARA.
Today's hearing is just the latest in what we all hope will
be an ongoing series as we continue to push agencies to adopt
these reforms.
Again, I thank my three colleagues for their willingness to
collaborate as one to try to make the government function
better and to save money for our hardworking taxpayers. Thank
you very much.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
I would like to hold the record open for 5 legislative days
for any members who would like to submit a written statement.
We will now recognize our panel of witnesses. I am pleased
to welcome Mr. Steven Cooper, chief information officer at the
U.S. Department of Commerce; Ms. Dawn Leaf, CIO at the U.S.
Department of Labor; Mr. Michael Johnson, CIO at the U.S.
Department of Energy; Ms. Renee Wynn, chief information officer
at NASA; and Mr. David Powner, director of IT management issues
at the U.S. Government Accountability Office.
It is always a pleasure to have you here, David.
Welcome to you all. Pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses will be sworn in before they testify, so please rise
and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
if you would implement your testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire
written statements will be made part of the record. If the
bells go off while you are talking, just keep going. We will
conclude at your statement.
Now, I would like to thank Mr. Cooper at the Department of
Commerce. You got a B, the highest grade that we gave. Mr.
Cooper, you get to kick us off today, starting with your 5
minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF STEVEN I. COOPER

Mr.  Cooper. Thank you very much. Chairman Hurd, Ranking
Member Kelly, Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member Connolly, and
members of the subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss Commerce's work on the
implementation of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act, and thank you for your resolute
bipartisan efforts to ensure that this critical law is
implemented successfully.
To begin, I believe FITARA is one of the strongest and most
helpful pieces of legislation to improve CIO involvement with
the decision processes and policies related to managing
information technology resources and increased government
efficiency and effectiveness. I am committed to its success.
Secretary Pritzker and Deputy Secretary Andrews strongly
support FITARA and have made FITARA one of their and my key
priorities. They have made it clear to DOC's executive
leadership that FITARA is the responsibility not only of the
CIO, but all their senior staff.
Since October 2015, the department's FITARA team,
representing my office and the department's budget,
acquisition, personnel, and legal offices, has been meeting
weekly to ensure the full implementation of our FITARA plan and
FITARA across the Department of Commerce.
FITARA implementation is one of my top goals, and I have
named one of my senior staff, Ms. Erin Cavanaugh, who is with
me today, our full-time program manager for FITARA
implementation, making the department one of only a few
departments to create a full-time FITARA program official.
Let me now highlight progress we have collaboratively made
in three specific areas, and why I believe we are on a path to
achieve full implementation in the budget, personnel, and
acquisition areas required by FITARA.
First, budget. My office is working closely with the
department's offices of budget to ensure that I am fully
engaged in the budget formulation and review process to enable
me to review and approve the overall DOC IT budget. Leveraging
FITARA has allowed me as the DOC CIO to have full visibility
into each bureau's IT budget, which enhances my understanding
of our full ask and spend, and helps me identify opportunities
for strategic and operational collaboration all across all 12
of our bureaus in areas like cybersecurity, enterprise
licensing agreements, cost savings, and contract consolidation.
I am particularly pleased that the NOAA and Census CIOs and
their budget offices have worked closely with my office and the
DOC budget office to introduce greater involvement in budget
formulation and visibility.
Second, acquisition. Our Office of Acquisition Management
has revised the Commerce acquisition manual, so that the CIO
now participates in the review and approval of all acquisitions
above $10 million, whether or not a program was initially
determined to be IT. This is a significant change. Previous
acquisition policy only required my office participation on
acquisition over $75 million.
Third, personnel. Our chief human capital officer and I
drafted and reviewed and signed a new department bulletin,
which gives me direct involvement in the selection
responsibility over all SES IT and all CIO-titled positions
across the department. That said, our IT work force planning is
not complete, but I expect to see considerable progress in the
next 6 months in addressing the hiring and retention of
critical IT resources for cyber and IT risk management, data
analytics, agile development, and Web services.
Another notable goal of FITARA and of every CIO is cost
savings in the IT environment. While my particular driver is
not the cost savings per se, I fully expect implementing FITARA
will help me drive the unit cost of every IT service we deliver
down. This will result from opportunities identified through
greater oversight, visibility, and collaboration across IT
acquisition and budget formulation.
In closing, for our DOC FITARA implementation to fully
succeed, we need more than just law or policy. We need to
institutionalize best IT practices and processes across the
department. My staff is working with their counterparts in each
bureau CIO office and in our H.R., finance, and acquisition
offices to improve visibility and participation in all IT
budget and acquisition processes. I expect to have initial
process improvements and reviews in place by the end of this
fiscal year, and to operate more efficiently in the future.
I thank the subcommittees for holding this hearing and for
your commitment to ensuring successful implementation of
FITARA. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may
have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
I now would like to recognize Ms. Dawn Leaf, CIO at the
Department of Labor, who had a grade of C, which is one step
better than you were the last time we issued these grades.
So, Ms. Leaf, over to you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAWN LEAF

Ms.  Leaf. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, Chairman
Meadows, Ranking Member Connolly, and members of the
subcommittees, good afternoon and thank you for the opportunity
to brief you on the Department of Labor's FITARA
implementation.
I would like to focus on some challenges, highlight some
progress, and provide you a working-level perspective on how
FITARA can help the department to improve its IT services.
First, let me state that, historically, the Department of
Labor has had decentralized IT organizations and resources,
that these have been fragmented and siloed at the department
bureau level. We have experienced the same inefficiencies and
issues that I know this committee has heard described in other
hearings by other agencies.
Another relevant factor that I would like to emphasize is
that decades of information technology underinvestment and the
fragile state of our IT infrastructure and our application
systems make it challenging for the department to improve its
performance in some of the FITARA metrics.
Specifically, it is difficult for the Department of Labor
to achieve high scores and cost savings because we are on a
bare-bones IT budget to start with. There is not much to cut.
On the positive side, we have a great opportunity with cost
avoidance, to leverage enterprise investments in IT, to add
technology capabilities and services, and to do so more
efficiently.
Turning to progress, the department has improved and
strengthened its IT governance processes, and that has helped
us to improve transparency, to improve our risk management, and
to improve our incremental delivery and development.
In 2012, the department launched an initiative to
consolidate nine separate agency infrastructures. We have made
some progress, and we have proven that we can deliver modern IT
services on time and within budget.
By the end of 2016, we will have closed 38 of our 90 data
centers. We will have achieved or met our 40 percent data
center consolidation target.
In 2014, the department migrated 17,000 employees from nine
separate legacy email systems to a commercial Federal community
cloud service. For the same cost, we are able to give our
employees 400 times as much storage, which gives them back 2
hours per month per employee, because now they are able to just
work instead of spending 2 hours a month archiving email so
that they have enough space to work, so they can send and
receive emails.
In 2015 and 2016, the department improved our cybersecurity
posture, including a 95 percent reduction in security
vulnerabilities by implementing an aggressive security patch in
our patch management process.
We are planning a 2017 through 2019 unified communications
project to redesign, modernize, and consolidate nine decades-
old networks in over 600 locations throughout the U.S. This is
not only critical for security, it also allows us to reduce
costs. We will be able to reduce 85 percent of our voice
circuits and 50 percent of our phone management costs.
In closing, I would like to just touch on two ways that
FITARA can help the Department of Labor with its IT challenges.
FITARA is especially important to an agency that is
starting in an underfunded position, because it encourages the
department to make IT investments that are not only effective
for agency missions, but efficient. FITARA also provides
structure to help us manage change, organization change and
technology change.
While the Department of Labor is moving forward, we realize
that we have a long road ahead. Thank you for the opportunity
to share my thoughts, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Leaf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Ms. Leaf.
Mr. Johnson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, and the
Department of Energy has moved the most in their grades to a C,
I believe from an F, the last score. So thank you for that, Mr.
Johnson. You are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL M. JOHNSON

Mr.  Johnson. Good afternoon, Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member
Kelly, Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member Connolly, and
distinguished members of the committee. On behalf of the
Department of Energy, I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you to discuss the department's implementation of the
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.
The department has been working closely with OMB to
implement FITARA and cyber best practices across the complex
ecosystem that is the Department of Energy as we meet our
diverse mission. We are pleased that the committees' just-
release May 2016 FITARA implementation scorecard 2.0
acknowledges that the department is making progress.
Just this last Friday, DOE submitted to OMB the third major
revision to our initial FITARA implementation plan submission.
I am pleased to say that yesterday OMB approved DOE's FITARA
implementation plan, and we will post it to our public Web site
within the next 30 days.
DOE's FITARA implementation plan is transformational for
the department, and it results in unprecedented CIO engagement
and DOE enterprise-wide transparency into IT budget formulation
and review, acquisition review and approval, and IT work force
planning. In addition, the plan provides for the collection of
detailed IT and cyber performance metrics across all DOE IT
investments.
At the request of the Secretary, I joined DOE a little over
a year ago to develop and implement an effective cyber strategy
for the DOE enterprise. The complex DOE enterprise comprises 97
entities across 27 States, to include 19 staff offices, 10
program offices, 19 field sites, 17 National Laboratories, four
technology centers, and the four Power Marketing
Administrations.
Each entity is structured to perform its area of our
diverse mission that spans nuclear security, scientific
research, energy, and environmental management. All but one of
our National Laboratories are government-owned, contractor-
operated facilities managed through the management and
operating, or M&O, contracts designed to enable innovation and
management efficiencies.
Our cyber governance is both transparent and responsive,
and includes close collaboration involvement with all entities
across DOE, notably the National Laboratories.
The Deputy Secretary chairs the DOE cyber council. As CIO,
I chair the DOE Information Management Governance Board. We use
these entities to oversee development, coordination, and
implementation of DOE's cyber- and IT-related policies.
The information technology portion of DOE's budget is
approximately $1.7 billion, which often is integrated into the
larger non-IT investments. We have expanded our processes to
ensure CIO involvement in all phases of annual and multiyear IT
planning, programming, budgeting, and decision-making. The
department has also developed an enterprise plan for review and
approval of IT acquisitions that covers acquisition plans,
statements of work, evaluation, and selection criteria.
DOE understands the need to leverage human capital for
success. Accordingly, we are focusing on the development of a
DOE cyber work force strategy that will increase the CIO's
involvement in DOE's human capital selection practices with a
focus on developing performance goals with results-driven
critical elements and enhanced recruitment and retention of
vital IT personnel.
The DOE continues to consolidate and optimize its data
centers to include advanced metering facility upgrades to
improve power utilization effectiveness.
From 2010 to present, for our updated and expanded
inventory of 217 enterprise computing data centers, including
both Federal and M&O, we closed 75, increasing cost savings to
the department of just over $17 million.
We developed a unified DOE cyber strategy and
implementation plan that consolidates and prioritizes the
excellent cyber enterprise information resources management
initiatives ongoing at the DOE into five key areas: information
resources management best practices, to include reliability and
enhanced efficiencies; modernization, to quickly move from
legacy to transformative solutions; strengthen cybersecurity
fundamentals, to reduce risk and enhance defense in-depth
capabilities; seamless integration of operations in
cyberdefense, to combine situational awareness and threat
operational status in enterprise-wide, real-time indicator-
sharing; and cyber research and development intended to out-
innovate our adversaries and stay ahead of advanced persistent
threats.
In conclusion, DOE is actively engaged in FITARA
implementation and related transformational reforms, which will
result in significant insights into and enhanced oversight of
DOE information and IT. Through a department-wide collaborative
and inclusive process, we have made major strides toward the
goal, although further work is needed.
I thank the subcommittees for their commitment to ensuring
successful implementation of FITARA. Your support is vital to
our success.
It has been my honor to provide this testimony, and I will
be pleased to address any questions you may have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Votes have been called. It is a six-vote series, so we are
going to stand adjourned until the end of the final vote.
[Recess.]
Mr.  Hurd. The Subcommittees on Information Technology and
Government Operations will reconvene.
I think we left off with you, Ms. Wynn, for your opening
statement of 5 minutes. Since I have called out the grades for
everyone else, NASA had the lowest grade of the folks reviewed
with an F. Ms. Wynn, over to you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RENEE P. WYNN

Ms.  Wynn. Thank you, Chairman Hurd, Chairman Meadows, and
other members of the Information Technology and Government
Operations Subcommittees for allowing me to appear before you
today to update you on NASA's implementation of the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.
Unfortunately, NASA is at the bottom of the FITARA
scorecard. That is not something we are proud of. NASA is fully
committed to implementing the FITARA law. We know we have a lot
of work to do, and I am here today to assure you that
significant changes are already underway at NASA to improve our
management of IT.
But before I get into more detail about our implementation
plans, I would like to introduce myself. My name is Renee Wynn,
and I have more than 26 years of Federal service, spending most
of those years at the Environmental Protection Agency. I joined
NASA 10 months ago as the deputy CIO, and, 2 months later, I
was promoted to be the agency CIO.
Since then, I have initiated listening meetings to learn
the needs of my IT customers and how they can inform our joint
path forward. I have visited each center, meeting with the CIOs
and the center directors, and I've been meeting with each
mission office at headquarters.
Everywhere I go, people are frank with me about IT needs,
about governance, and operational changes they are believe are
needed, or changes they fear are coming. So I am listening and
taking action as quickly as I can.
The ball is now in my court to manage and secure the
agency's IT resources, so that is what I and my amazing team
are going to do.
To its credit, over the last several years, NASA has
transformed its IT governance structure to empower the CIO with
greater authority, and thus, today, I am the beneficiary of
these many changes.
For example, I now report directly to the Administrator and
can talk to him whenever I want. The CIO now sits on all key
NASA decision-making councils, and the CIO has direct authority
and oversight over the center CIOs, including their IT
decisions and acquisitions.
Better yet, NASA recently completed an internal business
services assessment of NASA's IT program. In this BSA outlined
a series of steps the agency should take and plans to take to
optimize and protect our IT assets.
In my personal opinion, this review has been a gift to
current and future NASA CIOs in that it says NASA supports you
as the CIO and we do want you to transform the way NASA manages
IT. Like FITARA, the BSA results will ensure that IT is seen as
a strategic agency resource establishing clear direction for
the NASA CIO to approve the agency's IT spend for non-highly
specialized and highly specialized IT.
Additionally, NASA is strengthening its alignment of IT
resources against mission goals. My office will be held
accountable for additional agency IT costs, schedule, and
performance through a new portfolio review process. NASA is
providing me with greater visibility into the overall budget
planning cycle, allowing me to spot IT resource problems at a
mission level earlier on.
These are big steps forward for NASA, and NASA should be
commended for starting this process even before FITARA became
law.
It is important to remember that NASA's scientific and
technical mission is unique. For example, cooperation with
other nations, the public, and scientists around the world is
one of NASA's founding principles. Therefore, NASA has always
sought the widest practical and appropriate distribution of
information about our missions. But in doing so, we must also
safeguard our IT assets against well-resourced and highly
motivated individuals who wish to harm us.
Malicious threats to our network are constantly evolving,
which means our work is never done. Thus, I want to reassure
you today that IT is a top priority at NASA. While the number
of attempted cyber instances against NASA continues to
increase, I am confident that NASA continues to appropriately
address them.
For example, NASA did not experience any major incidents in
fiscal year 2015, as defined by the Office of Management and
Budget. NASA has successfully met all capability targets
established in the 2015 cyber sprint activity. And the DHS
cyber hygiene report for NASA currently shows that there are a
zero critical vulnerabilities older than 30 days.
In conclusion, I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to reassure you that NASA has a strong
foundation upon which to successfully implement FITARA and that
we are committed to fully implementing FITARA. We remain ever
vigilant with protecting our information assets as well.
I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Wynn follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Ms. Wynn.
Now someone who has testified many times before this
committee, Mr. Powner, you are recognized for your 5-minute
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID A. POWNER

Mr.  Powner. Chairmen Hurd and Meadows, Ranking Members
Kelly and Connolly, and members of the subcommittees, I would
like to thank you and your staff for your continued oversight
of the implementation of FITARA with the second set of grades.
We recently completed, at your request, detailed work on
three of the four scorecard areas to support your grading
efforts. This afternoon, I would like to briefly discuss the
grades overall in each of the three areas we performed our
work. Those are data centers, dashboard accuracy, and
incremental development, all major areas of emphasis with
FITARA.
Starting with the grades, overall, there has been some
progress with seven agencies having higher grades, one lower,
and 16 having no change. We view the 6-month progress as quite
positive, since implementing FITARA and receiving higher grades
will take time to address long-standing, systemic weaknesses in
IT management.
To comprehensively implement this law to better invest our
Nation's IT dollars, CIO authorities need to be strengthened.
Critical to that are the FITARA implementation plans that are
to provide an assessment of gaps in CIO authorities and agency
efforts to improve those authorities. We are pleased to hear
that both Labor and Energy now have approved plans, so they are
all in, and we will actually be looking at the next round of
iterations on those plans.
Now turning to data center consolidation, of the roughly
10,500 data centers, 3,121 have been closed to date and another
2,100 are planned. Interestingly, 84 percent of the closures to
date have come from four agencies, Ag, DOD, Treasury, and
Interior. Your uptick of the data center grades is quite
appropriate.
We want consolidation, and we want savings. This next slide
shows savings to date with data center consolidation. I know it
is hard to read. There are the closures, if you look at 3,100,
if we go back to that prior one, the prior slide, please. The
3,100, that is what has been closed to date.
I want to emphasize there are four agencies that are
accountable for 84 percent of those 3,100 closures. Your uptick
in their grades is appropriate.
If we flip to the next slide, this is savings. That gray
shaded area there from 2011 through 2015, there has been
collectively about $2.8 billion in savings to date. There is
another $5.4 billion remaining. When you look at out-years,
over $1 billion each year.
This is why FITARA is so important, because without FITARA,
we would not have this focus and attention on data center
consolidation.
A couple points on this chart. Four agencies account for 86
percent of the $2.8 billion in savings. Those are Commerce,
Defense, DHS, and Treasury. Again, rewarding these departments
with higher grades for their substantial savings is an
excellent idea.
The other point I would like to make is that out-years
savings of $5.4 billion, we actually have a lot more than $5.4
billion on the table. There were 10 agencies that had planned
closures that did not have out-year estimates that were called
for by OMB. We made recommendations to those 10 agencies.
And your downgrading those 10 agencies to emphasize the
importance of these out-year projections is really the right
way to go. So what we want to do is we want to reward closures
and savings, and we want to make sure there are not out-year
projections that we have to down tick in their grade. So that
is going to be really helpful in ensuring we get the
appropriate savings here.
Next, I would like to turn to dashboard transparency.
FITARA codified the IT dashboard and CIO risk ratings for
approximately 750 major IT investments across the departments.
These ratings indicate whether each investment is low,
moderate, or high risk. The dashboard currently tells us there
are about 200 investments totaling about $12 billion that are
moderate or high risk, and that 72 percent of IT dollars the
government invests is low risk.
Although CIOs are acknowledging a bit more risk from your
last hearing, these IT dashboard CIO ratings still greatly
underestimate risk.
This next chart shows the results of our latest review on
CIO ratings. We looked at approximately 100 investments on the
IT dashboard and performed our own risk assessments compared to
the CIO ratings. So, for instance, that green bar on the top,
there were 61 CIO ratings that were rated as low risk or green.
Our assessment concluded that only 10 of those were green, 28
should have been yellow, and 23 should have been red. So that
is an indication of where we need to get better transparency
and accuracy so that we can better manage these major IT
investments.
Your grading scheme, Mr. Chairman, which equates higher
grades with acknowledging more risk is definitely the way to go
until CIOs start acknowledging more risk with their ratings.
Turning to incremental development, FITARA requires that
CIOs certify that IT investments deliver in increments
consistent with OMB policy, which requires that major
investments deliver in 6 months. Agencies collectively report
that 65 percent of their IT projects government-wide plan to
deliver in 6 months.
Our review found some agencies were accurately reporting
this, like DHS and Transportation. However, others, like
Commerce and Treasury, were not, and your grades adjustments to
those two agencies were appropriate.
I would like to conclude by thanking your subcommittees for
your aggressive oversight of FITARA implementation with your
scorecard and your many other actions. With the upcoming change
in administration, it will be very important not to lose the
positive momentum we have. Our team at GAO will be working very
hard through this transition, addressing several requests from
you to keep the focus on CIO authorities, delivering
transformational IT solutions, and replacing antiquated,
inefficient, and, in many cases, insecure systems and
infrastructure.
Chairmen Hurd and Meadows, Ranking Member Kelly, I thank
you for your leadership. Our team at GAO looks forward to
continuing to work supporting your efforts on FITARA
implementation.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Powner.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for opening
questioning.
Mr. Cooper, I want to start with you. Commerce is one of
the four agencies that is responsible for 86 percent, 87
percent of the savings in closing down the data centers. How
are you able to use that money that you save?
Mr.  Cooper. We have an internal process that is set up. As
we realize savings, we have a prioritized bureau-specific list
of priorities. The bureaus bring forward, through our
investment review process, their savings dollars redirected
against that prioritized list.
So it comes through the bureau investment review process up
to the department review process. That way we have ----
Mr.  Hurd. Mr. Cooper, I'm going to interrupt there.
Mr.  Cooper. Please.
Mr.  Hurd. If you realize savings in your operations, you
should be able to use that savings also to go after some of the
other projects of legacy systems that you have already
identified. Are you able to do that?
Mr.  Cooper. Yes. I was going into a little bit of detail
on how we do that. The answer is yes. We have a process. We
actually do, both at the department level and at the bureau
level, redirect that savings. It is redirected based upon the
priorities of new investments or risk-based issues that need to
be addressed at the bureau level and the department level.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
Ms. Wynn, 10 months at NASA, correct? Two months in the CIO
job?
Ms.  Wynn. I was 2 months as the deputy CIO and then
promoted to the CIO the last 8 months.
Mr.  Hurd. So are we going to be able to get to Mars if we
are still using Fortran?
Ms.  Wynn. Thank you for your question, Chairman. At this
point, I am not an expert on what it is going to take to get to
Mars, but I'm happy to take the question for the record, and
add the question about programming language as well.
Mr.  Hurd. Please do.
My question for you is, so you have come in and inherited a
situation, and we recognize that. What additional
responsibilities or authorities would you like to have in order
to right this ship?
Ms.  Wynn. Chairman, thank you for the recognition to the
newness. It is much appreciated.
On March 31, the agency approved our transformation plan.
It is about 219 pages. That gives me a lot of authority that is
aligned with the FITARA law, as well as some things that NASA
saw that needed to change. So at this juncture, we are changing
our governance structure, changing the way we take a look at
the budget, as well as taking a look at how we do portfolio
review.
At this juncture, that feels like it is going to be an
excellent start for me at NASA.
Mr.  Hurd. When did the CIO report directly to the
Administrator, when did that change happen?
Ms.  Wynn. It is my understanding that that started about 2
years ago.
Mr.  Hurd. When it comes to incremental developments, on
your scorecard, there is no data on this. Is that because there
are no IT projects in the works? Or is it because we don't know
which IT projects are in the works?
Ms.  Wynn. Chairman, the lack of incremental spending is
due to, I believe, a couple things. One is, in my opening
statement testimony, I emphasized the ability of the CIO to
look at specialized and nonspecialized IT. The nonspecialized
IT is our mission IT where a lot of development work is in our
regular, ongoing basis. I recently have been given the
authority to begin to look to make more transparent what goes
on there. That is where a lot of our development happens, and
that is where I am expecting to be able to say to you, yes, we
are doing incremental.
Mr.  Hurd. In the next review cycle, what should we expect
from NASA?
Ms.  Wynn. At this juncture, in discovering this in
preparation for the hearing, this is what I expect to be able
to deliver to you. One is information on how much we have
actually saved in closing our data centers, to be able to say
to you that we have a good plan for a modified portfolio review
process that includes the infrastructure IT as well as our
mission IT, and then finally be able to report to you where we
have actually driven a lot of savings in our software
management.
Mr.  Hurd. I think that would be pretty successful.
Mr. Johnson, the 14 or 17 National Labs, why do they need
an exemption from FITARA?
Mr.  Johnson. Thank you for the question, Chairman.
So, as you know, DOE does not have a position on the
legislation, which exempted the National Labs from FITARA
implementation. However, we have been working closely with the
National Labs just over 1 year that I have been the CIO within
DOE. Through a collaborative process, which included not only
the program offices and the National Labs, we have been putting
in place a number of what we call transparency reforms that get
to an effective management of our IT and cyber work force and
information across our entire enterprise to include our
National Labs.
Mr.  Hurd. In my opinion, the National Labs are probably
some of the most important things to protect, and they are
probably the biggest target when you look at nation sponsors
that are looking at cutting-edge technology.
Not adhering to some of what I would consider some very
basic standards for good digital hygiene to me does not make
sense. This is an area where my expectation is that these
National Labs have some greater transparency on what they are
doing, how they are doing it, and ensuring they are not using
Fortran and systems that are super old and outdated.
I think as we go forward and have new laws and go through
appropriations, some of those things may change.
Ms. Leaf, what took so long to get the implementation plan
approved?
Ms.  Leaf. Thank you for the question.
The department leadership felt that it was very important
that we complete due diligence in understanding the
relationship of FITARA with the Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act, or CIPSEA.
So the department reviewed that internally. They requested
guidance from OMB, which we received. When we received it, we
incorporated it and finished our plan.
Mr.  Hurd. Ms. Leaf, thank you very much.
I now would like to recognize my colleague, Ms. Kelly, for
5 minutes of questioning.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Last November, the committee received a briefing on GAO's
review of how the 24 agencies identified in the Chief Financial
Officers Act of 1990 had begun implementation of FITARA. At the
committee's request, four key areas of FITARA were scored,
enhancement to agency chief information officer authorities,
transparency and risk management, portfolio review, and Federal
data center consolidations.
Mr. Powner, this question is for you. Can you explain why
those areas were selected and how the scores were calculated?
Mr.  Powner. First of all, in working with your staff, I
think we all collectively decided, and it was a great
bipartisan effort, that these were areas directly tied to
FITARA. They were areas that where needed reform needed to
occur. They were also areas where agencies had data.
So if you look at incremental development, scores on the
dashboard, and savings, there is publicly reported data on the
dashboard, on the CIO ratings, and incremental development, and
then also, too, there is savings information that goes to the
Appropriations Committees for both portfolios stats and data
centers.
So it is the agency's data, and I thought it was a great
idea on your part to use the agency's data to score them
initially on those initial grades back in November. Now this
go-around, there were some tweaks to the data, because it was
all self-reported initially, but there were some tweaks. Like
on incremental development, we didn't think it was quite
accurate with a couple agencies.
Mr. Cooper, one of them was Commerce. So there was a
downgrade on that score for incremental development.
But it was also great that these committees, that you
decided to uptick agencies who saved a lot and closed a lot,
because that is really what we want to do. So I think there has
been a nice little initial evolution of the grades where it
evolved from more just self-reporting and had some of our GAO
reports validate the self-reporting, and to reward what you
really want, closures and savings.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you.
Mr.  Johnson and Ms. Leaf, you represent two agencies that
showed improvement. Can you quickly review what steps you took
to improve?
Mr.  Johnson. Ranking Member, thank you for the question.
Let's see, as I mentioned, I have been at the department
just over a year. One of the things we prioritized was
streamlining governance so that we can make sure that we have a
common view on what issues we face as a department, both from
an IT information resource management point of view, and also
from a cyber point of view.
As part of that process, we have an integrated team now
that includes management all the way to the top of the
department. It includes all the elements of our department,
including our field and the previously mentioned National Labs.
What we have attempted to do is focus all of those great
minds and all of that great effort on focusing where we can
make improvements. Two places where DOE did improve, as you can
see from the scorecard, one, in particular, was in data
centers, something that we are focusing on specifically to try
to gain efficiencies that we can, as mentioned earlier, provide
funds back into mission to try to address the other issues we
have.
So I would account most of the success to opening up the
aperture of the governance and making sure that everyone is on
the same page, but, in addition, having a focused plan on what
we need to do.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you.
Ms.  Leaf. So at the Department of Labor, what we have
primarily done is strengthened our IT governance processes.
The two areas that we have really improved are more
detailed review of agency IT spend plans and acquisitions, so
that we really do understand what the agencies are buying and
how that fits with the overall strategic department objectives.
We also, for the first time, expanded our IT program review
board to include agency projects and programs. Before it was
just for enterprise-level projects.
So those are our two governance areas that we have improved
and I think what has contributed to our improvement.
Ms.  Kelly. I am happy to see that all 24 agencies' plans
have been approved or submitted. That is one thing. But, of
course, they have to be implemented.
Can you guys quickly go down the line and talk about what
are your plans for the transition? Because we know, one way or
another, there will be a new administration.
Mr.  Cooper. I'm happy to start. Thank you for the
question. At Commerce, we have already taken steps that
actually even preceded my coming into the role at the
Department of Commerce as the CIO.
We have already institutionalized in a memo actually signed
by our Acting Secretary back in 2012 a significant amount of
the authorities granted to the CIO and then reinforced by
FITARA. That has allowed Commerce to kind of have a bit of a
head start, if you want to think of it that way.
But in addition, we have implemented, through our
governance process for IT, some additional reviews that did not
exist until we had FITARA to leverage, two specific ones that
are now part of the CIO oversight review.
First, programmatic reviews that my office or I or any
bureau CIO can request. That is a formal review. You can think
of them as being analogous or the equivalent of TechStat. But
we launched those. We invite OMB to join us and, in some cases,
GAO, depending upon what is under review.
The second is, and this is brand new, it is kind of unique
to Commerce that we have implemented, is what we call a CIO
review. That is a review that didn't previously exist. I
leveraged FITARA, the authorities granted to the CIOs, to be
able to call a CIO review. We are using it specifically to take
a look at programs that fall below our investment thresholds.
We are focused on the following three major types of
programs: one, any public-facing type of initiative that
reaches to our constituents, stakeholders, citizens; second,
any introduction of new technologies that could be state of the
market, but they have not been used within the department
before; and third, anything that we believe constitutes not
abnormal risk but risk of a different nature than we are used
to addressing.
An example, moving into the cloud requires new IT skill
sets. We consider that a high risk. So even though you might
have an initiative in a bureau that might represent less than
$10 million for a lifecycle investment, we can now conduct a
CIO review on that program.
Ms.  Kelly. Briefly. My time is up.
Ms.  Leaf. Okay, so quickly, we are really focusing on
process improvements that will be in place and are
institutionalized, irrespective of the individuals that are in
place.
There are two areas for that. One is our actual FITARA plan
has quarterly milestones, so we have committed to those. The
other is that we are actually implementing the processes in the
department through directives. So those should stand regardless
of who is in place.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you.
Mr.  Johnson. So within the Department of Energy, three
main changes.
One, as it relates to, as mentioned earlier, our
implementation plan also has quarterly deadlines that we are
following.
We are also modifying our program review process to include
modifying the charters by which those are run, including our
Information Management Governance Board, which will be used as
our internal investment review board for the department. That
charter is being modified, and it will be signed out by the
Deputy Secretary.
And finally, for the first time within the department, I,
as CIO, am going to be included on an Energy systems advisory
board that analyzes all major investments to include $400
million and above, to include facilities that might include IT
major investments like high-performance computing, et cetera,
which is hugely transformational for the department.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you.
Ms.  Wynn. For NASA, and thank you for the question,
Congresswoman, that is, we basically have one thing and that is
implement our business services assessment, which covers such
things, but not just these things. It would be our governance,
our roles and responsibilities, as well as our security, the
way we focus on security. And there are policies and procedures
that go underneath that. And a huge element of this one is a
culture change element.
So as long as we stay the course on what we have committed
to do, we should be in good stead.
Ms.  Kelly. I don't know if you have a comment?
Mr.  Powner. I would just add that I think the improvements
in governance is really needed across the Federal Government,
not only on the large acquisitions, but where that governance
also looks at the legacy spend.
I know, next week, we are going to look more closely at
these old legacy systems and the challenges in maintaining and
the security vulnerabilities.
But that governance perspective really needs to look at
everything, so it is encouraging that these processes are being
approved.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
I now would like to recognize Chairman Meadows for 5
minutes.
Mr.  Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank each of you
for your testimony. I will try to be brief as we work through
this issue.
Ms. Leaf, I want to come to you. Your particular position,
do you think it is an impediment to accomplishing your overall
goal with where you are in the reporting status to the very top
of your agency?
Ms.  Leaf. So let me just address what the department is
going to do in the FITARA plan to strengthen the role of the
CIO. We have two items. We are adding the CIO, and I am
currently in that position, to the department management
meeting, which is where they agency heads meet regularly. We
have an action item to reassess this in 2017, with respect to
the reporting structure.
My honest answer to you is that I report to an Assistant
Secretary, who is a strong champion of IT. I participate with
him in meetings with the Deputy Secretary and with the
Secretary. So in this particular instance, the reporting
structure is not an impediment, because of the individuals who
are in the positions.
I do think that it is appropriate for the department to
reconsider it, however, with the transition.
Mr.  Meadows. I would concur with your last statement. I
guess what I would say is, knowing that the reporting is a
critical component after you are gone, or perhaps after those
you report to are gone, I would encourage, while you have a
cooperative mood, to express the sense of Congress that that
reporting relationship is being looked at. How about that?
Ms. Wynn, I want to come to you. Obviously, your grade was
not one that I jumped up and down about, nor do you, I can
tell. I even questioned GAO. The gentleman to your left will
admit that when I saw it I said that this has to be wrong,
because I visited NASA, and I know the commitment to the
mission at NASA, so certainly it has to be wrong.
So I guess my question to you is twofold. Do you know what
it would take to get from an F to a C?
Ms.  Wynn. Chairman, thank you.
We are not proud of our ----
Mr.  Meadows. I am not here to beat you up.
Ms.  Wynn. I'm glad GAO said yes, we did not make a mistake
in our reporting, so great on that one.
So I think with our business services assessment, we are on
track to head toward a C. As long as we stay on that particular
plan that the agency approved--and, as you know, in order for
us to make the changes in the CIO world, we have to have the
support of senior leadership, and we have to have that because
of the culture change. I have that in place now, so it is time
for me and my team to capture that moment and get through the
implementation process.
Mr.  Meadows. So in a roundabout way, I guess the answer
was yes, you know how to get to a C.
So the question becomes, at the next briefing, will we see
you at a C?
Ms.  Wynn. Chairman Meadows, yes, your summary is right. We
are to do that.
As far as guaranteeing a C, as long as the grading stays
precisely as it is right now, we know how to make those
changes. But I would say that there are a couple areas where
there are bigger changes. That is on the incremental side,
taking a look at some of our projects. We are headed toward
getting that insight. I just can't guarantee what day I'm going
to get that one.
Mr.  Meadows. I am not asking for that. I knew many of your
teammates in other areas, and we expect the culture to be one
that would embrace--just to be frank, they will not be
satisfied with being an F, so you have big shoes to fill.
But I guess my question is, do you have the tools and the
insight and the commitment to improve?
Ms.  Wynn. Chairman Meadows, I do.
Mr.  Meadows. Okay, all right.
So let me go to the GAO very quickly, because one of the
graphs that you put up there had to do with what you identified
as I guess low risk, that was identified by the agencies as low
risk, but it looked like most of that was either medium or high
risk, according to your analysis of where it should be.
So is there a disadvantage for agencies to self-report now
that the scorecard is already out, to say, ``Okay, we made a
mistake. They are, indeed, medium risk, high risk, or
whatever.'' By self-reporting to you at this point, do they get
adversely affected by getting a different dashboard quicker? Or
is there an incentive to go ahead and have all the agencies
call you tomorrow and say, ``Gosh, we agree with your
assessment. Put us at high risk, low risk, here.''
Mr.  Powner. So I think, if they had more red than yellow
investments, they would have a higher grade. Right now, we need
to still move in that direction.
Right now, the dashboard shows 72 percent of our dollars,
this is both major investments in acquisition or operations,
are low risk. There is no one in this room that believes 72
percent of our major investments are low risk. They are just
not.
Mr.  Meadows. So what you are saying, your testimony here
today, and it needs to be a clear message to all of the
agencies, is they can get a higher score-- am I understanding
you right?--just by reporting it correctly?
Mr.  Powner. Correct. So Commerce and Labor both have As.
They acknowledge a fair amount of yellows. And Labor has one
red, but there is a fair amount of yellows in their
assessments. It is not all green. NASA is all green, so they
get an F on dashboard.
So that is kind of how it works right now. We have seen
changes. There is more acknowledgment of risk since your last
hearing, but that review we did for you shows that we still
have a long way to go.
Even Commerce, there were a couple assessments that Steve
has that we weren't in full agreement. We think he could still
acknowledge some more risk on certain ones.
Our point on this is you cannot manage these IT investments
appropriately unless you acknowledge the risk. If you say it is
green, you are not going to get reviewed when we all know that
there are a lot of yellows and reds.
We need that governance that every one of these CIOs talk
about. And collectively, these four CIOs spend $5 billion
collectively on IT in a given year. That is a lot of money that
we need to manage more appropriately, and it starts with
acknowledging risk.
Mr.  Meadows. All right. So that message needs to be clear.
Let me finish up with two very small points.
One, Mr. Cooper, congratulations on moving forward. Do you
have a full-time CIO in place for Census yet?
Mr.  Cooper. We have made the selection. That individual
will be moving into that office. I apologize. I do not know the
specific timing, but very shortly.
Mr.  Meadows. Without getting into the weeds here, we
really have some to-do items as it relates to Census. I won't
beat you up in public, so let's just follow up on that.
Ms. Leaf, is it true that you had to buy replacement parts
on eBay for some of your system?
Ms.  Leaf. Yes, sir, it is. But I'm happy to say that those
servers have been upgraded and replaced.
Mr.  Meadows. All right, so here is my last admonishment to
all of you, and the chairman talked about it with Ms. Wynn with
regards to Fortran. We have legacy systems that must--not
maybe, must--must be changed. So the message that needs to go
from you to those who work in IT is that we will no longer
accept that this is the way that we have always done it,
whether it is COBOL, Fortran, or any other language that is
grayer than I am.
It is imperative, without mentioning it in a public forum,
we have agencies who are taking IT dollars to prop up legacy
systems and stealing from the future of our IT systems to prop
it up.
Mr.  Connolly and Mr. Hurd are much better versed at this
than I am. I will dig from an investigative standpoint, and
then let them weigh in from a technical standpoint, but let
this day be the day that we start to address that.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Chairman Meadows.
I would like to recognize Mr. Connolly for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I echo everything
my friend from North Carolina and my friend from Texas have
said.
Picking up on a very interesting line of questioning Mr.
Hurd had, Mr. Johnson, I want to state for the record that the
carveout for the National Labs was an outrageous thing to do.
They used their influence here on the Hill. They used an
appropriations vehicle to get around this committee and this
bill. The ink was barely dry on the bill. We didn't have
implementation evaluation, and those labs got an exception.
Who could be hurt by that? Well, anybody depending on the
National Lab.
The whole point here isn't another pain in the neck set of
requirements and compliances. It is to transform how we do
business. It is to get at legacy systems. It is to make sure
things are encrypted and secure. It is to try to streamline
management. It is to save resources and plow them back into the
enterprise.
If there is anyone who could have benefited from FITARA, it
is the National Labs.
So I hope you will go home to the Department of Energy with
this message: We are not going to stand for it. We will revisit
this issue.
I do not presume to speak for my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle, but I think this will be a broad bipartisan
assault on the National Labs if they try it again. And if we
have to go toe-to-toe with Appropriations Committee, we will do
so, because it has been evident that others are benefiting from
this effort.
It would be one thing if we were many years into the
process and it was onerous and it was hard and it was
bureaucratic and it was costing money and the promise wasn't
being realized. I still might not like it, but I could
understand why you might pursue your other options--not you,
but the National Labs, did not wait.
I hope you will go back and warn them. This time, there
will be a fight. And I think it will be bipartisan.
At any rate, other than that, Mr. Cooper, you were talking
in your testimony about cost savings. This really isn't about
cost savings. I take that point very well. But on the other
hand, as Ms. Leaf pointed out, there are cost savings. She
specifically cited one that makes my heart go pitty-pat, data
center consolidation.
How are we doing at DOC on that? And do you have some kind
of number you can ascribe to it?
Mr.  Cooper. Yes, we are doing very well, and we continue
to do well.
We have realized about--I think the number, and I will
verify this to make sure I'm giving you an accurate number, so
I will come back with a follow-up. But I think we now stand at
about $308 million that we have actually realized. We are on
track to continue our very solid record of adding to that
savings figure.
If I may, I want to clarify very quickly what my remark
was. It was to differentiate between a focus on absolute cost
savings in IT. One of the things that is misunderstood in my
executive leadership team that we are working to clarify is the
difference between absolute cost of IT--for example, for
capacity expansion or newer demand, new capability. That will
drive the total cost of IT up. But some folks are
misunderstanding that if the total cost of IT is going up, then
I as the CIO and other CIOs must be doing something incorrect.
They believe that the total cost should be moving down or stay
flat.
What we are doing is we are trying to educate our entire
work force in Commerce that the correct metric to use around
cost savings is to ensure that the unit cost of any IT service
that we deliver, we are constantly driving the unit cost down.
That way, both can be true. We can reflect true efficiency,
true cost savings, even when the total amount of spend may, in
fact, be going up.
Mr.  Connolly. A good point, and that is why I wanted you
to have the opportunity to clarify. I will give you a political
note on that.
But all of what you said takes a little time to
institutionalize, to get everybody right with the program, to
have a plan, to make sure the National Labs--we have this
moment in time where the leadership here is completely united.
We have GAO and GSA and OMB all on that script. That ain't
going to last forever. There are not always going to be people
appear who go, ``Yes, I get that, no problem, as long as
trajectories are right.'' As you heard Mr. Hurd ask, I hope you
are able to reinvest the savings, not everyone is going to have
that point of view.
That is why one of the things we are keen on here is taking
advantage of this moment while you can.
Mr. Powner, what changes might be made as we look down the
road to the scorecard, to make it even more useful and
hopefully more accurate?
By the way, I like the fact that we are using some
subjective judgment. When we see all green, you get an F. You
are not rewarded for that. That is terrific. That is a very
non-bureaucratic approach to a very important subject. I mean,
one could just absolve oneself and go check, it's all green,
how wonderful. We know that is not true. We know that we have
lost billions of dollars sometimes in waste and mistaken
investments. So trying to catch them early is a good thing.
Exercising that judgment, to me, is also a very welcoming, good
thing.
But what might we add to the scorecard that would round it
out and give us a better picture of DOE and NASA and others?
Mr.  Powner. A couple key examples. I think, one, fixing
the CIO authority issue, you need to find some way to score
that, because if you do not fix the CIO authority issue in the
cultures and bureaucracies at all these departments and
agencies, you are not going to be able to accomplish FITARA in
all of these areas as well as you possibly could. So looking at
those plans and measuring whether the CIO authorities are truly
being tackled is, as I think Ms. Leaf clearly pointed out that
they are doing at the Department of Labor, that is what we need
to find a way to look into. That is critical.
The other thing, if you look at data center consolidation,
over time, it is not going to be about closures and savings,
although we are always going to have savings, but it is about
optimization metrics, too, because there are some agencies that
I still think are low-balling their estimates. It looks like
they are done, but their optimization metrics are nowhere
utilizing the equipment and the facilities at those departments
and agencies. So that means they probably still have more
savings.
I think when we mature this in the future, looking at
optimization metrics, but clearly, the CIO authority needs to
be tackled aggressively.
Mr.  Connolly. By the way, just for the record, now every
Federal agency has submitted a FITARA implementation plan,
right?
Mr.  Powner. Yes.
Mr.  Connolly. Okay. The last two came in recently.
Mr.  Powner. Yes. You can take your C- off the scorecards
and make them C.
Mr.  Connolly. Ms. Wynn, two points, and then my time is
up. One following up on what the chairman asked you, which I
think is a brilliant question, are we going to get to Mars
using Fortran? I think you said, well, I have to get back to
you for the record. That is one I want to read.
But I think he was getting at, with legacy systems, with
antiquated systems, what could go wrong with that, in terms of
Mars? Of all Federal agencies, yours in some ways is the most
critically dependent on technology and technology working.
I guess I would just ask you, for the record, would you not
concede the point I think implied in the chairman's question,
which is that technology, the IT piece, is really important to
really all of your missions at NASA, and, therefore, getting
them right and making sure we have them sort of updated and
upgraded is pretty important?
Ms.  Wynn. Congressman Connolly, you are absolutely right.
IT is important for NASA's mission.
Mr.  Connolly. One final point with you, Ms. Wynn, as you
are relatively new, as you are working through the FITARA plan,
I think you said you have a 219-page plan, setting metrics in
advance, to me, is really important. If you do not have
metrics, it is all interesting but--so, for example, on data
center consolidation, I think it is really important, a priori,
to say we have X number and we are going to reduce it by this
much by this date.
And it has to be a stretch. It has to push the organization
a little bit, not an impossible goal, but if you don't have
stretch goals, we are not really meeting our mission.
So I would commend to you as you work through that plan set
some of those metrics for the organization and your other
colleagues, because that is the only way we are going to
achieve progress. And it is the only way we are going to use
FITARA as it was intended, which is a useful management tool
for you and ultimately for the head of NASA itself.
All right, I want to thank all of you for being here. I
really benefited a lot.
And my concern about the National Labs ought not to color,
Mr. Johnson, the progress DOE is making. I thank you, but I
wanted you to go back, because I think the chairman is
absolutely right to ask that question, and it did not go
unnoticed up here. Thank you.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Meadows?
Mr.  Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A very brief follow-up, since we are talking about legacy
systems, and since most of the people working on those legacy
systems I would surmise are closer to retirement than not, what
I would like from each one of you is the cost estimate of
really not waiting for 2 or 3 or 5 years for us to fall off the
cliff, the cost estimate of getting rid of those legacy systems
for your agencies, if you would do that.
Then, Mr. Cooper, let me come back to the CIO. It is
obvious that you get this here, and we have the Census coming
up and we cannot afford to fail. Has it been contemplated that
the CIO role for Census would be incorporated as part of your
responsibility, or that you take that on, since you obviously
get it and are willing to work? Because I need to get the
Census side with the GAO counterpart because we have GAO and we
all stakeholders, to be frank, that are very, very concerned
that we are not getting it. And we have a great relationship,
but we are reaching a point of ``go, no go'' on a lot of
decisions that are creeping up.
You get it. I'm not so sure the new CIO would get it, so
have you looked at that?
Mr.  Cooper. Yes, and, Chairman Meadows, may I offer this,
would this be acceptable, I will carry back--I know the planned
timing. As I mentioned, we selected the individual. I know the
planned timing. Would you allow me to go back, work with
Director Thompson, and speed that up and allow us to put that
individual in place?
My commitment to you and this committee is that I will then
commit to working directly with that individual to ensure that
we help that individual come up to speed as rapidly as
possible, but leveraging myself and my office to ensure that we
honor the commitments that I previously made to this committee
and that director Thompson has previously made to this
committee?
Mr.  Meadows. That sounds fair, because what we cannot have
is someone in the job 8 months later, and we get an F on the
Census. So I appreciate that.
I yield back.
Mr.  Hurd. Mr. Powner, the issue of the CIO responsibility
still perplexes me. Of the 24 CFO agencies, how many of the
CIOs report directly to the agency head?
Mr.  Powner. I do not have that exact number, but I think
very few of them do. Even if they do--we looked at this years
ago and did some work on this. It is dated, but even those that
on paper report to the agency head typically report to the
DepSec. We found that reporting to the DepSec actually gives
most CIOs the right visibility and a seat at the table at most
of the agencies. That is what we concluded.
Mr.  Hurd. So how many report directly to the Deputy
Secretary or the Secretary?
Mr.  Powner. I don't have an exact number on that. But I
can tell you not enough.
Mr.  Hurd. So in your opinion, would an appropriate grade
when it comes to CIO authorities be whether they report
directly to the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary, and do all
of the CIOs within the agency report to them?
Mr.  Powner. Yes, that is a good way to measure. That is
the intent of FITARA, where you have the CIOs reporting to the
department or agency ----
Mr.  Hurd. Would you agree that this metric is
disproportionately more influential in the overall grading of
an agency over all the other areas that FITARA looks at?
Mr.  Powner. Yes, if you don't fix those CIO authorities, I
think you're going to continually struggle.
The other thing I think to keep in mind is the relationship
with the other CFOs. We have heard many agencies, when CIOs
have a solid relationship with the chief financial officers,
things work out a lot better.
Mr.  Hurd. Mr. Powner, you are reading my mind.
How are CFOs responding to the implementation of FITARA?
Mr.  Powner. Mixed bag. I don't have GAO reports that say
this, but we have enough anecdotes, and you have heard it. Some
CFOs are worried about losing power. Some CFOs are working
closely with CIOs. We are seeing some progress, but we need to
see more progress so we have equal footing there.
I think a true measure, too, is going to be trying to get
your arms around the IT budget. I don't think CIOs can do that
without CFOs' help. So you have to partner with CFOs to get
your arms around the IT budget. That is a clear position in
FITARA. There was a reason FITARA was written that way,
starting with this committee.
Mr.  Hurd. At FITARA 3.0, I think it would be interesting
to have some of the CFOs sitting alongside their CIO
colleagues, having these conversations.
Mr.  Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Mr.  Hurd. Yes?
Mr.  Connolly. You have asked a very, very important
question, and I would just say, when we wrote FITARA, we
decided to make it less prescriptive and more expansive. We
took cognizance of the fact that we had multiple CIOs, and
rather than by fiat say there shall be one, we kind of
encouraged the system to evolve, so that there would be a
primus inter pares, first among equals, in the CIO
constellation, because there were 240 or 250 CIOs. And your
question is absolutely apt.
So will that sort of flexible legislative framework work,
or do we have to resort to codifying and deciding by fiat? And
that is why I think your question is so irrelevant, and I hope
the CFOs understand that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the question.
Mr.  Hurd. My last question goes to Mr. Cooper.
I appreciate everyone being here today, and for the delay
for votes.
Commerce got the highest grade, yet Commerce has 114
million lines of Fortran code, which they have 525 employees
supporting that. There are 37 systems that are using operating
systems that are no longer supported by the vendor. Por que?
Why?
Mr.  Cooper. In most cases, those support operations that
cannot easily be replaced by commercial, off-the-shelf
software.
Mr.  Hurd. You are talking about the Fortran code?
Mr.  Cooper. The Fortran code is, in most cases that I am
aware of--I accept what you're telling me as far as the numbers
of systems and lines of code.
What we are doing is working with those bureaus directly
where we have a legacy system exactly like you described. It is
no longer vendor-supported.
Now, what we are doing in a lot of cases is we actually are
backporting, meaning we are getting patches through the public
domain, and we are applying those patches on a very regular
basis, much as we would do if we received a vendor patch. We
are doing that in every situation that we can.
We are also doing the following. In a situation where we
cannot take that approach, we are doing everything we can to
basically quarantine that legacy system. We are doing that
specifically to prevent cyber risk in the spread of something
coming in through a vulnerability in those legacy systems. We
are trying to quarantine it so that we can shut it off and it
won't then propagate across our networks or across other
applications.
Lastly, we are working as rapidly and effectively as we
can, quality with speed, to replace those legacy systems. But
because, in most cases, we can't find readily available
commercial, off-the-shelf software, we still have to build it.
We are taking advantage of savings we are realizing through our
data center consolidation initiative and optimization efforts
to redirect that savings into new development and replacement
of some of, but not all, some of those legacy systems.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
I would like to thank the rest of the witnesses for taking
the time to appear before us today. If there is no further
business, without objection, the subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:29 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
