- REBUILDING THE CHEMICAL SAFETY BOARD: FINDING A SOLUTION TO THE CSB'S GOVERN- ANCE AND MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REBUILDING THE CHEMICAL SAFETY BOARD:
FINDING A SOLUTION TO THE CSB'S GOVERN-
ANCE AND MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-103 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2015

______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
William McGrath, Staff Director-Interior Subcommittee
Joseph Brazauskas, Counsel
Drew Colliatie, Professional Staff Member
Melissa Beaumont, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 4, 2015....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. Rafael Moure-Eraso, Chairman, U.S. Chemical Safety Board
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7
The Hon. Manuel Ehrlich, Board Member, U.S. Chemical Safety Board
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23
The Hon. Mark Griffon, Board Member, U.S. Chemical Safety Board
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29
The Hon. Rich Engler, Board Member, U.S. Chemical Safety Board
Oral Statement...............................................    37
Written Statement............................................    39
Mr. Patrick Sullivan, Assistant Inspector General for
Investigations, Office of Inspector General, U.S. EPA,
Accompanied by Kevin Christensen, Assistant Inspector General
for Audit, Office of Inspector General, U.S. EPA
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45

APPENDIX

Letter from the American Chemistry Council to the Committee......   108
Letter from the United Steelworkers to the Committee.............   111
Letter from former CSB Board Member William Wright to the
Committee......................................................   115
Letter from former CSB Board Member Gerald Poje to the Committee.   122
Written Testimony of former CSB Board Member Beth Rosenberg to
the Committee..................................................   127
Letter from former CSB member William Wark to the Committee......   130
Letter from former CSB Chairman John Bresland to the Committee...   133
February 12, 2015 Vantage Report titled, ``Briefing to CSB Senior
Leadership''...................................................   136
July 10, 2014 Carden Group Report titled, ``U.S. Chemical Safety
Board Path Forward Overview.''.................................   174
July 7, 2014 letter to the President from Chairman Issa and
Members........................................................   194
Government in the Sunshine Act 5 USC 522b........................   198
U.S. Chemical Safety Board Order 28..............................   203
Job posting on USAJOBS for a new Senior Executive Service
position of Managing Director at the Chemical Safety Board,
posted March 2, 2015...........................................   207
January 16, 2015 memorandum from the EPA Inspector General to the
President......................................................   212
February 2, 2015 Letter rom the White House Counsel to CSB
Chairman Rafael Moure-Eraso....................................   225
EPA Office of Inspector General Statement of Compliance form.....   226
Statement of Representative Gerald E. Connolly (VA-11)...........   227
U.S. Chemical Safety Board Order 23..............................   229
Letter from CSB Chairman Rafael Moure-Eraso to the EPA Inspector
General........................................................   249
Responses to questions for the record from Representative Gary
Palmer (AL-06) from CSB Board Member Manuel H Ehrlich, Jr......   250
Responses to questions for the record from Representative Gary
Palmer (AL-06) from CSB Board Member Mark A. Griffon...........   252

REBUILDING THE CHEMICAL SAFETY BOARD: FINDING A SOLUTION TO THE CSB'S
GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES

----------

Wednesday, March 4, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m., in room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Walberg, Amash,
Gosar, DesJarlais, Gowdy, Lummis, Massie, Meadows, DeSantis,
Mulvaney, Buck, Walker, Hice, Russell, Carter, Grothman, Hurd,
Palmer, Cummings, Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Connolly, Kelly,
Lawrence, Lieu, Plaskett, DeSaulnier, and Lujan Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. Good morning. The Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time. Before I give an opening statement, I would
like to take a moment and announce the newest member of the
Subcommittee on Health--Health Care, Benefits and
Administrative Rules. I'm pleased that the gentlewoman from New
Mexico, Ms. Lujan Grisham, has been appointed.
And I'm confident that she'll be an asset to the
subcommittee and glad we can make that appointment.
Today we're here to revisit issues related to the
management of the Chemical Safety Board. This organization has
suffered from a checkered history with regard to leadership.
Much has been documented by this committee. In June 2014, this
committee held a hearing about whistleblower reprisals and
mismanagement at the Chemical Safety Board. And now, just 9
months later, we find ourselves here again as things have not
improved at all. In fact, in many cases, they have actually
gotten worse as more information has come to light.
The EPA inspector general found violations of the Federal
Records Act by senior Chemical Safety Board's officials, and we
will be discussing this today. In January, the EPA inspector
general reported that Chairman Moure-Eraso, General Counsel
Richard Loeb, and Managing Director Daniel Horowitz knowingly
violated the Federal Records Act by using private emails to
conduct official Chemical Safety Board business, despite
previous testimony and assurances to this committee that they
would not and had not been doing that for some time.
The inspector general's findings are in direct contention
with testimony that we heard by the Chairman of the Chemical
Safety Board before this committee. The Chairman testified
before this committee, on June 19, 2014, that the use of
private emails had ceased in early 2013. The inspector general
found--for the EPA--found, however, that the use of private
emails continued through 2013 and even into 2014.
Despite objection by some Board members, on January 28,
2015, the Board suddenly and without warning passed a sweeping
22-page order. That order reversed many longstanding orders
that operated as a checkup to the power of the Chairman and to
assure the proper functioning of the Board. This action was
widely criticized by past and current Board members, industry,
labor unions, all of which worry about the state of the
Chemical Safety Board. The action was also timed to prevent
input by a new Senate confirmed member of the Board.
One of the other things that's deeply concerning to the
committee is that the Chemical Safety Board employee
satisfaction is at an all-time low. Only 26 percent of the CSB
employees recently rated their senior leadership as
satisfactory. And overall satisfaction was dead last in 2014,
the ranking of Federal agencies. All of Federal Government, all
of Federal Government, the Chemical Safety Board is dead last
in terms of morale.
These problems were confirmed by an outside firm retained
to review the Chemical Safety Board management. That firm
found: ``The agency still suffers from lack of trust in senior
leadership, poor communication, ineffective goal setting, a
lack of standard procedures, lack of trust, and a lack of
followup by senior leadership, which contributes to a lack of
accountability.''
Instead of acknowledging the issues raised by the outside
firm's report, Chemical Safety Board management appears to
punish dissenters and discourage employees from bringing their
concerns to Congress. In fact, an employee was removed from
this position within minutes after overseeing an outside firm
because the senior leadership was unhappy that the report
showed that there were core problems at the agency. This same
employee was then summarily demoted the day after speaking with
committee staff about his concern.
I'm here to tell you, we put up with a lot of things. We
are not putting up with employee retaliation. Members of the
Chemical Safety Board and throughout Federal Government have
the ability and the opportunity to speak to Members of Congress
and their staff, and when they do, there is to be no reprisal.
For them to simply try to demote this person, change their
title, take away responsibility because they talk to Congress,
we are not putting up with that sort of retaliation. It's a
very serious issue, and I know on both sides of the aisle, we
do not take this lightly.
Employees at the Chemical Safety Board work hard and are
devoted to the agency's goals--goals have been beaten and
demoralized. Nearly 50 percent of the employees have left since
2011. Moreover, the Chemical Safety Board, under its current
leadership, cannot effectively carry out its important mission.
That's just not me as the chairman saying that. You get outside
groups coming in who have paid a lot of money to come in and
analyze the group. And we are going to read through some of
their conclusions. It's not a pretty picture.
We must ensure that the Chemical Safety Board returns to
its core mandate and away from leadership that fails to lead
and stifles employees' actions. The safety of hardworking
Americans is important to this committee and will continue to
do whatever it is that we need to do in order to fix the
Chemical Safety Board. We should not have to have this agency
come before this committee again, but the problems are getting
worse, not better. We feel that we have been misled and that
the employees have been suffering consequences in the
management of this--this organization.
Now, I would like to recognize the distinguished ranking
member, Mr. Cummings from Maryland, for his opening statements.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let me
start off by saying that I fully agree with you that
retaliation is just something that we will not stand for on
both sides of the aisle.
Mr. Chairman, it's been 9 months since our committee held
its last hearing on the Chemical Safety Board. During that
hearing last June, I said that it was clear that there were
serious management problems that needed to be addressed. I also
said that they were not new revelations. For example, Henry
Waxman, the former ranking member of the House Energy and
Commerce Committee, who helped establish the CSB in 1990, sent
seven recommendations to address these challenges on May 2,
2014.
In addition, the inspector general of the Environmental
Protection Agency, which has jurisdiction over the CSB, issued
five audit reports since 2011 with 23 additional
recommendations on these issues.
In July 2014, the agency hired a management consultant that
identified problems and made more recommendations, and the CSB
also has an internal workplace improvement committee that has
identified concerns and suggested even more improvements.
Today I'm equally troubled to report that despite all of
this feedback and all of these recommendations, things have not
improved at the CSB. To the contrary, management problems at
the agency appears to have gotten worse. Last September, the
CSB hired another management consulting firm to address
fundamental changes within the agency. This company, Vantage
Human Resource Services briefed the Chairman and Board members
on its findings last month on February 12, 2015. We obtained a
copy of Vantage's presentation, which was based on interviews
with agency employees. Vantage found that 80 percent of CSB
employees feel: ``much, much frustration with top leadership--
80 percent.'' That is astounding. That is absolutely a stunning
fact.
Vantage also reported that 47 percent of employees have a,
``perception of a climate where senior leadership discouraged
dissenting opinion.'' That is nearly half the agency. Something
is awfully wrong with this picture. This is the latest in the
long list of negative reports the CSB Chairman has received
about his senior leadership, but instead of using this feedback
in a productive way, the Chairman and his managing director
appeared to have retaliated against the CSB contracting officer
in charge of the Vantage contract.
On the same day that Vantage briefed the Board on its
findings last month, the CSB Managing Director Daniel Horowitz
removed the contracting officer of the Vantage contract and
designated himself--himself--as the contracting officer
instead. On the same day, the managing director asked the CSB
Chairman for permission to search the emails of the former
contracting officer, apparently looking for some incriminating
evidence. Based on documents we now have obtained, it appears
that the CSB Chairman agreed to this request despite the fact
that it included no specific justification whatsoever. He said
only that he wanted to, ``examine a confidential personnel
issue.''
Another troubling development occurred at a public meeting
in Richmond, California, on January 28, 2015. Board Member
Manny Ehrlich offered a sweeping proposal to consolidate the
power in the CSB Chairman and to cancel three investigations.
The motion came with no prior notice and no opportunity for
Board member Mark Griffon to review the motion. Something is
wrong with that picture. It also came after another Board
member was confirmed by the Senate but before he was sworn in
and able to vote.
These allegations are appalling and they indicate that the
CSB has gone off the rails, and it's shocking to the
conscience. Yesterday President Obama nominated Vanessa
Sutherland to be the new Chair of the CSB, something the agency
sorely needs, in my opinion, but that does not end the matter.
Until she is confirmed, sadly, the current Chairman
apparently will remain in place at least for the remaining 3
months of his term. I must tell you that concerns me greatly.
So I want to hear from him directly. I want to listen to his
explanations for these events. I want to understand why he
believes he should remain in his position. And I want to know--
I really want to know--why he is not resigning, especially
since he has now lost the confidence of the President of the
United States of America.
I would also like to hear the perspectives of the other
Board members and the Office of the Inspector General of what
reforms are needed to get this agency back on track. CSB has a
critical mission. The agency was created to investigate
industrial chemical accidents, and it has done landmark work,
such as the 2014 report on the Deepwater Horizon explosion, but
I remind all of you that we're better than that. We are better
than where we are now and better than what has been happening
in this agency. And so we owe it to the employees who are
working hard every day to carry out the mission to ensure that
significant and meaningful changes come out of this hearing.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I'll hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
Member who would like to submit a written Statement.
We will now recognize the panel of witnesses, including the
Honorable Rafael Moure-Eraso, Chairman of the U.S. Chemical
Safety Board; the Honorable Manuel Ehrlich, Board member of the
United States Chemical Safety Board; the Honorable Rich Engler,
Board member of the Chemical Safety Board; Honorable Mark
Griffon, Board member of the Chemical Safety Board; Mr. Patrick
Sullivan, assistant inspector general for investigations in the
Office of Inspector General at the United States Environmental
Protection Agency. Mr. Sullivan is also accompanied by Mr.
Kevin Christensen, assistant inspector general for audit, whose
expertise may be needed during the questioning. We would like
you to be sworn in as well.
We welcome you all, and pursuant to committee rules, the
witnesses will be sworn before they testify, so if you will
please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you.
Let the record reflect that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative, and you may please be seated.
We'll now recognize our panel of witnesses. And Mr.--or Dr.
Moure-Eraso, the Chairman, we will now recognize you first.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Please push the button.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RAFAEL MOURE-ERASO

Mr. Moure-Eraso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am Rafael
Moure-Eraso, the Chairperson with the U.S. Chemical Safety
Board, or the CSB. I have--I am a first-generation American who
has dedicated his life to occupational safety and health. I
have 15 weeks to go before I retire to my home near Boston and
to my family and my grandchildren.
I will start by frankly acknowledging your criticisms of my
management during the last hearing. I was humbled by the
messages I heard loud and clear. I took them to heart.
I have worked together with other Board members and the
staff to address the issues you raise. We have adopted a set of
recommendations made by former Representative Henry Waxman
aimed at improving the functioning of the Board. We have also
formed an independent workplace improvement committee that is
functioning. As you know, we contracted with a consulting
company, Vantage, to provide coaching and other services to
help us improve internal communications.
We recently discovered that Vantage findings, prior from
being presented to the Board, were altered through
inappropriate interactions with the contractor. We have asked
for the IG's--the inspector general--assistance in
investigating this matter, the contractual matter.
But the most important point I will make today is that we
have been making rapid progress in the core mission of the CSB,
what we were called to do. We have completed eight high-quality
chemical accident investigation reports in the last 9 months, a
record for the agency. These reports represent the culmination
of years of hard work by our highly motivated investigators.
These are wonderful public servants who have spent long months
away from their families determining the root causes of
horrible accidents.
The number of open investigations, which was as an all-time
high of 22 in June 2010, when I began my term, is now down to
6. Five of those six remaining cases are on track to be
completed by the end of the fiscal year, including the West
Fertilizer explosion, the contamination of West Virginia
drinking water, and the Deepwater Horizon blowout.
Our Deepwater reports issued last year established for the
first time why the blowout preventer failed to work properly.
Many other investigations are having a lasting impact on
safety.
For example, California and Washington States are revamping
the refinery safety rules following the CSB Chevron and Tesoro
investigations when we completed this very last year.
Finally, I would like to thank the IG for their efforts
with us on Federal records management concerning the use of the
nongovernmental email. In February, we received a letter from
the White House Counsel concerning the IG report and have taken
all the corrective actions he requested. The nongovernmental
emails have been transferred to agency servers, as we recently
informed the IG and the committee. We found that at least two
other Board members and many staff have been using also
personal email. Those emails have also been preserved and
moving to the agency servers.
In addition, on February 19, we provided training to all
Board members and as the new requirements on the law of the
preservation of nongovernmental report.
As my time as Chairman goes to a close, we will be leaving
behind a stronger agency. We have two outstanding new
appointees, Manuel Ehrlich and Rick Engler, one from industry
and one from labor, and both tremendously enthusiastic about
the mission. It's a perfect fit.
All of us look forward to the confirmation and appointment
of President Obama's new nominee as Chair, Vanessa Sutherland,
who was announced yesterday. As we work through your concerns
to make this an even better agency, I assure you that whatever
my shortcomings have been, my commitment to the CSB mission
have never wavered. I am looking forward to working collegially
with the new members for the few weeks that remain. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Moure-Eraso follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Ehrlich, you are now recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MANUEL EHRLICH

Mr. Ehrlich. Thank you, and good morning.
My name is Manny Ehrlich. I'm a chemist who came to CSB
from a 50-year career in the chemical industry, mostly with
BASF Corporation. I served in a variety of roles, including
executive management, and I eventually led emergency response
efforts at chemical accidents across North America.
My role as a Board member is especially meaningful to me. I
worked in a plant in which two workers lost their lives in a
chemical accident. It was my responsibility to notify their
wives. It is an experience you never forget and one I hope none
of you ever have to be involved in.
Only last month, Chairman Moure-Eraso and I visited the
DuPont facility in LaPorte, Texas, where we were investigating
a toxic gas release that killed four workers. This trip
reminded us of the agony associated with the loss of life at a
chemical plant and reaffirmed our commitment to work diligently
at the CSB to prevent future accidents.
From what I have seen at my time in the agency, staff
productivity is high. The work of the investigators is very
stressful, but they are focused and dedicated. I'm impressed
with the consistently high quality of the investigation reports
and recommendations.
Mr. Chairman, I am aware of the issues this committee has
raised concerning management at the agency. Coming from the
private sector, my approach is that we need clear delineation
of goals, procedures, and responsibilities while we work with
the committee to find solutions to unresolved issues.
I would like to take this opportunity to say that I have a
high degree of respect for Chairman Moure-Eraso and the high
work output at the CSB during his tenure. He has been under
heavy fire, but I know him as a man of high integrity that is
dedicated to preventing chemical accidents and saving workers'
lives and is truly committed to the agency's mission.
He's a working Chairman, who is in the office every day. He
travels to accident sites and is fully immersed in the life of
the agency. In my judgment, as a former industry executive, a
large part of the Board's problems have been due to the
confused and ambiguous lines of authority between the Board,
career staff, and the Board Chair. It appears that some Board
members work with a few career staff that curtail the
appropriate administrative authority of the Board Chair, thus
the chain of command within the agency has been undermined.
The Chair is facing internal opposition, tension, and
criticism as he simply tried to undertake the basic functions
of the agency. During my time at the agency, I witnessed
employee actions that I have never seen in the private sector
which have a very negative effect on the organization. An
example is a situation the Chair referred to in which two staff
members intentionally doctored a report by our organizational
consultant. They took out examples of progress being made and
added in very negative comments about senior management, and
they improperly instructed the contractor to keep their
involvement secret.
I put forth a motion in January 2015 to clarify ambiguities
about the Chair's administrative authority. My motion was about
the future of the agency and the authority and leadership
capacity of future Chairs. The agency needs to function in a
more businesslike manner with clearer lines of accountability,
responsibility, and authority. I believe my motion conforms to
private sector practices as well as the practices used at
agencies like the NTSB. Most importantly, it clarifies the
appropriate division of responsibilities between the Board and
the Chair.
It is now time to move forward and not look back. Mr.
Engler and I will be working to ensure that the strong labor
and environmental coalition background that he brings to the
Board and the industry background that I bring will be used
collaboratively. We plan to meet jointly with industry and
union stakeholders to build bridges and gain acceptance of key
CSB recommendations.
I look forward to working collegially with Mr. Engler and
future Board members. I'll be pleased to answer any questions
you have. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Ehrlich follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Griffon, you are now recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK GRIFFON

Mr. Griffon. Thank you. Good morning and thank you,
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, members of the
committee. Thank you for holding this hearing today. This
committee's oversight is both timely and urgent. My name is
Mark Griffon. I was nominated by President Obama in March 2010
and confirmed by the Senate in--in June 2010 to a 5-year term
ending in June 2015.
I would like to focus my testimony on two key issues. One,
the late night vote in a Board meeting in Richmond, California,
without any advance notice, in which the agency governance
system was stripped of necessary checks and balances; and two,
the failure to honor commitments made to this committee in the
June 19, 2014, hearing, pursuant to Congressman Waxman's
recommendations.
First, the Board action in Richmond, California. In
Richmond, California, on January 28 at a public meeting
regarding the Chevron investigation, a surprise motion was
presented by Board Member Ehrlich. The multipart motion
included fundamentally modifying the governance of the agency
and canceling three investigations, the Citgo refinery
incidents in Corpus Christi, Texas; the explosion of the
Horsehead facility in Monaca, Pennsylvania; and the explosion
at the Silver Eagle refinery in Woods Cross, Utah.
My efforts to table the matter failed and the motion passed
2 to 1. The urgency of taking up a sweeping motion just prior
to Mr. Engler joining the agency has not yet been explained.
The resulting Board order on governance, Board Order 2015-1,
consolidated power with the Chair and eliminated specific
checks and balances, including Board authorities related to the
development of the budget and the use and distribution of
appropriated funds; the approval of large expenditures; the
appointment of heads of administrative units; career Senior
Executive Service appointments. The importance of these
authorities was discussed in a letter from Senator Lautenberg
back in 1999, shortly after the agency was established.
In this letter, Senator Lautenberg clearly indicates that
the Chairperson shall exercise the executive and administrative
function of the Board but must perform those functions, ``under
the direction and approval of the Board as a whole,'' The
intent, as expressed by Senator Lautenberg, is lost in the
motion passed on January 28, 2015.
The second key issue, CSB action subsequent to Congressman
Waxman's recommendations. In a May 2, 2014, letter to the
Board, Congressman Waxman put forward several recommendations
to begin to address some of the management problems. These
recommendations, which I consider reasonable--a reasonable
starting point toward improving agency management, have not
been fulfilled.
I offer the following observations: One, communication with
the Board has not improved. This is best illustrated by the
lack of any communication with me leading up to the January 28,
2015, meeting. Two, rather than attempt to vote to modify Board
Order 28, an order that delineates the authorities of the Board
and the Chair, the Chairman unilaterally declared Board Order
28 invalid based on a CSB Office of General Counsel opinion.
Three, despite Congressman Waxman's recommendations, the 2013
recommendation from the EPA IG, and numerous requests by Board
members, an overall investigations plan has not been completed
since I've been on the Board. And four, a plan for completing
the investigations protocol has never been provided to the
Board.
So what is the remedy? In the last year, the agency has
hired management consultants and executive coaches and set up a
workplace improvement committee purportedly to improve employee
morale and make necessary management reforms. Despite these
activities, no meaningful management changes have been made.
I believe the following actions should be taken. No. 1, the
entire motion made in the January 28, 2015, meeting should be
rescinded. Two, Board Order 28, dated August 8, 2006, should be
reinStated. Three, the Board should make a clearcut statement
of policy that the CSB orders are the governing procedures of
the agency. Four, the Board should make a commitment to hold
monthly public business meetings. And five, the oversight and
recommendations provided by the EPA IG are useful and the
relationship with the EPA IG must be rebuilt. The agency's
mission is very important, and these problems must be resolved.
Thank you for your consideration.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Griffon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Engler, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICH ENGLER

Mr. Engler. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz,
Ranking Member Cummings, and the committee members for asking
me to testify at this important and timely hearing. Excuse me.
My name is Rick Engler. I was confirmed by the Senate to be a
CSB member last December 16, and I was commissioned to the
Board for a 5-year term by President Obama on February 5, 2015.
I am thus the newest CSB members.
Before this appointment, I was director of the New Jersey
Work Environment Council, a collaboration of labor, community,
and environmental organizations where preventing chemical
disasters was a primary focus. The CSB and its dedicated staff
have accomplished much over its short history. Its
investigations, its recommendations, reports are essential
tools for preventing tragic chemical incidents, which continue
today.
During my first few weeks at CSB, I've reviewed extensive
material, including CSB reports, recommendations, and briefing
documents, inspector general findings, materials from this
committee's hearing on the CSB last June 19, and the new
Vantage report discussed earlier. I've spoken to some past and
all current Board members, and many but not all CSB staff as
well as some outside stakeholders.
Excuse me. My learning process is not done, yet I already
conclude that major internal changes must occur for the CSB to
best fulfill its critical mission. Foremost, changes are needed
to resolve the controversy over CSB governance and the powers
of the Chair in relationship to other members. The serious
engagement of all CSB members in major decisions provides
critical checks and balances and would result in the best
decisions.
Unfortunately, Board Order 2015-1 was approved by a 2-to-1
vote on January 28, 2015, and has been--as has been already
pointed out. This action took place after I was confirmed by
the U.S. Senate but just 5 business days before I was sworn in
as a CSB member. It consolidated power in the Chair and
eliminated, for example, the four--the role of four other
members in deciding budgets, major use of funds, key contracts,
and approving appointment department heads.
Well, I believe this will have a negative outcome on the
performance of the agency. And I should point out, in a very
small agency that has roughly 40 staff, the 5 Board members
are, in my view, should be active participants in the work, not
sitting aside from the work and making decisions but doing
work. And that means that they should be participants actively
in key decisions as well.
So I would urge the Board to rescind its overall motion of
January 28. I respectfully ask this committee to urge the CSB
to take such action. A new process with deadlines to ensure the
both governance rules and policies with checks and balances
could then begin.
Some other changes are also urgently needed to accomplish
the following: Address the serious issues raised by the Vantage
report, including poor internal communications, lack of
consistent policies and procedures, and employee frustrations
with senior management, which have all led to very low staff
morale, and I would like to add that, regardless of the
process, the substance of the Vantage report is very, very
troubling. So, regardless of what interactions took place, the
essential message there gives me grave concern about the issues
that have been raised.
I will work to ensure that CSB members and staff work
collegially, where all views are respected even when there are
agreements--whether it's over science, whether it's over
policy, whether it's over recommendations. And I would also
like to add that I have spent decades in the State of New
Jersey working for strong whistleblower protection. One example
is that I helped lead an effort to amend our Conscientious
Employee Protection Act, which passed legislation in the State
of New Jersey with virtually unanimous bipartisan support, that
required an annual notice to go to every private-and public-
sector employee in the State, making sure that they understand
that they had a right to speak out, an obligation to speak out
if they found violations of law or public policies. I feel
deeply about whistleblower protections.
I also think that the Board needs to adopt a new project-
management-tracking system with clear objectives, benchmarks,
and internal controls, that the Board must engage stakeholders,
that there must be frequent well-publicized business meetings.
And I reject any notion that carrying out the people's business
by a public agency is merely theater. And I look forward to a
new relationship with the Office of Inspector General. And I
will anticipate--in fact, I'll do it right now--I would seek a
briefing from the inspector general on all the outstanding
issues. And I look forward to rebuilding that--that
relationship.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Engler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Now recognize Mr. Sullivan from the
Office of the Inspector General. Now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK SULLIVAN

Mr. Sullivan. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee.
I am Patrick Sullivan, assistant inspector general for
investigations for the EPA and the Chemical Safety Board. Thank
you for inviting me to appear before you today.
I plan to discuss two matters related to CSB.
The first is a report of investigation that Inspector
General Arthur Elkins sent to the President on January 22 of
this year addressing conduct by CSB Chairman Rafael Moure-Eraso
and two of the senior staff members. The second relates to our
audit work at CSB.
I will provide an overview of CSB's document production and
its use of nongovernmental email systems for official
communications. On or about February 6, 2013, the OIG received
information alleging that CSB officials were conducting
official business via nongovernmental email accounts. During
our investigation, the OIG made a request to the CSB for
communications pertaining to official CSB matters that were
sent via nongovernmental email systems.
CSB declined to provide all the requested documents and
provided some documents and emails in redacted form. This
refusal of access to the OIG constituted a particularly serious
or flagrant problem under the IG act. And Inspector General
Elkins was compelled to issue a 7-day letter to Chairman Moure-
Eraso on September--in September 2013. CSB nevertheless again
refused to provide the emails and forwarded the IG's 7-day
letter along with the CSB response to Congress.
In June 2014, this committee held a hearing on these
issues. Following the hearing, the committee directed the CSB
to turn over the emails to the OIG, and the agency provided a
number of responsive documents. My office completed its
investigation, finding information sufficient to support
conclusions that Chairman Moure-Eraso and Mr. Loeb purposefully
used private nongovernmental email systems to communicate on
CSB matters. Also, these communications were not preserved as
official records.
Regarding the OIG report of investigation on February 9,
Chairman Moure-Eraso responded in writing to the White House
Counsel. We are awaiting the President's determination as to
whether disciplinary action is warranted. At various times,
Chairman Moure-Eraso and Mr. Loeb explained what action was
taken to correct the use of nongovernmental email systems for
official CSB communications.
In its February 2015 letter to the White House Counsel, the
Chairman Stated, ``All the individuals who are cited in the
OIG's Memorandum of Report and Investigations of January 16,
2015, have zealously abided by the IG's email preservation
recommendations since the OIG first made us aware of this
issue,'' More recently, in fact just 2 days ago, on March 2,
Inspector General Elkins received a letter from the Chairman
saying that remedial actions have been taken at CSB. But we
have yet to receive statements from the Chairman, Mr. Loeb, and
Mr. Horowitz, which was asked for in August 2014, certifying
that they have fully complied with the OIG's request for
documents.
During our investigation, a document requested--a document
request to Mr. Horowitz turned up a nongovernmental email
communication among him, Chairman Moure-Eraso, and Mr. Loeb,
dated August 21, 2013. The date is relevant because it occurred
after Mr. Loeb told congressional investigators in the OIG that
the use of nongovernmental emails for official business had
ceased. Further, we found emails between Mr. Loeb and Mr.
Horowitz sent via nongovernmental email accounts pertinent to
previously received allegations from a confidential source that
a high-level employee in the Office of Special Counsel had
compromised the identities of whistleblowers at the CSB.
We have an ongoing--we have ongoing audits on CSB
contracts, purchase card improper payments, and CSB governance.
A recent CSB Board abolished 18 Board orders, which eliminated
internal controls that were being reviewed as part of an
ongoing OIG audit. There are five CSB related OIG audit reports
with open and unresolved recommendations. Agencies are supposed
to be establish a resolution process for such situations.
However, the CSB has never done so.
Today, I believe I have several areas of significant
concern with regard to potential waste, fraud, and abuse as
identified by the EPA OIG in our investigative and audit work.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. My
colleague, Kevin Christensen, our assistant inspector general
for audit, and I will be prepared to answer any questions that
you and the committee may have. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Walberg for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
holding this hearing. It's important that the citizens of our
great country, whether they agree or disagree with the policies
that come from Congress or come from agencies, that they can
expect that we play within--within the boundaries of the
playing field using the rules of play. So I appreciate this--
this hearing.
Mr. Sullivan, the EPA inspector general confirmed that
Moure-Eraso, Loeb, and Horowitz violated the Federal Records
Act. Are you certain that you've determined the entire scope of
their use of private email accounts?
Mr. Sullivan. No, sir. We cannot be certain until we get a
certification from each individual that they have complied with
our request. They have not done so yet.
Mr. Walberg. Well, based upon your investigation, were any
other CSB employees or Board members involved in the use of
private email accounts to conduct official business with Moure-
Eraso, Loeb, or Horowitz?
Mr. Sullivan. Based on our investigation, we focused our
inquiry on Mr. Moure-Eraso, Mr. Loeb, and Mr. Horowitz. On
March 2, we received a letter from the Chairman indicating that
additional CSB members had utilized private email accounts.
This first came to our attention on March 2. And we are
currently examining that information. And we intend to pursue
further inquiries in that regard.
Mr. Walberg. Have Moure-Eraso, Loeb, or Horowitz taken
steps to ensure that their previous private email
communications have been entered in the CSB records?
Mr. Sullivan. They have asserted that to us, sir. That's
correct.
Mr. Walberg. At this time----
Mr. Sullivan. But we have not confirmed that. That's what
they've asserted to us, but we have not physically checked to
ensure that those records are preserved, but we intend to do
so.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Mr. Moure-Eraso, have you taken steps to
include all private email communications that you used to
conduct official CSB business into the Federal record?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. In February of this year, we received
a letter from the White House in which they--they say that if--
excuse me. Let me start again.
We believe that, at this time, we are in compliance with
all regulations and with all the requests of the IG. All
relevant emails have been transferred to government servers for
recordkeeping. I certify my own certification in July of last
year, 2014, and after reviewing----
Mr. Walberg. Dr. Moure-Eraso, let me make it very clear,
under oath, you are stating this----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I can send you to a letter that I sent
through email in which I made the certification. If you want, I
can quote it from it. It's right here. My letter say to Mr.
Elkins, July 15, 2014, last two paragraphs: Accordingly, I
believe that all documents requested by your office covering
the period to January 2012 to the present have been fulfilled.
The CSB chief information officer was responsible for
conducting and overseeing these searches, and based on his
assurances and to the best of my knowledge and belief, the
documents provided to your office satisfy all outstanding
requests concerning this matter.
This was submitted to Mr. Elkins in July 15, 2014.
Mr. Walberg. Let me move further on this. Is--is--you
indicated that your personal email account to seek--was used to
seek Mr. Loeb's legal opinion on draft communications as part
of the communication that you had. Is that the only subject
matter contained in these emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. There were some other subject matters. We
used to use the Gmail to transmit publications in which the CSB
were mentioned. We discovered the publication, and I will send
him a copy to----
Mr. Walberg. Well, did--did you in fact use a personal
email address to conduct almost all CSB business that involved
Loeb and Horowitz?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That is not correct, no. That is not the
case.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Sullivan, what is your understanding of
the subject matter of emails exchanged between Moure-Eraso,
Loeb, and Horowitz that violated the Federal Records Act.
Mr. Sullivan. There were numerous discussions of CSB
business, which should have been covered under the dot-gov
email accounts. Specifically, though, the issue of the
compliance that we requested, we sent a request from Mr.
Horowitz, Mr. Loeb, and Mr. Moure-Eraso to fill out a form.
It's a statement of compliance, and we asked them to certify
that they completed the correct record searches using correct
search terms and that they've searched their private email
accounts. We've yet to receive this document back certifying
that they've done that.
Mr. Walberg. Is that the document that Mr. Moure-Eraso
referred to?
Mr. Sullivan. No, he sent a letter saying that he searched
the records, but neither of the three gentleman we've requested
have submitted this document to us specifically stating exactly
the methodology they used to conduct the searches. That's what
we need to certify that they're in compliance.
Mr. Walberg. OK. Thank you.
My time is expired.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentleman.
Now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Kelly for
5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank you and the
ranking member for holding this hearing. Since 2010, the
Federal Employee Survey results indicate dissatisfaction with
the governance of CSB by senior management. CSB ranks near the
bottom in a comparison of very small agencies with a high
percentage of staff reporting that they would not recommend the
CSB as a good place to work.
Mr. Chairman, are you aware of these survey results?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, Congressman, I am aware.
Ms. Kelly. In September, 2014, CSB commissioned a study by
Vantage Human Resource Services to help the agency address its
challenges. Is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That is correct.
Ms. Kelly. And, in February 2015, you received a report in
which Vantage provided its findings. We obtained a copy of this
report. And I would like to walk through them. One of the
findings was that 47 percent of CSB employees felt that senior
leadership discouraged dissenting opinions.
Mr. Chairman, are you aware that nearly half of your
employees don't feel as if they can disagree with the agency's
position on issues without retaliation?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That's what the survey seemed to imply,
yes.
Ms. Kelly. Excuse me?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That's what the survey seems to indicate.
Ms. Kelly. This concern was raised last June by former
Board Member Beth Rosenberg, who said, ``Those whose opinions
differed from those of senior leadership are marginalized and
vilified. At the CSB, disagreement is seen as disloyalty,
criticism is not welcome, and staff fear retaliation.''
Do you disagree with the results of this survey, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't disagree with the results of the
survey, but I disagree with the statements that you mention
from the former Board member.
Ms. Kelly. OK. Why do you disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Because I think that people have the
option in the agency to express their views and to discuss it
with everybody. That has been my policy.
Ms. Kelly. But you did say you agree with the--or you had
the results of the survey. So the employees don't seem to agree
with--that--they don't seem to feel free to be able to express
themselves by the results of the survey.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I think that the employee--the
employees disagree with my view.
Ms. Kelly. The report also finds that 60 percent of the
employees felt that there was a lack of accountability and a
lack of follow-through by senior leadership. Were you aware of
that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. This says that. Also I would like to say
that the report said that 70 percent of the people agree that
they feel that they are accountable for achieving results and
also that there have been 20 percent improvement since 2013 of
more than two-thirds of the issues that were raised in the
survey.
Ms. Kelly. OK. In addition, 80 percent of employees felt
that conflict among Board members is having a negative impact
on the agency.
Mr. Griffon, you have served for nearly 5 years now. Do you
agree with this finding, and if so, why?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, I do agree with this finding. Thank you
for the question. I think that the conflict on the Board--when
Board orders are continuously violated and the Board is
circumvented, it creates conflict on the Board. And it has
resulted in staff concerns. And I shared--I think some Board
members, including myself, shared the frustration of the staff
that we can't work as a unit, work as a full Board. This
frustration forced Dr. Rosenberg to leave after 17 months.
Ms. Kelly. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, you wrote a letter to the IG 2 days ago
requesting investigation into potentially inappropriate
communications and interactions by CSB employees with Vantage.
Is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That's correct, yes.
Ms. Kelly. Is it fair to say that you do not agree with the
conclusions about CSB senior management?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I am open about the conclusions of
Vantage, but what I discovered is that the report itself have
been compromised by two CSB senior members. They seem to have
influenced the contractor to insert critical language that they
theirselves have written and eliminated the language that where
the consultants believe that CSB was making progress. This make
it appear that the consultants were highly critical of senior
leadership. They did this in secret and told the contractor to
keep it confidential. I have requested that the IG investigate
this contractor relationship that seems to be compromised and
that seems to me that loses the integrity of the results.
Ms. Kelly. I have one more question so let me get my
question in. Mr. Griffon, is there an example of how employees
who express opinions that are different from or critical of
senior management are treated?
Mr. Griffon. Yes. I think one--one obvious case involved a
safety case recommendation that was made and discussed in the
Chevron report in California, and there are many staff that
felt at--felt as though it needed further examination as I do,
and they felt strongly that if they brought that up, that was
disloyalty, and they just were hushed essentially.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, and thanks for being here.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
And I'll recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Gowdy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Moure-Eraso, in June 2014, you had been sworn and were
asked a series of questions by our chairman, one of which was,
have you ever used personal email for official business or
communication? And, again, under oath, Dr. Moure-Eraso, your
answer was, Well, yes, out of ignorance.
What was the source of your ignorance?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, what I found when I get into the
agency is that it was a normal custom that----
Mr. Gowdy. Who did you--who told you that with specificity?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I use--saw the experience that
everybody used Gmail for certain communications.
Mr. Gowdy. Everybody?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Everybody that communicated with me, yes.
Mr. Gowdy. Did you--did you consult any manuals? Did you
seek any legal guidance as to whether or not that was in
compliance Federal Records Act?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. My understanding at the time is that
communications through Gmail were acceptable and----
Mr. Gowdy. Well, good. I'm glad you brought that up because
your answer continued, At the beginning of my tenure, I used to
write drafts or positions.
When did your tenure begin, Dr. Moure-Eraso?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. In June 2010
Mr. Gowdy. So the beginning of you tenure would reasonably
be construed as what? Since you answered under oath that you
limited yourself to using personal email during the beginning
of your tenure, what's a reasonable understanding of the
beginning of your tenure?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I told you, June 2010.
Mr. Gowdy. Six months? 12 months?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Three months.
Mr. Gowdy. Three months. So your testimony is you did not
use personal email more than 3 months after the beginning of
your tenure, which would be in 2010?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, that is not my answer. What I did----
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I'm reading--I'm reading your answer, and
your answer was, At the beginning of my tenure, I used to write
drafts or positions.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, right. That is----
Mr. Gowdy. Did you ever use--did you ever use personal
email after the beginning of your tenure, which you defined as
3 months?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. When I was notified by my----
Mr. Gowdy. I really have----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Counsel that this was not a
good recordkeeping practice----
Mr. Gowdy. I really am----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. I stopped doing it.
Mr. Gowdy [continuing]. Looking for a yes or no answer
initially, and then you are welcome to explain. Did you use
personal email after you had been on the job 3 months?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Probably yes.
Mr. Gowdy. Probably yes or yes?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I mean----
Mr. Gowdy. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I didn't know that I couldn't.
Mr. Gowdy. See there, that wasn't that complicated. The
answer is yes.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I did know----
Mr. Gowdy. The answer is yes.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. I did recognize that it was
not a good recordkeeping practice.
Mr. Gowdy. And then you went on to say----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It was pointed out to me, and I ceased to
do this.
Mr. Gowdy. The court reporter is going to have enough
trouble without us talking over each other, Dr. Moure-Eraso.
You also said that you used to write drafts or positions
before I would put it as, and then you were cutoff. Did you
ever use personal email to do anything other than write drafts
or positions?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, I transmitted----
Mr. Gowdy. All right. So that answer that you gave to
Chairman Chaffetz was incorrect in multiple ways. First of all,
you did use it at the beginning of your tenure, and
secondarily, you did use it for more than just drafts or
positions.
And then the chairman said, When is the most recent time
that you used your personal email?
And I found this answer instructive. You said, We stopped
the practice. Who is ``we''?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, the people that I write emails to
and people that write emails to me, so----
Mr. Gowdy. Does ``we'' include you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Of course.
Mr. Gowdy. So your testimony would have been that I stopped
that practice about a year and a half ago. If ``I'' is included
in the word ``we,'' then your answer was, I stopped that
practice about a year and a half ago.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know the exact date as you are
asking for, but yes, I stopped the practice.
Mr. Gowdy. I'm--I'm looking at your exact testimony. That's
what I'm looking at. And you said----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know----
Mr. Gowdy [continuing]. You stopped it----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. The exact day.
Mr. Gowdy. You said you stopped it a year and a half prior
to when Chairman Chaffetz asked you about it. Do you agree that
a common understanding of a year and a half would be 18 months?
Is that a common understanding of a year and a half? Do you
disagree that a year and a half would be 18 months, Dr. Moure-
Eraso?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Congressman, I cannot tell you an
exact day. I'm sorry.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, you gave Chairman Chaffetz an exact date
under oath.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I said----
Mr. Gowdy. Under oath you said a year and a half ago----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I said at the beginning of my tenure.
Mr. Gowdy. I've moved on to another question, Dr. Moure-
Eraso.
I've moved on to the second question and your second
answer, which was we stopped that practice about a year and a
half ago, and what I find vexing, Doctor, is this was testimony
in June 2014, so a year and a half ago would have been some
time in early 2013. And here I am looking at personal emails
you sent in August 2013, well within a year of when you gave
that testimony to Congressman Chaffetz.
Can you understand why we would be troubled by your
previous testimony, Dr. Moure-Eraso? I just cited four
instances in which it was factually deficient.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If you look at the email that you are
referring to----
Mr. Gowdy. I'm looking----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It's simply the transmission of an article
that appeared in the press.
Mr. Gowdy. Dr. Moure-Eraso, I am looking at your prior
testimony. That's what I find vexing and alarming is your prior
testimony to the chairman of this committee.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I accept it. I made mistake probably
in address, and rather than using the CSB mail, by a mistake, I
sent it a Gmail with a copy of an article that appeared in a
newspaper.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I agree you made a mistake, but my main
concern is that you made a mistake when you were testifying
before this committee.
And with that, I would yield back to the chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Lieu,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'd like to discuss the motion that was approved at the
January 28 public meeting convened by the CSB in Richmond,
California. Eighteen of the agency's orders relating to
personnel, contracting, budgeting, and general administration
of the Board were rescinded, including Board Order 28. Mr.
Chairman, is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, it is.
Mr. Lieu. OK. The motion eliminated the Board approval
regarding the hiring of senior staff, selection of members of
the Senior Executive Service, and spending above $50,000. Mr.
Griffon, Mr. Engler, is that your understanding as well?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, that is.
Mr. Lieu. All right. So I'm going to read to you a quote in
the National Journal article by William Wright, a former Board
member, who Stated, It looks like a takeover of the agency.
Early on, the agency had some really rough roads because we
were fighting over authority, but we tried to balance that.
You're basically now handing it over to one person.
Mr. Griffon, Mr. Engler, would you agree with that
statement?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, I would agree with that statement.
Mr. Engler. Yes, I would.
Mr. Lieu. And you agree this is essentially a power grab by
the Chairman, correct?
Mr. Griffon. Yes. Yes, I agree it's to restore power--or
put power in the Chair and take it away from the overall Board,
yes.
Mr. Engler. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. OK.
And, in 2000, the Department of Justice Office of Legal
Counsel opinion agrees with you, and it States, ``The day-to-
day administration of Board matters and execution of Board
policies are the responsibilities of the Chairperson subject to
Board oversight.''
In addition, the Carden Group, a consulting firm hired by
CSB to help agency address internal challenges also believed
that Board oversight or governance was critically important. A
report from that firm said, Restoring Board governance to
ensure functionality to the Board is ultimately--and ultimately
at CSB is mandatory.
Mr. Griffon, Mr. Engler, do you agree with both of those
statements?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, absolutely. I think this--the motion
removed many important checks and balances, and I absolutely
agree.
Mr. Engler. I agree as well.
Mr. Lieu. Dr. Moure, you asked earlier--at the beginning of
this hearing, you opened up by saying, I will start by frankly
acknowledging that a number of members of this committee have
been critical of my Chairmanship of the CSB. I was humbled by
the message that I heard loud and clear during your hearing 8
months ago in June.
I don't believe you. A person who has been humbled would
not, about a month and a half ago, have consolidated power on
the Board. When someone's embattled, when someone has shown
dysfunctional leadership, they don't consolidate power. That is
what dictators do. It's not what public officials in America
do.
Mr. Lieu. I do not understand why you would look at taking
that action when none of the recommendations of Congressman
Waxman or of this committee anywhere would say, hey, we've got
a dysfunctional CSB, we've got a chairman that has violated
laws and regulations, and the solution to that is for the
chairman to consolidate power. That makes absolutely no sense.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If I may----
Mr. Lieu. No. I will ask you a question, and then you can
answer.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. OK. Well, do you want----
Mr. Lieu. Are you aware that on February 18 there was an
explosion at the Torrance ExxonMobil refinery in my district?
That's a question to you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Oh, that's the question, yes. Yes, I was I
aware of that explosion, yes.
Mr. Lieu. And what are you all doing about it?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We--as we normally do when there are
serious chemical explosions, we convened what we call a
deployment meeting, in which we collect information about the
particular incident. We poll the senior department directors on
the information that we have. We use an algorithm to put a
number that will define the seriousness of the consequence of
the accident. And based on all those inputs, we make a decision
if we are able to deploy or not to a particular accident.
And we went through all that process in Torrance.
Mr. Lieu. And what's a timeline for that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The timeline is within 24 hours of the
accident.
Mr. Lieu. And then have you shared what your conclusions
were after 24 hours?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The conclusions of the deployment meeting
was that, even though that was an important and serious
accidents, that we didn't have the resources to deploy, and we
didn't deploy.
Mr. Lieu. OK. I will followup with the CSB on that issue.
And then let me close by saying that, again, I am deeply
troubled not only by your desire to consolidate power at the
Board but also by the method in which you chose to do so, by
intentionally ramming this through even though you had another
Board member coming up who could have voted on this.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Congressman----
Mr. Lieu. I yield back.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Congressman, if I might--if I may,
these changes that happened in January the 28th were not for
me. I have a few weeks left. They were put on the Board after 4
1/2 years of discussion of what is the way that governance will
work on the Board. And they were put in place and voted in
there by the new Board member--were proposed by a new Board
member and supported by me to establish clear lines of
authority and to put the way that the agency functioned to make
it compatible with Federal law.
We cannot have Board orders that are incompatible with
Federal law. The objective is to put them in line with the
National Transportation Safety Board--that we did--and to have
a system that is--a system that is--that follows a model--that
is, the National Transportation Safety Board--and that will
work for the future. This is for the future.
If there is any idea from other Board members that this is
not acceptable or it is not useful, of course they have the
opportunity to propose a motion and to try to change it
whenever they want. They have 5 years to do it.
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Lieu, go ahead. I recognize you for
additional time if you so need it.
Mr. Lieu. I think my point has been made. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'd like to interject here and ask a
question as to why, then, didn't you publish this in advance of
the meeting?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have been discussing the government
issue with Mr. Griffon for 4 1/2 years. As a matter of fact,
for a year, we discussed what should be the Board's roles and
responsibilities. And----
Chairman Chaffetz. OK. Let's get----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. We're proposing a Board order
that we agree on, that we're going to vote on, and then he
voted ``no'' on it. And this discussion continued for a year.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let's get Mr. Griffon's opinion of this
perspective.
Mr. Griffon?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, thank you, Chairman.
It is true, we've talked about the exchanges for quite some
time, and we grappled with the changes to Board Order 28 and
additional Board orders on roles and responsibilities. And, at
the end of the day, changes were not acceptable to me, and Mr.
Bresland asked for calendaring the motion. Later, when Dr.
Rosenberg was on the Board, it was the same situation.
So we did grapple with those changes, but instead of voting
and trying to fix them through a vote, they continued to work
around and circumvent the Board orders, leading up to this
final surprise vote in California.
Chairman Chaffetz. When you say ``surprise,'' what do you
mean, ``surprise?''
Mr. Griffon. I mean ``surprise'' in that, the night of the
vote, I listened to the motion be read into the--at the end of
a Chevron report, Mr. Ehrlich was recognized to make a motion.
He read a summary of the motion. Subsequent to that, they
handed me a 22-page package. It was the first time I saw that.
Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize the gentlewoman,
unless Mr. Lieu--unless you--or Mr.----
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Chaffetz [continuing]. Cummings?
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Engler, what do you want to say?
Mr. Engler. Thank you.
I think the issue of governance is a major central issue to
the future of the Board. It's the bedrock upon which decisions
are made. It will determine the nature of the recommendations.
It can affect, certainly, key staffing.
And what I would like to see, moving forward, in addition
to retraction of the in-the-night action in Richmond, is a look
at can the Board policies and procedures be done by regulation.
The CSB is not a regulatory agency, but it does have the
ability to issue regulations to govern its own conduct. And I
would suggest--and I have to say that I have to consult with
more people about whether this is really a good idea--that if
it was done by a regulation, there would be an opportunity for
advance notice, there would be an opportunity for public
comment, there could be an opportunity for a public hearing of
industry, labor, environment, academic stakeholders.
And so the outcome of such could be that we have rules that
last beyond one particular chair, whether they are nominated by
a President from one party or another, that would have lasting
value. And I think that would help the credibility of the Board
and stabilize the Board moving forward.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Now recognize the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms. Lummis, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Ehrlich. Mr. Chairman, may I say a few words?
Chairman Chaffetz. No. We're going to recognize the
gentlewoman from Wyoming now.
Mrs. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to followup on Mr. Lieu's line of questioning.
Mr. Ehrlich, why did you put forth, as part of that late-
night motion in California, why did you move to close out
pending investigations at Silver Eagle and CITGO and Horsehead?
Mr. Ehrlich. Based on the information that I was given, we
had done just about all we could do there. If----
Mrs. Lummis. Who provided you----
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, I'd----
Mrs. Lummis [continuing]. With that information?
Mr. Ehrlich [continuing]. Talked with the staff.
Mrs. Lummis. So the staff told you, ``We're done''?
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, they had put out several reports. One of
the--one of the instances had to do with technology that no one
in the United States even used anymore.
Mrs. Lummis. So why a late-night motion that wrapped a
whole bunch of Board procedures, chairman duties in with this?
Mr. Ehrlich. For the same reason I made the motion
concerning the Board orders. This was tagged onto it. My
primary objective was to clean the slate so that, when Mr.
Engler and myself remain after June, we have a clean slate to
deal with. We can go back and put any Board order or rewrite
any Board order.
And, in fact, of the 18 Board orders that were rescinded, 3
of them hadn't been used in years, 10 of them were inaccurate,
3 of them were obsolete, and 1 of them conflicted with the
GSA's travel policy. We are in the process of putting four
Board orders in place at this time to correct some of those
deficiencies.
There is nothing to say that we can't go back and put in
place the correct Board orders. We can look at issues around
those three particular accidents that had been closed out. But,
at that point in time, we had spent a lot of data on it--a lot
of time on it. And most of the people who were involved were
not involved in--were not available anymore----
Mrs. Lummis. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso, did you agree with this, this closing out
the pending investigations?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, I did. We----
Mrs. Lummis. OK.
So, Mr. Griffon----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We have----
Mrs. Lummis [continuing]. Did you agree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If I can explain to you----
Mrs. Lummis. I'm sorry. You just said yes. I got my answer.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. You know we have----
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Griffon, did you agree with closing out
those investigations?
Mr. Griffon. No, I didn't agree. And, in fact, we had an
action plan submitted to the Board, a draft action plan, in
November that had actually incorporated all three of these as
being part of our actions going forward.
Mrs. Lummis. So what are the implications of closing these
out without the effort to go forward?
Mr. Griffon. Well, I think the implications are that what
we've issued so far are just--one of them is a metallurgical
report and the others were urgent recommendations, which I
supported, for CITGO, but it doesn't allow--it didn't allow for
the full assessment that our kind of investigations would do to
look at the higher-level causes of an incident.
And that's what the stakeholders are interested in. They
don't want to know just why the metal failed; they want to know
what caused it to get in that State in the first place.
Mrs. Lummis. So do you believe these investigations were
closed because investigators have left the agency? Or did that
have nothing to do with it?
Mr. Griffon. I believe that these were old investigations,
and some of the investigators did leave the agency, yes. But
there was a lot of work that went into these, I think overall
800-and-some-thousand dollars put into these three
investigations, so I was at least interested in hearing more
about what could be done with these cases with our current
investigative team. They can certainly pick up the evidence
that's there and work with it.
Mrs. Lummis. And do you think that that evidence might have
a bearing on public safety, they might inform or instruct
public safety in the future?
Mr. Griffon. Oh, absolutely. And I think, you know, that's
why we do this work. It's not simply to know why the piece of
metal failed. The stakeholders want to know more, and that's
what we can provide.
And for the two investigations, even the fact that some
investigative staff had left, CITGO and Silver Eagle, they were
put into the action plan as part of an overall refinery study.
And I thought that could be a reasonable option since we maybe
can't do full reports on those investigation. We don't want to
lose those issues; they are very important. After this meeting,
the action plan was updated to eliminate the refinery study and
those investigations.
Mrs. Lummis. Mr. Engler, any idea why this--why eliminate
this?
Mr. Engler. I'm not precisely sure. In fact, I wanted to
have a meeting tomorrow afternoon, because one of the problems
of being a new Board member in this environment is complete
confusion----
Mrs. Lummis. Yes.
Mr. Engler [continuing]. About what decisions have been
made, the difference between an investigation--an investigation
that morphs into a study that changes into an industry-wide
study that might be related to a conference. I mean, figuring
out what clear decisions have been made is a moving target.
Mrs. Lummis. Yes. I think----
Mr. Engler. And that's been one of my challenges as a new
Board member, and I'm finding it, frankly, very difficult.
Mrs. Lummis. Yes. We share your frustration.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentlewoman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
DeSaulnier, for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank you for this hearing, and the ranking member. And I
particularly want to thank you for the title of the hearing,
``Rebuilding the Chemical Safety Board,'' because I think the
Board is important.
To the Chairman, I take extreme exception to your comments
in your opening remarks, having been a State and regional
regulator in California, that you would suggest that
California, because of your actions, are adding to regulations.
And, as you know in our conversation, I tend to agree with
you that we should look at adopting a safety-first culture that
they have in Europe. And when I was in the legislature, because
of a hearing in Chevron, which is in any district, in Richmond,
I looked at that, but because of the dysfunction of this
agency, it was recommended to me that I withhold that
legislation.
So I had staff members in the meeting in Richmond City Hall
that you all talk about. In the last 24 hours, I've had
continued conversations with State and regional local
regulators who were there, who used words to describe the
events after you had the recess as ``incredulous'' and
``embarrassing,'' as the actions of the Board, and that the
motion was ``inaudible.''
So, Mr. Griffon and Mr. Engler, this action was taken, was
it not, because Mr. Engler had been confirmed by the Senate and
was due to join the Board so that the majority, in this
instance, would not have been able to pass the motion once Mr.
Engler joined the Board at a subsequent meeting? Is that not
why it happened, in your view?
Mr. Griffon. In my view, it would seem to be the case, yes.
And I made a motion to table based in part on that fact.
Mr. DeSaulnier. So I just want to read for you a quote
that's been publicly put out by a former Board member during
both the Clinton and George W. Bush Administrations in this
regard. ``The action seemed to stick its finger in the eye of
the Senate.''
Would you agree with that, Mr. Engler, given that you were
already confirmed and because of personal reasons you couldn't
join the Board for the meeting in Richmond?
Mr. Engler. Yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Another quote from a former CSB member in
regards to your actions by--William Wright is the former CSB
member. ``They basically''--talking about the majority--
``highjacked the agency,'' said former member William Wright.
``They did it surreptitiously and with forethought. They didn't
announce this major, sweeping change in advance of the meeting.
Then, all of a sudden, 22 pages of changes take place.'' The
motion canceled unfinished investigations into three major
investigations.
And a comment from an employee representative said this
resulted in ``missed opportunities like this''--in this
action--``truly putting workers and the public at risk.
Would you agree with those quotes, Mr. Engler and Mr.
Griffon?
Mr. Griffon. Yes.
Mr. Engler. Yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ehrlich, when we had
our conversation yesterday, I said I would be amongst your
staunchest supporters when you're right, but when you're wrong,
as somebody who believes in this and has been, as I said, a
regulator--and Mr. Lieu and I have within our districts the
preponderance of the capacity for refining in the State of
California.
In my county, we have the highest concentration of chemical
and refinery facilities and hazardous materials in the State of
California. It's in, I believe, the fourth-largest metropolitan
area surrounded by urbanized areas. I, for one, want those
facilities to work and work successfully. They are continuously
amongst the 10 largest taxpayers. Their multipliers are huge.
I've had somewhat of a love-hate relationship with the
regulated community, but they respect me and I respect them,
and I don't want them to leave.
Effective enforcement is very important. We're proud of
what we do in the bay area. I can't say that I'm proud of what
this Board does. It's very clear, sitting here, that this is a
dysfunctional agency. Usually, you have to scratch around a
little bit to find arrogance and incompetence, but, in this
instance, it's right out in the daylight.
And I apologize if that appears harsh, but what good would
it do the agency or the public--and, Mr. Ehrlich, your comments
about going to funerals, those are heartfelt. As you know, I
have had to attend funerals of constituents, one of who was
eviscerated, four who were burned in a very, very hard,
emotional incident for the bay area. Both resulted in economic
downturns for the bay area--not downturns, but they had a
significant impact because of the importance of the refining
capacity.
So I am at a complete loss as to why, when you tell me--and
you just said you only have a few weeks, but, in effect, you
have a few months. When I read the Vantage report, which I
think is terrific--your last, as was said by a colleague--and
viewed incomparable agencies--and you've actually gone down in
the last year in terms of confidence of your employees. I look
at the vote as 80 percent of the people directed at leadership
as being dysfunctional as a vote of no confidence. Normally,
when you get an 80 percent vote of no confidence, you leave.
You can leave with dignity. You've had a long career. It
would be my personal suggestion, having had a long time in
regulatory affairs at refineries, and my ask of you personally
that you resign as soon as possible. I see no possible good for
you personally, the agency, or the people we serve for you to
serve one more day.
So, for me--and, Mr. Chairman, again, I appreciate your
having this hearing.
But for the sake of the people we serve in a bipartisan
fashion, I wish we would begin to rebuild this agency, and the
only way to do that, with all due respect to the Chairman and
Mr. Ehrlich, is to get your resignations as soon as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. May I respond----
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. To the Congressman?
Chairman Chaffetz. No.
The gentleman's time is now recognized for Mr. Meadows of
North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
holding this hearing.
And I must confess, when I saw the topic of the hearing, I
was a little surprised, Mr. Chairman, that we would be having
some of these same people come back before Oversight on the
very same issue. And I don't know if, perhaps, Mr. Chairman,
that they didn't take the suggestions that you and others had
made earlier, but I'm really confused as to why we would not
have addressed those.
So, Mr. Sullivan, I'm going to come down to you because I
know your credentials as an investigator are impeccable. And I
thank you for your work.
And it's my understanding that you sent a report based on
the investigation to the White House. Is that correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. And have you received any response from the
White House regarding your report on the use of private emails?
Mr. Sullivan. The White House Counsel has communicated with
our counsel, saying it was received. And the Counsel's Office
in the White House forwarded it on to Dr. Moure-Eraso for his
reply, and we've received Dr. Moure-Eraso's reply.
We've had no further communication from the White House,
whether or not disciplinary action is planned.
Mr. Meadows. But they are engaged with you?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. OK.
So, Dr. Eraso, have you had discussions--obviously, you've
replied. Have you had discussions with the White House
regarding this report?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, I have. I have----
Mr. Meadows. So have you defended your actions?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have, to tell them that we have
immediately responded to the IG request and provided them with
their request and that we have--we are in compliance with the
rules that were passed in terms of how to use nongovernmental
mail that were passed by this committee and----
Mr. Meadows. So you've said that you've complied with this
committee?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. Well, now, I'm a little troubled with that,
because the chairman and Mr. Gowdy both have indicated that
some of your testimony here before us before is not consistent
with your actions. Would you agree with that statement? That
you make one statement here before us and do something else.
Let me make it clear.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I agree there is a confusion about some
dates about when these things happened. But I can tell you that
all the nongovernmental emails that were produced by me and by
staff and by two Board members, all those emails have been
transferred--I mean, for one thing, have been kept in the
server and are available for----
Mr. Meadows. So you've given all those to the Inspector
General's Mr. Sullivan?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. They----
Mr. Meadows. Yes or no?
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Are right here. They are
right here. I informed to them that they have been put on the
server and they are available.
Mr. Meadows. I don't care about the server. I care about
getting them to Mr. Sullivan and this committee. Do I have your
commitment today that you're willing to give them to Mr.
Sullivan and this committee, every one of them?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Absolutely. They are right here.
Mr. Meadows. But do you understand that you've violated the
Federal Records Act, you've violated the law? Do you understand
that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The law----
Mr. Meadows. By using your personal email.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. As far as I understand it,
was passed in November 2014. Immediately, as I was made aware
of that law, I----
Mr. Meadows. No, the Federal Records Act is not a 2014
initiative. You know, being able to keep and use your personal
email, did you not know that that was illegal?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. My understanding is that the Federal
Records Act before 2014 was silent about nongovernmental
emails.
Mr. Meadows. Well, is silent about you not losing your job.
We have a piece of legislation that maybe we have to address
that.
So what do we tell the people where you've used your
personal email to keep control and take advantage of those
employees that are hardworking employees, some of which the
ranking member has identified, some of which are reaching out
to us as whistleblowers? What do we tell those employees?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I disagree with your premise that
the objective of using those emails was to oppress people or
all the other things that you are saying that had happened.
The----
Mr. Meadows. So why would you use personal email versus
your official one, then, if it wasn't to hide your dialog?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. First, when I started, as I explained, out
of ignorance. When I find out that this was obviously not a
good way of keeping records, I stopped the practice, and I
start collecting everything that was developed in----
Mr. Meadows. OK. I'm running out of the time.
So do I have your commitment that you will give every
single email, as well as the other emails that were
personally--to the investigator and to this committee? Do I
have your commitment today?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I already have provided that information.
Yes. And the information on the other people that use Gmail
that I here I will provide too.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the patience of the chair.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and to the
ranking member. This is an important hearing.
I want to go back. I know, Mr. Ehrlich, you talked about
worker safety. And it's puzzling to me why the Board has
canceled three investigations that had been pending for more
than 4 years.
One of these investigations involved a fire and the release
of 42,000 pounds of highly toxic hydrofluoric acid at a CITGO
refinery in Texas. In that instance, one worker was badly
burned in that accident.
Another investigation that you canceled involved an
explosion and a fire at the Horsehead zinc plant in
Pennsylvania. We had two workers killed there.
We had a third investigation that involved a flash fire
caused by a large flammable vapor cloud at the Silver Eagle
Refinery in Utah. We had four workers who were severely burned.
And a, sort of, follow-on, second explosion at that facility
caused by a pipe failure occurred a couple of months later,
which also damaged about 100 homes.
So, despite the concern for worker safety and public
safety, there was a decision to--and, Mr. Ehrlich, in
introducing a motion before the Board to cancel those
investigations, you stated, ``There is no realistic opportunity
to issue a CSB report'' on these tragic incidents.
Mr. Griffon, you voted against this motion to cancel these
investigations; is that correct?
Mr. Griffon. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Lynch. You know, help me. Help me with this. How can we
do this?
Mr. Griffon. Well, I mean, I think--I go back to something
I've been requesting for 4 1/2 years, which is an overall
investigations plan and the ability of the Board to make these
decisions. And, you know, these investigations being canceled
in the dark of night in California wasn't the appropriate way
to deliberate on these.
There were other proposals put forward, as I said, of
having a larger refinery study, where these investigations
could've been incorporated into that. I'd be happy to
deliberate on that and decide that as a Board, not--not in the
fashion it was done, no.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Mr. Chairman, I think that this is as bad as I've seen. And
I just--I appreciate you bringing this forward.
Let me ask you about--Mr. Griffon, were you there when they
did this--yes, you were there when we did this hearing and they
eliminated all these rules. Previously, there was a rule on any
expenditure over $50,000 required the Board members to approve
it. But then, with this most recent coup--and it was a coup--
now the chairman has the ability to make expenditures over
$50,000 without Board approval.
What's up with that?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, that's correct. I think that along with
other important checks and balances were lost when they
canceled. And I have my binder here of the 18 Board orders.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Mr. Griffon. You know, no opportunity to study these. I
think perhaps going through these one by one and making
revisions, that might be appropriate, but to sweep them all
away I thought was ridiculous and lost a lot of the important
checks and balances of the Board oversight over the Chairman's
administrative and executive function.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
And, Mr. Engler, this all happened just as you were--you
had been approved by the Senate, but you hadn't been able to
take your seat yet and to deliberate on this. Is that correct?
Mr. Engler. Yes, that's absolutely correct. I'd worked for
decades for an organization, and, through my long process of
consideration for this position, I had a responsibility not to
walk out on my longtime employer. And so I needed a somewhat--
somewhat of a transition time to complete work there so I could
fully devote to my duties here. So I was not in a position to
join the Board.
I will say, moving forward, I am very concerned about
hydrofluoric acid, as I know many of the Board leaders and
staff are. In fact, relating back to the mission of the Board,
the Oil Insurance Association pointed out in roughly 1974 that
hydrofluoric acid use in alkylation units in oil refineries
posed major, major dangers. The Oil Insurance Association was
then the advisor to the petroleum industry.
And so this should be taken very, very, very seriously, and
I intend, moving forward, to revisit this issue. I'm not sure
what the best way to do it is at this point, but I think that
this is one of the most important issues that we face as a
responsible Board, to look at this particular hazard.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I was going to talk a little bit about that
meeting in Richmond, but a couple of the exchanges that just
took place regarding the emails got my attention. So I'm going
to ask a variety of questions to a group of you, starting with
you, Dr. Moure-Eraso.
You said that it was the Federal Records Act that was
adopted in November 2014 that prompted you to change your
practice. Yet, in June 2014, which was before the Federal
Records Act passed, you said, ``We stopped that practice about
a year and a half ago because we realized how problematic it
was.''
So tell me, if you're relying on the November 2014 changes
to the law, why did you make your change 18 months before your
June 2014 testimony?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, first of all, Mr. Congressman, we
stopped using the emails, giving the exact date, March 2013.
Mr. Mulvaney. About 18 months before your June--so,
clearly, the Federal Records Act changes in November 2014 had
nothing to do with the change in your practice.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I mean, that was what the White House
requested from us to comply with that----
Mr. Mulvaney. But, again, your----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. And we complied with that.
Mr. Mulvaney. But, previously, you told Mr. Meadows that it
was the Federal Records Act of 2014. That had nothing to do
with your decision in March 2013, right?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, of course not.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right.
Now, then it said that--when Mr. Chaffetz asked you about
why you did that, you said, ``The Board was telling me that I
couldn't use my private''--and then there was some talking
over. I assume you were going to say ``private email
accounts.'' Is that fair? ``The Board was telling me I couldn't
use my private email accounts.''
Why did the Board know it was against the rules but you
didn't?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It was a general practice in the agency
for people to use Gmails when I arrived.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK, but that's not what you said. You said,
``The Board was tell me I couldn't use my''--did Mr. Ehrlich
tell you you couldn't use your emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Ehrlich wasn't there.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK. Who was on the Board at that time?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Griffon, I believe.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK. Who told you at that--who on the Board
told you you could not use your private emails, it was
problematic?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No one really----
Mr. Mulvaney. And are you testifying, or is it the guy
behind you in the dark hair?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The people that told me that--I mean, it
wasn't a discussion about if we could use or not use emails.
It's simply that----
Mr. Mulvaney. No, it was. It was.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Naturally, people----
Mr. Mulvaney. I'm just reading your testimony. ``The Board
was telling me that I couldn't use my private''--and we assume
the next word is ``email.'' So I'm asking you, who on the Board
told you that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have no recollection of that.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you know that it was improper to use your
private email accounts?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. At that time, no.
Mr. Mulvaney. Should you have known?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know. Probably I should----
Mr. Mulvaney. Were there other people on the Board who knew
it was inappropriate?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well----
Mr. Mulvaney. And, again, is it the guy behind you who's
giving you the answers, or are you going to testify?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I am testifying.
Mr. Mulvaney. Would you identify the gentleman in the dark
hair behind you, please?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That gentleman is general counsel of the
agency.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK. Is he testifying today? Is he under oath?
Did he just----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know. You are running----
Mr. Mulvaney [continuing]. Feed you the answer to that
question I gave you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. The hearing here.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did he just tell you the answer to my
question was ``no''? Is that what he just said to you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I didn't hear, no.
Mr. Mulvaney. You can't hear him at all?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, I couldn't hear him.
Mr. Mulvaney. Because we can see him. Everybody up here can
see him.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I am paying attention to you. I----
Mr. Mulvaney. Let's go back to my question. You just said
you didn't know it was inappropriate to use your emails in
March 2013. And I'm asking you, did any members of your Board
know it was inappropriate or problematic?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know.
Mr. Mulvaney. But then why did you tell Mr. Chaffetz in
June 2014 that the Board was telling me I couldn't use my
private emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I mean, I--I made that statement because,
as I said, it was a common practice for everybody to use it, so
my assumption----
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you make the statement because it was a
true statement?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. As far as I can tell, yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. So I'm asking you again--but the Board didn't
tell you you couldn't use your private emails. You've already
said that. You can't remember anybody on the Board telling you
that. You can't identify anybody who knew it was against the
rules. The Board didn't tell it was problematic, did they?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know one way or the other. I don't
have any recollection of that on that issue.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right. Should you have known?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Probably, yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Was there anybody else at your agency that
knew? Was there anybody else who knew it was problematic to use
emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK.
You retire in 15 weeks.
By the way, Mr. Sullivan, did you ever come across any
evidence that Dr. Moure-Eraso continued to use his private
emails after he knew it was problematic or against the law or
in violation of the Federal Records Act?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, Mr. Mulvaney, we did.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK. Thank you very much. And I wish I had
more time to explore that.
Dr. Moure-Eraso, you retire in 15 weeks. Do you believe
that retiring bureaucrats who break the law should be entitled
to their full retirement package?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I am committed to see--to see the work of
the Chemical----
Mr. Mulvaney. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Safety Board finished----
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you believe----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. And I believe that the
reports that we still have on line have to be finished----
Mr. Mulvaney. I'm not asking you about that. I'm just
asking you your personal opinion as a 30-year public servant.
Do you think that public servants who give misleading testimony
to Congress should be entitled to their full retirement
package?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't have an opinion on that.
Mr. Mulvaney. Do you believe that any lifetime bureaucrat
who is held in contempt of Congress should be entitled to their
full retirement package?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't know which lifetime bureaucrat you
are referring to. I'm not a lifetime bureaucrat.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize the gentlewoman from
Michigan, Ms. Lawrence, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This line of questioning is concerning to me, the
responses.
Last May, former Congressman Henry Waxman recommended that
the Chairman consult with Board members to establish an
investigation plan. And it's been stated here today that that
was a request and a desire of some Board members.
I think such a plan would allow the CSB to prioritize its
investigations better, to better control its workload and
resources to ensure that investigations are completed. And,
frankly, it gives us accountability.
Mr. Griffon, has an investigation plan been developed, yes
or no?
Mr. Griffon. No.
Mrs. Lawrence. But it was requested last May. Is that
correct?
Mr. Griffon. It was requested last May, and I have
requested it for several years. It was pointed out by a 2013
EPA IG report that we should have an investigative plan. So
it's been pointed out a number of times, yes.
Mrs. Lawrence. And you also requested a public business
plan to obtain information on the status of all open
investigations. Is that right?
Mr. Griffon. Right. This was along the same lines. We--Dr.
Rosenberg and myself requested that. We attempted to make a
motion in a public meeting to have another meeting. We also
later did a written motion for the same request, to simply have
a business meeting to hear the status of all open
investigations and what our path forward was so that the Board
actually had some input into where these investigations were
going.
Mrs. Lawrence. So I understand you made the requests. What
were the responses?
Mr. Griffon. They were denied. The last vote was
calendared, essentially tabled, to be taken up, ironically, at
another public meeting. But it was--it was a procedural block,
essentially.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Chairman, in your testimony, you're not
even addressing an investigation plan. You talk about the
backlog. Can you tell me why the request was denied?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The request was not denied. I disagree
with Mr. Griffon. We have published an action plan in which we
have listed all the open investigations and what were the plans
to do. This was presented and discussed with all Board members
at our public----
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Griffon, I asked you that question, and
the Chairman just stated that there has been a plan submitted.
What was your response to that?
Mr. Griffon. There has been no--there is something called
an action plan--which was never published, by the way--and it
was modified, as I said, after the last California meeting. But
it essentially is a list of investigations that they think
they're going to complete within the year. It's not a--it's not
a full plan.
Mrs. Lawrence. You know, it has been----
Mr. Engler. Could I add----
Mrs. Lawrence [continuing]. It has been demonstrated today
that there are--Mr. Engler, did you have a comment?
Mr. Engler. Just that I've looked at the action plan, and I
just didn't think it met rigorous standards that included what
the clear objectives are, what the benchmarks were for
progress, what were the--any kind of time-specific focus on a
breakdown of tasks.
And I think, in fact, this is an area where Mr. Ehrlich and
I can agree that there needs to be a much more rigorous
approach to tracking progress on these critical investigations.
Mrs. Lawrence. Well, I agree with you 100 percent. As a
matter of fact, I want to state today on the record that this
is totally unacceptable. When we look at the responsibility and
the vote of trust that is placed in this agency and we do not
have an accountable investigation plan, that is totally
unacceptable.
Mr. Chairman, you're stating that you have a period of time
that you will still be the Chairman. What is your commitment
that an investigative plan--an investigation plan will be
established, voted on for this Board? What is--give me a
commitment today. And not an action plan.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Congressman, this action plan with the
elements that Mr. Engler mentioned is in place. We have
presented to the Board. It has been distributed to the Board.
It's not simply a list of investigations. It's a prioritized
list in which we say which ones are going to be finished first,
second, and third and why, and also establish points in the
schedule of when different things are going to be finished.
That is----
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you. I think that clearly defines
where there is a breakdown, and what you perceive as a real,
accountable investigation plan--and I feel strongly that this
Board has an obligation to do that.
And I yield my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentlewoman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Buck,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sullivan, what's the purpose, in one sentence or less,
if you can, for me, what's the purpose of the Federal Records
Act?
Mr. Sullivan. It's to ensure that there's transparency and
accountability, especially if someone files--a citizen files a
Freedom of Information Act request, that the records will be
available, and for oversight for Congress and for the inspector
generals to have access to records.
Mr. Buck. OK. That's two sentences but still good.
Tell me who is responsible for that.
Mr. Sullivan. The agency heads are responsible for ensuring
compliance.
Mr. Buck. Why do we have a Records Act?
Mr. Sullivan. To ensure records are kept in a timely,
efficient manner.
Mr. Buck. OK.
What would happen--how does someone set up a private email
system on their public computer, on their office computer?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, in some agencies, private email is
blocked. I can tell you that from my experience in the Federal
Government. So you can only use the government email account.
But in most agencies it's not blocked. You just go to Gmail or
Yahoo, and you open up your email, and you start sending
messages. It's fairly simple.
Mr. Buck. OK.
My understanding is that there is a policy that was issued
by the President of the United States that would prohibit
private emails on government computers, Federal Government
computers.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, it's my understanding, sir, to be
technical, I think it's to prohibit the use of government
business on private email accounts. I don't think there's a
Presidential directive that you can't check your personal email
on a government computer.
Mr. Buck. OK. So say it--say that again. What is the
directive?
Mr. Sullivan. The prohibition is you cannot conduct
government business using private email accounts.
Mr. Buck. And if someone used a private email account on
their government computer, they're sending that email,
typically, to other people in government.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, it really depends.
Mr. Buck. But if they did, would there be any
responsibility of other people in government to report that
fact?
Mr. Sullivan. I think if you're a member of that agency, it
would be. But if you're sending it to another government
agency, I don't know. I think it would get a little murky at
that point.
Mr. Buck. But you can see clearly on the email account
where it's coming from.
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Buck. You can see that it's not coming from a
government agency.
Mr. Sullivan. You can see----
Mr. Buck. Coming from a Yahoo account or----
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Buck [continuing]. Coming from some other kind of
account.
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir. Clearly, it does not say ``.gov,''
so you know it's from a private account.
Mr. Buck. OK.
So, just hypothetically, if a Secretary of State, for
example, were using a private email account and sent out emails
to individuals--other individuals in government, those
individuals would know that that Cabinet-level official was
using a private email account.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, hypothetically, it's obvious from the
address in the email whether it's a dot-gov or not. Yes, it
would be fairly--fairly self-evident.
Mr. Buck. And at least as it pertains to other Cabinet-
level officials, those folks would know that the President had
issued a directive that would have told others not to use
private email accounts.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, I certainly know that in the Inspector
General's Office, and I would assume most government officials
know that.
Mr. Buck. And, certainly, Cabinet-level officials know it.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, I think that's a safe assumption.
Mr. Buck. And do people in government get training on what
is right and what is wrong as it pertains to either ethics or
the use of private emails and other appropriate uses of----
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Buck [continuing]. Resources?
Mr. Sullivan. It's required training.
Mr. Buck. OK.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentlewoman from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to clear up this email business, and I think
we might be able to do it right here at this hearing. Because
I've heard Dr. Moure-Eraso keep pointing to the presence of
emails here, you know, as if he has nothing to hide.
And I understand, Mr. Sullivan, that you wanted to make
sure that the Chairman had turned over all of his emails from
his personal records that reflected government business. Isn't
that right?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, Ms. Norton. That's correct.
Ms. Norton. Now, I'm asking you, do you have a copy of that
certification with you today?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, ma'am, I do.
Ms. Norton. I wonder if a staff from the committee would
provide a copy to our colleagues?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes. I have two copies here for both yourself
and for the majority.
Ms. Norton. I ask that that be done. And while I wait, let
me continue.
Let me make clear--let me ask you to make clear what this
form that is being distributed is. Is this--it says,
``Statement of Compliance.'' Is this the standard form you use
during investigations to make sure that you have all the
records?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, ma'am. This is a template, and it's
been--it's been specified here for the specific case we are
working on. And you can see, in paragraph 3, we have the
specific search terms that we're interested in in this
investigation.
So it's a template that we use, but it's been--it's been
kind of drilled down to be specific for the investigation
involving the Chemical Safety Board and specifically involving
Mr. Moure-Eraso, Mr. Loeb, and Mr. Horowitz.
Ms. Norton. And the point is to make sure there are no
additional records, that you have all the records?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, ma'am. We just cannot accept a letter
saying that we've checked our records. We have to determine
what the methodology is. Did you use these important search
terms that we're asking for? Did you have any records with any
of these individuals' names mentioned that--it's important to
our investigation. Because we cannot access a personal email
account unless we have a search warrant. And, this time, the
U.S. Attorney's office had already declined a criminal
prosecution, so we had no means to get a search warrant.
So the only way we could possibly obtain compliance is
self-compliance, with an affidavit to us stating that they've
done what we've asked them to do.
Ms. Norton. Well, now, I'm going to ask Mr. Moure-Eraso to
listen carefully. I'm going to read the clause that I think
expresses what Mr. Sullivan has just said.
``The materials provided to the OIG are genuine, complete,
and in full compliance with the request made by the inspector
general. After receiving the initial request from the OIG for
the above referenced documents, I took no intentional action to
destroy, delete, or remove any official CSB email communication
in my presence. I state that the following is true and
correct.''
Now that you have heard this, Chairman Moure-Eraso, do you
agree, under oath, that you have met the terms of this
certification?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I affirm that.
Ms. Norton. So it seems to me the emails now should be
turned over.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, if the gentlewoman would yield, I
assume you're asking unanimous consent to enter this document
into the record?
Ms. Norton. Yes, I am, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Chaffetz. If I may followup on your questioning,
because I think you're right, how many times and how long has
the Chairman had this document?
Mr. Sullivan. We sent it to his chief counsel August 2014.
This is after we received some of the records. We wanted to
ensure--be ensured that it was complete, the records that were
turned over to us.
Chairman Chaffetz. So why didn't you sign it?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I sent, as I said before, a letter to Mr.
Elkins expressing that, as I said before, that the CSB Chief
Information Officer, who are responsible for conducting and
overseeing the searches they request, and based on his
assurances and to the best of my knowledge and belief, the
documents provided to the office of Mr. Elkins satisfy all
outstanding requests in this matter.
Chairman Chaffetz. So, to be clear, the inspector general
asked you to certify this, gave you a document, one page, and
you elected not to sign it.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I sent him a letter certifying that I have
sent----
Chairman Chaffetz. No. No, no, no. You didn't sign the
document that the inspector general asked for, correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I didn't. I sent the letter----
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. And this is part of the
ongoing frustration----
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, can I reclaim my time for a
moment----
Mr. Chaffetz. Sure. Sure.
Ms. Norton [continuing]. And ask, what's the difference you
see between--now, here's the official government document. Why
did you prefer your letter when there's an official--you know,
I could file my own Federal income taxes my own way, too, and I
prefer to do it that way. But they make me sign this document,
they make me fill the thing out.
So why did you feel privileged to certify through mail
rather than through the kind of official document you must have
become accustomed to your entire life?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The way it was put to me is that I was
asking to volunteer to sign the--that I--if I volunteered to
sign this new form that they provided to me. And I felt like I
have already certified, I have signed, I have given my word,
and I didn't feel like volunteer to sign this new form--this
new form that was presented to me.
Ms. Norton. You had a conscientious objection to signing
this form?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It's just that I already have given a
certification. I was asking a second certification--volunteered
to make a second one.
Ms. Norton. Were you advised by lawyers that you should not
sign this form but instead send a letter?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Ms. Norton. Oh. What lawyers? Were they private lawyers, or
were they the agency lawyers?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. My private lawyers said that I shouldn't
volunteer to sign forms that I wasn't obligated to sign.
Ms. Norton. Did they give you any reason for this? Did they
think you might incriminate yourself in some fashion?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It was thought that it was volunteer, so I
said, look, the issue is certification or send the materials. I
have given a certification in the form of a letter. I have sent
the material. I have given my word that I sent the material. I
have my chief information officers doing the searches, getting
the information, and transferring. I--I followed the advice.
Ms. Norton. So you're a Federal official, but you do not
feel that you have to abide by the same laws requiring
documents as other Federal officials.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well----
Ms. Norton. That's the long and short of it, isn't it? I
mean, other Federal----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I wasn't very clear if I was required to
sign the certification. I have a letter in which I certified--
--
Ms. Norton. Well, did you ask for clarification from Mr.
Sullivan?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I thought that my letter speak for
myself for giving a certification of----
Ms. Norton. So you didn't ask for certification from Mr.
Sullivan.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I didn't.
Chairman Chaffetz. Go ahead.
Mr. Cummings. Just one question.
Why didn't you sign the document, man? I mean, it just
seems like it's such a simple thing. You're familiar with the
document. You agree with every word of it; is that right?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I--I have--I asked for legal advice
on this. This is a pretty serious matter.
Mr. Cummings. Yes, it's a very serious----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. And I showed--yes--I showed them this
document and said, well, you know, they are asking me--they
have developed this document, they want me to volunteer to
sign. And I said, well, I already certified this, I already
signed the letter saying I submitted what they want. So he
said, well, my advice is you don't volunteer to sign a document
that you don't have to.
Mr. Cummings. And the letter said everything that's in this
document. The letter that you did sign.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. As far as I'm concerned, yes.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, could I ask if----
Mr. Cummings. Do we have that----
Ms. Norton [continuing]. The advice was from the lawyer
who's with him today?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No.
Mr. Cummings. No. That's his private lawyer.
Do you have the document--do you have the letter?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I have it here.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, good. May I--can we get a copy of that?
Chairman Chaffetz. If the clerk can get this, make
duplicates for everybody on the Board. And we ask unanimous
consent to enter it into the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have two copies, as a matter of fact, so
I'll give you one.
Chairman Chaffetz. The clerk will take that. It will take a
few minutes to duplicate it.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Moure-Eraso, you said earlier that you are a first-
generation American; is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I'm sorry?
Mr. Walker. You said earlier that you are a first-
generation American----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Walker [continuing]. In your opening statement?
Do you remember the last line of the oath that you took, by
chance, the last sentence of the oath?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't remember now.
Mr. Walker. Let me read it for you. It says, ``I will
perform work of national importance under civilian direction
when required by the law and that I take this obligation freely
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, so help
me God.''
Now, interesting enough, I believe in about 15 weeks, when
you're talking of retiring, is going to be your 30th
anniversary of being this first-generation American. And I have
a question for you.
It seems to me from what I'm hearing that you're just
trying to survive another 15 weeks. Is that fair?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have work to do.
Mr. Walker. OK. Well, let me ask you a little bit about
that work that you're doing.
Go back to one individual, and I'm going to list seven
things, and you tell me if any of these that you disagree are
correct--or feel are incorrect.
No. 1, Dr. Rosenberg said, ``The criticism was never
accepted.'' Agree or disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Disagree.
Mr. Walker. And that the government inside your leadership
was ineffective. Agree or disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Disagree.
Mr. Walker. Said there was a lack of accountability. Agree
or disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Disagree.
Mr. Walker. Said there was no priorities for reducing the
backlog of investigations. Agree or disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Disagree.
Mr. Walker. She also said choreographed production when you
had a press conference. Do you understand that, what she was
saying there?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I disagree.
Mr. Walker. Disagree?
And that she would literally have to have meetings--for
concerns were being intimidated--she would actually have to
have meetings in ladies' rooms. Agree or disagree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't visit ladies' washrooms. So I
disagree. I don't know one way or the other.
Mr. Walker. OK.
Well, let me just expand the scope out from Dr. Rosenberg a
little bit. Multiple individuals inside this agency have
portrayed it as a toxic work environment. What do you have to
say about that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I disagree. As a matter of fact, what we
have to see is what is the product of the agency, what we
accomplish, what we produce. I pointed out, in the last 8
months, we have to produced eight world-class reports on
safety. And that is our core mission, that's what we do, and
that's what we do right.
Mr. Walker. Do you----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. A place that has a toxic work environment
probably cannot produce world-class----
Mr. Walker. In two or three sentences, how would you
describe--give me a brief description of your job. What are
primarily, in two or three sentences, your function?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The function of the job is to make--to
organize an agency that will be able to investigate major
chemical accidents and provide recommendations for preventing
them from happening.
Mr. Walker. Uh-huh.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That has been happening, and that we are
providing to the American public.
Mr. Walker. On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate
yourself in accomplishing that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I would say about an eight.
Mr. Walker. About an eight.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Uh-huh.
Mr. Walker. Well, I will tell you here, I've been here 8
weeks, and this is the first committee hearing that I've
participated in where there is a bipartisan approach that
really drills down to the inefficiency of this particular
agency, and it has been under your leadership. How do you
account for that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I don't know how you define
``inefficiency.'' We have produced 22 major reports in 5 years,
and in the last 8 months we have produced eight reports, major
reports, that include, each one, a video that appear on our
Website. We have 400,000 hits on our Website for our work. I
don't think----
Mr. Walker. In other words, you are basically telling this
committee that your agency has run at premium efficiency level.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Not premium, but, you know, it has
delivered what it was designed to do.
Mr. Walker. What would you have liked to have done better?
What do you feel like the mistakes were made?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I would like to have--to have more
resources in order to be able to cover more of these chemical
accidents.
Mr. Walker. So this was resources or the inefficiencies,
they were because you didn't have enough resources.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We didn't have enough resources to do the
work that we were--were given to us, yes.
Mr. Walker. OK. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome back,
Mr. Moure-Eraso.
Mr. Engler, you have called for the rescission of the Board
decision of January 28. Is that correct?
Mr. Engler. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. And why do you think it should be rescinded?
Mr. Engler. Because I think it was not considered in an
open and fair way, and I don't mean--it's not a personal matter
that no one called me up prior to a formal appointment by the
President and asked me what I thought. It seems to me when you
change major procedures, policies, that there is an obligation
as a public entity to interact with the public, to not--and
frankly, I'm--I'm quite familiar with the--some of the New
Jersey laws we have on this. I need a briefing. One of the
things I wasn't briefed on, on the Sunshine Act. I don't know
whether there was a technical violation or a--just a violation
of the intent of that, but major change by agencies needs to be
done with public notice, the opportunity for public comment,
public hearings, and it has to be an ongoing process, and I
endorse a call of Member Griffon.
Mr. Connolly. Would you----
Mr. Engler [continuing]. For public meetings.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Would you say that the decision to
rescind made on January 28 was a pretty profound decision?
Mr. Engler. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Because?
Mr. Engler. Because it seemed to upend a whole series of
Board policies, including on budget. So, before I arrived on
the scene, to look carefully at budgets because, frankly, I
feel like I'm accountable to the public for how the agency
spends its money. I then find out that, no, I'm not.
Mr. Connolly. OK. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman of the CSB, you voted to
rescind, on that date, 18 Board orders. Is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Connolly. And one of those Board orders was Board Order
23, which established policies and procedures for hiring and
selecting career appointments to the SES, the Senior Executive
Service. Is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. And also, that order also established the
Executive Resources Board within your agency that--and that
board conducts the hiring process and makes recommendations of
best qualified candidates to the Board. Is that correct?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The old Board order, yes, it has something
like that in the old Board order, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Uh-huh. Why did you decide to vote to
essentially eliminate the Executive Resources Board?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Because the--that order is in conflict
with the Office of Personnel Management procedures for the
choosing of SES. Under the procedures of the Office of
Personnel Management, the appointment authority for SES in a
Federal agency is the head of the agency.
Mr. Connolly. Well, what----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. In this particular--in the old order that
you are referring to, they say that the appointment authority
was on the Board. It has to be a vote to accept an SES.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Sullivan----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That the evaluation of the person has to
be also doing by the whole Board arrive on the one person.
Mr. Connolly. OK. Hold that thought.
Mr. Sullivan, I was under the impression OPM regulations
actually require having an Executive Resources Board. Is that
not correct?
Mr. Sullivan. I am not--I don't know, sir. Sorry.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. May I make----
Mr. Connolly. I've got the regulation right here: 3393,
career appointments, subsection B, each agency shall establish
one or more Executive Resources Boards, et cetera, et cetera.
So that seems to contradict exactly what you just said, Dr.
Moure-Eraso.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, we do have an Executive Resources
Board, as a matter of fact. We have established one for SES as
hiring. That is part--you are correct, that is part of the OPM
regulations.
Mr. Connolly. But you just said in answer to my question
that in rescinding Board Order 23, the Executive Resources
Board went away. Would that----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, no. I misspoke. There was an
additional board, internal board that was created for Board
Order 23, and that is what it was, not on the Office of
Personnel Management. There is an additional board created
internally.
Mr. Connolly. An additional board.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Is it also not true that the CSB recently
entered into a contract with a private company to handle the
agency's recruiting and hiring of senior executives?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Was that contract awarded to a long-time
friend and associate of your general counsel, Mr. Loeb?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We have--we're authorized to have three
SESes, and at the time we only have one, so I thought it was
important to initiate the process to recruit another SES
member. And so, since this issue is so delicate and there has
to be beyond any reproach, the process, I did hire a consultant
with extensive experience on SES, that was a former SES, to
conduct the search to choose an Executive Resource Board that
is already chosen and to start--to start the process of--open a
search for an SES that has been initiated.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time is up, but I
do want the say I think there are so many issues here, One does
not know where to begin. I am deeply troubled at what is--looks
like the politicization of the hiring process and cronyism and,
frankly, a very cloudy, if not illegal, meeting that took place
on January 28 with, as Mr. Engler said, profound implications
in the management of this agency. And it ought to concern all
of us.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Great. Thank you.
I'm actually now going to recognize myself. I have not
taken my 5 minutes.
Mr. Moure-Eraso, I want to play a clip of a hearing from
last time.
[video shown.]
Chairman Chaffetz. So that would have put the date back in
January 13. Did you use your personal email after January 13--
or January 2013, I should say?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Chairman, I have to look at my----
Chairman Chaffetz. It's a yes or no. It's a yes----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have to look at my records. I don't
know.
Chairman Chaffetz. When is the most recent time that you
used your personal email?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have to look at----
Chairman Chaffetz. For work?
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. My records. I cannot answer
you.
Chairman Chaffetz. You can't tell us that you just haven't?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have to look at my records.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let me ask the inspector general. What's
the most recent time you've seen him using his personal email
for work-related business?
Mr. Sullivan. August 2013.
Chairman Chaffetz. There is some information that suggests
you may have emails as late as 2014. Would that be accurate or
inaccurate, Mr.----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I assume that Mr. Sullivan has probably a
document that says so.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you did use your email even though
you testified to us. You testified. And then, even after that,
you used it, your personal email.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I said that--I didn't give you a date. I
can't--I couldn't give you an exact date of when this is done.
Chairman Chaffetz. The--you said the CIO, chief information
officer, had gone through this. Did you give the chief
information officer your password to your personal Gmail
account?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. And did you let the CIO go through all
of your personal emails on your Gmail account?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. Did that also happen for Managing
Director Daniel Horowitz and General Counsel Richard Loeb?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. You have to ask them.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, you sent letter. You just handed
us this letter.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. So, tell me, what--I'm trying to read
through it real quick. You just gave it to us. So what's your
hesitation in signing this document that's given to you by the
inspector general? I still don't understand that.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. My lawyer told me that I shouldn't
volunteer when I don't have to. So I am not volunteer.
Chairman Chaffetz. Your document here, July 15, 2014, says,
These documents were produced based on a search of both CSB and
personal email accounts of the individuals from whom the
documents were requested, and the document request was above
and beyond you.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. So what is the question?
Chairman Chaffetz. Did they or did they not have the CIO
check their personal emails, Mr. Horowitz and Mr.----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. As far as I know, yes. My knowledge is
that----
Chairman Chaffetz. This is--this is the pattern with you.
Is once you're presented with facts, then you just change your
story, but you don't give us candid testimony the moment that
you're asked.
Let me go back to something. I don't want you----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If I don't know something, I cannot tell
you yes or no.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let me go to something specific. I want
to warn you with the sternest words I can possibly do. This is
whistleblower information. You're going to be able to figure
out who this person is, unfortunately, but I don't want this
person's name used in this public format. Do you understand?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Uh-huh.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let me ask you about this Vantage
report. The Vantage report was produced on--to the Board, or
to--to you--let me get the exact date--February 11 of 2015.
That presentation was from 3:30 to 4:30 that afternoon. There
was a person who was the person of record interacting with
Vantage. When was that switch made to change the person of
record interacting with at Vantage?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I understand within 24 hours or 48 hours.
Chairman Chaffetz. Eight minutes, 8 minutes. So you get a
very--you get the Vantage report, which is not very flattering.
I mean, several members have gone up through this, and 8
minutes after you get bad news, you move, you change this
employee away from being the contact of record.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I will characterize it this way. I use--I
use--have reason to believe that the report has been tampered
with and that the report was not a piece of that that I could
trust, an integral objective evaluation of my agency. I have
spent a lot of money contracting these people to give accurate
information.
Chairman Chaffetz. What evidence do you have of that, and
when will you provide it to this committee?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I'm sorry?
Chairman Chaffetz. When will you provide that information
to this committee? If you have evidence of it, I want to know
what it is, and I want to know when you're going to give it to
me and----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. As a matter of fact, I have a----
Chairman Chaffetz. When are we----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. A number of emails. When the
committee request us for information.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'm requesting it right now. When are
you going to give it to me?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We sent--we send it to you what I believe
is 2,000 pages of emails, of interaction between Vantage----
Chairman Chaffetz. Let's go back----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. And CSB.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let's go back----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. And you know, if you just look at what
those emails said, if you will, you know. I have--I have here--
--
Chairman Chaffetz. Hold on. Hold on. Our committee
interacted with this same person who was changed as the
contract of record. That happened on February 25 of 2015. Two
days later, that person was demoted--2 days. Less than 48
hours, he's demoted.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The reasons were, you know, I found an
email from this person that said: ``to the--to Vantage, will
not say anything about progress.'' Also, it says, Put in the
slide saying leaders appear to be backing away from external
advice and accompanying committees. As a result, in the
document, it says, Senior leaders are backing away from
external advice.
My issue is, you know, is this a report of an independent
objective consultant of professionals advising me, or is it
simply they are basically transmitting----
Chairman Chaffetz. I think it's because----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. The appearance of a hostile
establishment.
Chairman Chaffetz. I don't think you want to hear the
truth. It's not like you've had one report. You've had Board
members. You've had people quit. You have almost 50 percent of
your people from 2011 who have actually quit and moved on.
We're losing good people, decent people, who work hard for a
living, who provide expertise that this government needs in
order to do its job. And they can't stand you and the way you
manage this place.
We heard this repeatedly for hours. We shouldn't have to
have the Chemical Safety Board come before this committee
twice. This person meets with our committee staff, and less
than 48 hours, he's demoted. He presents you bad information
that you don't want to see in the Vantage report, and 8 minutes
later, he is taken off the case. That is not a coincidence, in
my opinion.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I have asked--I have asked the inspector
general to look at the relationship between the contractor and
this person because I believe they compromise the integrity of
the statements that they are claiming to have objectively----
Chairman Chaffetz. Last question.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Evaluated.
Chairman Chaffetz. Last question. The workplace improvement
committee, how many times did they meet in 2014?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. They meet very frequently. I will say more
than 10 times since they have met, yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I got to tell you it's not--well, my
time is more than--more than expired, but nothing has ever been
finalized. They're looking at low-hanging fruit. You don't want
them to talk about management issues, and I got to tell you, I
think we're very united in this. Until you leave this
organization, these problems are going to persist. There is
something rotten to its core, and it is you. And I believe--I
didn't--I didn't start in that position, but I can tell you
between you, Managing Director Daniel Horowitz, and General
Counsel Richard Loeb, this is a dysfunctional, unfair, and
unproductive organization. And good people are suffering. And I
will do everything I can, in conjunction with my ranking member
here, to make that change sooner rather than later.
This has continued to fester. We need help from the White
House and this administration, but good, decent people need
help. I am calling upon them.
I think you should be fired. I think the other two should
be fired, but have the decency to actually step down and move
this government forward.
I yield back.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The--Mr. Chairman Moure-Eraso, your agency hired a
management consultant company, Vantage Human Resources, to
examine the challenges to CSB.
On February 12, 2015, Vantage provided you with a
presentation that included results of interviews they conducted
with CSB employees. Frankly, that report was devastating.
Vantage found that 80 percent of CSB employees felt, ``much
frustration with top leadership.'' Vantage also found that 47
percent of employees had, quote, a perception of a climate
where senior leadership discourages dissenting opinions.
Let me ask you about what happened directly after the
briefing, and I'm going to followup on some of the things that
the chairman was saying.
On that day, February 12, 2015, your managing director,
Daniel Horowitz sent an email removing the contracting officer
from the Vantage contract and designating himself instead. Were
you aware of this removal action, and did you approve of it?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. I found out that this report that I
was counting on to help to do the work that we have was
compromised and that the person that was in charge of it has
interfered on the report, and I approved of removing him of
having anymore responsibilities of running this contract.
Mr. Cummings. Are you sure that the--I mean, what--now, so
how did you find out that information?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I found out that information because we
look at communications that were sent to you, to the committee,
that you requested and emails in which there are secret
communications between the CSB contracted officer and----
Mr. Cummings. But wait a minute, you didn't get the
communications till later, did you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I got the communications because--I got
the communications when I----
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Horowitz--Mr. Eraso.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. I want you to listen to me. You got the
communications later, did you not? And I want to remind you,
you are under oath now.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, I read the communications in the last
3 or 4 days. This happened 2 weeks ago, you know. It's a very
fast-moving situation and----
Mr. Cummings. Well, now I'm really confused. I thought you
just said--I asked you how did you find out, and you said you
read some communications, and that was the basis of your
approval.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Is that right?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Could I explain to you----
Mr. Cummings. Of course.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. How it happened? When--when I
read the--what Vantage presented to me, and I inquired to
Vantage what were the communications that it had with your
staff, he refused to give me clear information about it. And I
found it strange that information about progress that we have
done about the Washington report and the problems that we have
gone about steps that we have taken in the nine points--in nine
points, programs that I have to improve issues, none of those
things that were progress on the management of the agency
appeared in the report.
And I got suspicious about that because I have provided
directly that information to Vantage, and they say that it was
very important information to include what progress has been
done. When that was missing and when--when he says that he was
not commenting with anybody that--that that hasn't any of that
information additional on the report, I thought that the report
was incomplete and the report was----
Mr. Cummings. But that was your opinion, right?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Exactly.
Mr. Cummings. And you hired--well, you hired Vantage to
look at this agency and render their opinion. They talked to
employees. They put in the report what they thought was
appropriate, and so now you're telling me that you approved
that action because you suspected that--I mean, well, first of
all, it didn't have everything you wanted in it and----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. What I did, if I may, Congressman----
Mr. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. What I did is say, I would like to see
communications between the CSB contract--contract manager and
the contractor. I read the communications, and that is when I--
what I am reading to you when I saw direct interference of the
contract officer was trying to change the conclusions of the
report. As a matter of fact, there was aprevious version of the
Vantage report in which all the positive things appear, and in
the second, all were erased.
Mr. Cummings. Yes, you're--you're--I think you are right
now hurting yourself, but I want to clear this thing up.
Mr. Chairman, the chairman took 10 minutes. So we usually
try to have equal time.
Again, the very same day, your managing director, Horowitz,
sent you an email. And we now have a copy of that email. In it,
he asked for your permission to go through the former
contracting officer's emails. The problem is, he doesn't say
why he wanted to do this. He simply says that he wants to,
quote, examine a confidential personnel issue.
So you approved that request, right, just based on that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I approved that because not based on the
interview that I have with Vantage and the interview that I
have with the person that made the--that----
Mr. Cummings. All right. Let me ask you this.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Made the report.
Mr. Cummings. During your term as chairman, how many times
have you approved a request from staff to go through an
employee's emails? How many times have you done that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That I remember, probably this is--this
is--the time, I have to refresh my memory.
Mr. Cummings. Let me ask you, do you--do you think there
was another time?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It might be at least once before another
time.
Mr. Cummings. Can you tell us who that was?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I don't remember. I have to look at my
records.
Mr. Cummings. Why did you sign off on a request this
significant, allowing someone to go through another employee's
email, without specific information about why?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. When--when there is what I consider that
there might be some legal problems or that something is going
to be detrimental of the agency, I will like to know what is
happening, yes, and I did----
Mr. Cummings. So you're saying that you would approve every
single request under those circumstances that you just stated?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, not every single request, a request
that I believe the integrity of the agency is at stake.
Mr. Cummings. Sir, this is a serious legal point. Let me
ask you this. The meeting you all held--were hearing in
February 2014 that examined surveillance of employee emails of
the Food and Drug Administration. At that hearing, the
inspector general recommended that the agency document the
reasons for initiating, reviewing, and approving electronic
monitoring, including opinions of legal counsel. Did you seek
legal counsel before authorizing a search of these employee
emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And your counsel, is he copied on it?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Oh, yes. I mean, he--I requested----
Mr. Cummings. He's not. He's not.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. The authority. I have verbal
conversations with him about all of these developments.
Mr. Cummings. So but you didn't send--you didn't provide
him with a copy. Did you seek his advice?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I sought his advice, yes.
Mr. Cummings. And who is your legal counsel? Who is that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Loeb.
Mr. Cummings. Is that the gentleman sitting behind you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Now, why would you want--so you're
saying you didn't exclude him from it. You just didn't send him
a copy.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I discussed the issue with him, and I was
told that I have the authority to do that under our rules, and
I did it.
Mr. Cummings. You know, this makes it sound like you are
retaliating against employees. And I got to tell you, I've sat
here now for the last 2 or 3 hours, and this is painful. This
is painful, and it's got to be painful for you when you get a
Vantage report which basically says that the leadership is the
problem.
And you know, I mean, have you thought about it? I mean,
you've had several members ask you to take an early retirement.
Have you considered that? I mean, for the good of the
organization.
Most people who truly care about an organization--and this
organization does some very, very important work, but it seems
as if, and the Vantage report bears this out, that you're not
the right person to be the head of this, sir.
And I know that--I know you've got a lot of pride and all
that kind of stuff, but this is much bigger than you.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Cummings, but you know, you are--
you're saying that Vantage report said some negative stuff. My
problem is I would very much want to believe what the Vantage
report is, but, you know, the report has been compromised, the
report has been interfered with. I will like to have to--I have
asked for an investigation if this report is objective, if this
report deserves to be used, and the conclusions are correct.
That is my problem.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows [presiding]. I thank the ranking member, and I
would agree with him that you need to really evaluate this. I
think the chairman, the ranking member have both been extremely
eloquent but also piercing with their words, and my
recommendation, for the good of the organization, is to take an
early retirement.
And so the chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I agree with my other colleagues. This is extremely
painful. It seems like with every question, the hole gets
deeper and deeper and darker and darker along the way.
I would like to continue walking down this path a little
bit further on the Vantage report and direct my questions, Mr.
Griffon, to you.
You are familiar with the Vantage study, I assume.
Mr. Griffon. Yes. Yes, I am familiar with it.
Mr. Hice. OK. Do you--do you know the primary reason why
the study was requested in the first place?
Mr. Griffon. We had a prior group that did an assessment,
the Carden Group, and the reason we did the followup was at the
recommendation of the Carden Group that they need--that we
needed to have another management consultant to help us look
through the problems and make recommendations to reform.
Mr. Hice. So I can take from that the Carden Group
recognized that the problems likewise are deep and dark and
they wanted more affirmation, and so that's----
Mr. Griffon. Yes.
Mr. Hice [continuing]. Kind of what----
Mr. Griffon. Yes.
Mr. Hice. OK. What is the primary problem that both of
these studies, but let's focus on the Vantage, concerning the
Chemical Safety Board, what is the primary issue that they
discovered?
Mr. Griffon. The primary issues point to senior leadership
and the failure of senior leadership, failure of senior
management, and there's several things about faulty
communication, no ability to have dissenting views. All these
things are very consistent with previous employee surveys we've
seen, also the testimony of other Board members, very
consistent.
Mr. Hice. All right. But it basically came down to
leadership.
Mr. Griffon. Yes.
Mr. Hice. And we have not one but two studies saying the
same thing.
Mr. Griffon. Yes.
Mr. Hice. All right. Mr. Griffon, what is your reaction to
the findings that the Board and, more specifically, that Mr.
Moure-Eraso is the problem?
Mr. Griffon. I'll just say that I've--at this point, I've
lost all confidence in the chairman.
Mr. Hice. And you're not the only one, it appears. So you
would agree wholeheartedly with the outcome of the study?
Mr. Griffon. Yes. I actually got a briefing from the head
of Vantage in which he told me that the only way to fix this
organization is going to involve a Marshall Plan, and I think
that's pretty accurate.
Mr. Hice. OK. You referred to, just a moment ago, several
different issues, from a lack of collaboration to a lack of
accountability to creating an environment that discourages
dissenting opinions, a host of issues, and from the study,
staggering, over 80 percent or somewhere in that category of
people who were interviewed, agreed that we have a serious
problem at leadership with all of these issues. How do you
explain these general themes? I mean, they are--it appears from
the questioning and the testimony that these things were wide
in the open, right out in the open.
Mr. Griffon. Yes. And, you know, I think, you know, all
this starts with leadership, and I think if--hopefully going
forward, leadership will realize that the Board has to lead
together. The chairman has to work with the Board instead of
going around Board orders, marginalizing Board members, et
cetera.
Mr. Hice. It appears the root has been discovered. We just
need to pull it up.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to cease continued questions, but
I would ask for unanimous consent to enter a copy of the
Vantage report into the record.
Mr. Meadows. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Hice. And I yield my time. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman from Georgia. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Russell.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Chairman, ranking member, members of the committee,
I'm concerned that this problem, even if Dr. Moure-Eraso does
do the honorable thing and the needed thing of stepping down,
that this problem will perhaps perpetuate itself with the
creation of a Senior Executive Service position for the
managing director. And so my question to you, Dr. Moure-Eraso,
is did the Chemical Safety Board announce the creation of a
Senior Executive Service position as managing director?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, we have that.
Mr. Russell. Was it announced just yesterday?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It was announced, yes.
Mr. Russell. Yesterday?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, it was.
Mr. Russell. Dr. Eraso, numerous whistleblowers have stated
that you fast-tracked the creation of this new SES position to
make sure that Mr. Horowitz would be put in it before you left
the Chemical Safety Board. Was this position created----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It's absolutely untrue.
Mr. Russell [continuing]. For Daniel Horowitz?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It's absolutely untrue. This is--as a
matter of fact, that's the reason why I have an outside
consultant to come in to run the campaign to open a----
Mr. Russell. So this position was put up on the Board for
review, and then we have a Mr. Horowitz changing his title to
senior advisor to the Deepwater Horizon investigation, and he
did that on March 2. Is that true?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. He has that position.
Mr. Russell. He changed his title so he would what, qualify
for the position?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The position is open for anybody that
wants to--I mean, the system of the Office of Personnel
Management is that you open a position in the Federal
Government for anybody to apply.
Mr. Russell. So let me understand the sequence of attack
here. Draconian policies can be furthered by creating an SES
position as managing director. Position is posted up on the
Board for anyone, as you state, to apply, and magically, Mr.
Horowitz changes his title so he somehow positions himself, and
now it is your intention to hire him for this position. Is that
about right?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The position of managing director have
always existed at different times in the--in the--in the
organization.
Mr. Russell. But this one is a new position. Is that
correct, the managing director?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The managing director has existed since
September 2011.
Mr. Russell. And so now you are intending to--what--even
after you retire, continue your toxic work environment as was
stated in these survey----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. What I intended to do----
Mr. Russell [continuing]. Position?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Open the position to be----
Mr. Russell. How far do the----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. In the----
Mr. Russell [continuing]. Go into this organization that
you have to have a grip on it even after you would leave,
whether honorably or dishonorably in 15 weeks, that you would
continue to set everything in motion so that you keep your
little web in control of something so vital to the country? Is
that--is that the intention, or do I have it wrong?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. You have it wrong.
Mr. Russell. I see. OK. And after listening to all of the
testimony and the answers given so far, we'll let the people of
the United States be the judge there.
Mr. Griffon, Mr. Engler, Mr. Ehrlich, given the lack of
confidence in senior leadership that has been highlighted in
the H.R. consulting report, you know, I think back to when I
was in the military, if I got a command climate survey as a
commander of 1,000 soldiers and it said that 80 percent of my
soldiers thought I was incompetent to lead and then it was
followed up with a Board and testimony and then I would have to
come back and show some type of gain, whether 3 months, 6
months later, or something of that nature, and yet the follow-
on reports were even worse and then I was called on the carpet
before, I would be relieved of command. I mean, it would be
just absolutely--that would be the result. I would be relieved
of command. Do you think that hiring Mr. Horowitz for an SES
position is a good idea at this time, given the climate that
the command safety board has?
Mr. Griffon, please.
Mr. Griffon. I think, you know, I think the evidence speaks
for itself as far as the problems with management, and I think
it should involve a careful assessment of whether he is the
appropriate person to----
Mr. Russell. Do you believe that it ought to have more time
other than just be posted and then titles being changed and
then people being recommended and then we just go from there,
or do you think that this thing might ought to have some brakes
put on it and get--one, do you even need it? We look at the
Veterans Affairs Administration and see the problem that our
Senior Executive Services have created with the Secretary.
That's a whole different issue, but now we are going to make a
construct to potentially do that.
Mr. Engler, do you think that it's appropriate at this
time?
Mr. Engler. I think that it needs to be a full, fair, and
objective evaluation. I would--given how fast other things have
happened, I would urge things go slower but in accordance with
Federal statutory and regulatory personnel requirements.
And if I could just add for the record, part of my briefing
was very useful from the CSB staff. And I appreciate the CSB
staff at updating me, but there were some notable exceptions to
what was not included in my briefing that I think should have
been. One was any reference to the Cardon report. One--another
was any detailed review of the Vantage report, which in fact I
had to request a copy of to get, which I did get. But then when
I requested to have a conversation with the contract--with the
contractor over the last couple of days, apparently because of
the--I don't know how to characterize it as a sort of a
counterattack on this committee, that because there's a request
to the IG, now it's something that I don't have access to, I
mean, this is making due diligence for me very, very difficult.
And it's just an incredibly challenging position to be in as
someone who cares very, very deeply about the mission of the
Board, to have to encounter these obstacles in the first days
of appearing here.
Mr. Russell. Well, my time is expired, and Mr. Chairman, I
thank you for your patience, and I think I can speak for all of
us that we are committed to try to help remove these obstacles.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman from Oklahoma.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If you would, could we show the OMP--the OPM survey and the
CSB worker satisfaction slide. Thank you.
Chairman Moure-Eraso, if you look at these statistics on
employee satisfaction, they indicate an agency in turmoil. In
particular, it would appear from this that the satisfaction of
your senior leadership, which in this case would seem to be
yourself as Chairman, your top staff, such as Mr. Loeb and Mr.
Horowitz, why do you think these numbers are so low?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. You know, we run an agency, as was
explained before, that has very little resources, that does
have, I agree, leadership problems. We have a--a Board that
is--functions without any agreement, and they are in constant
conflict. All that create a situation that I believe the people
and the staff feel that the leadership of the agency is not to
their liking.
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask Mr. Griffon and the rest of the
Board, but particularly Mr. Griffon, as long as you work with
the Chairman, you might have some more detailed thoughts on
this. Can you give us some insights into why you think these
numbers are so low?
Mr. Griffon. Well, I think the number--I think part of it
is that the Board--we've had the--a series of maneuvers and
operations and ways to get around orderly Board order--Board
orders are governance, and I think if the Board can make a
commitment to say that we will all follow the Board orders,
then a lot of the conflict on the Board would go away.
That certainly contributes to it, but I also think it goes
deeper than that. It's the ways in which staff are not--a fear
of retaliation. There's a real fear of retaliation. There's not
an openness for dissenting opinions to be shared, so it's much
deeper than that. But this has gone on for quite some time. I
guess my biggest disappointment is, even after the hearing in
June, I urged everyone to reflect and let's try to reform. And
I think instead, we continue to deflect and defend: It's lack
of resources, lack of staff. It's never management problems.
And I think they are--the evidence is there. It's very
clear. We have to accept them and try to actually reform the
place.
Mr. Palmer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ehrlich. I can't speak to the date that was gathered
some time ago. What I can speak to is the issue of how data was
handled in the Vantage study. In my----
Mr. Palmer. We already covered that, I think, earlier in
the hearing.
Mr. Ehrlich. But I wasn't asked. You asked me why I--what I
thought was going on, and I'd like to tell you, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Go ahead.
Mr. Ehrlich. I have talked to almost everybody in the
agency. I have a background in organizational diagnosis as well
as chemistry. I think there are some issues, yes, but I know
for a fact--and the emails are forthcoming to the inspector
general--that a person inside, two people inside the agency
told the contractor--by the way, the contractor, who lied to us
that nobody had ever seen this report up until the day it was
presented--we have data which will be submitted to you that
says in fact that two people inside of the agency told the
contractor to change the data so that it was in fact not very
positive.
Mr. Palmer. That's noted. Thank you.
Mr. Ehrlich. You're welcome.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Griffon, would you please briefly explain
Board Order 28. On January 28, there was a motion which
rescinded Board Order 28 which established significant checks
on the chairman. Would you explain that?
Mr. Griffon. Yes. Board Order 28 came about after some--
some earlier arguments in the life of the Board, of governance
on the Board, and it delineated the authorities of the chairman
versus the Board as a whole, and it allowed for several checks
and balances, including voting on budget allocation of funds as
well as the appointment of heads of administrative units as
well as large expenditures. And I think some of these I
referenced in my opening statement that some of these
principles were outlined by Senator Lautenberg when this
initial dispute was going on. He thought that those checks and
balances were very important, and I should also point out that,
during a period of time under Carolyn Merritt, it seems that
these Board orders, perhaps there were arguments here and there
about them, but overall, they operated under those Board
orders, and they were pretty productive, and I think that was
working. And if you want to amend these, they should be done by
the full Board, not----
Mr. Palmer. Quickly.
Mr. Griffon [continuing]. In the dark of night.
Mr. Palmer. Do you believe that Chairman Moure-Eraso
adhered to these, to Board Order 28?
Mr. Griffon. No. I think even when--even when we were
supposedly operating under Board Order 28, Chairman Moure-Eraso
appointed a person to an administrative unit head, which I
objected to, in violation of that Board order. It should have
been a Board vote for that position, and he--he proceeded with
the appointment unilaterally.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter Board Order
28 into the record.
Mr. Meadows. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Palmer. My time is expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, the witnesses.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We all know the mission of the U.S. Chemical Safety Board
is to investigate chemical accidents and issue timely findings
and recommendations in order to prevent future accidents, and
we are all here because the serious management deficiencies at
the Chemical Safety Board have prevented this independent
agency from fulfilling its mission. And my first question,
Chairman Moure-Eraso, you know, the CSB plays a very important
role in public safety. Members of this committee have expressed
their concern, as my colleague from Virginia said, about the
dysfunctional culture at CSB and your ability to remain as
chairman.
And your current former Board colleagues have testified to
the hostile climate at CSB. Former CSB Board Member Beth
Rosenberg stated that those whose opinion differed from those
of senior leadership or the Chair are marginalized and
vilified. You have 15 weeks--is that correct, sir--left?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, 15.
Mr. Hurd. And you have said, I think, many of my colleagues
have intimated or outright said they think it's time for you to
step down. And you responded with you have work to do. What
work do you think you can do to fix these major problems in 15
weeks?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. First of all, Mr. Congressman, I disagree
with your premise that the core mission of the agency is not
being fulfilled. As I expressed before, in the last 8 months,
we have produced the eight excellent interview and reports with
videos of our investigations. We have completed 22
investigations. The core mission of the agency is being made.
Mr. Hurd. Is that because of you or in spite of you?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It's because the agency works, and the
product that we have is the evidence that the agency works.
Mr. Hurd. And what do you plan on doing the remaining 15
weeks of your time?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. We still have three major reports that are
in the process of being finished, and I would like to bring
those reports to an end in the next weeks that I have.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Ehrlich, question for you. On February 12,
2015, you submitted a letter to the editor of the National
Journal claiming that the Office of Special Counsel never
substantiated any claim of whistleblower retaliation by the
CSB's management after years of inquiry. Can you explain how
you arrived at this conclusion and what is the basis for this
claim?
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, I understand that that came about in
the--in the hearing last year, and I asked the questions of the
staff, was that information ever transmitted into the agency?
And I was told no, and I accepted that on the face of it and
accepted it to be true and wrote it in that article.
Mr. Hurd. And so do you have a change of opinion now?
Mr. Ehrlich. No, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Did the Board receive formal communication from
the Office of Special Counsel?
Mr. Ehrlich. I don't know, sir.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If I may, Congressman.
Mr. Hurd. Sure.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The Office of Special Counsel has been
investigated--investigating the agency for 3 and a half years.
They have come out with no findings. They have come out with no
instances of retaliation, period.
Mr. Hurd. So noted. Thank you.
Mr. Ehrlich, last question for you. Have you ever used
personal email to conduct official CSB business?
Mr. Ehrlich. Not that I haven't copied my own email on in
my office.
Mr. Hurd. And who are you communicating that?
Mr. Ehrlich. At CSB.gov. I think I've sent emails from home
on my personal email, but I copy my CSB.gov file.
Mr. Hurd. Great. Thank you.
And my last question is for inspector general Sullivan.
What is the process of removing a Board member from the U.S.
Chemical Safety Board or the Chairman?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, we would not be involved in any process
of removal. What our role would be is to present the facts in a
clear and unbiased way, present them to the next level above to
take--to take the potential disciplinary action. In this case,
our report of investigation was sent to the President because
he is in effect Dr. Moure-Eraso's supervisor.
Mr. Hurd. Is it odd to have named the Chairman before--15
months before the end of someone's tenure?
Mr. Sullivan. Can you repeat your----
Mr. Hurd. In your opinion?
Mr. Sullivan. I didn't understand the question, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. The fact that the President named a replacement
Chairman yesterday, is that right, March 3, is that a common
practice?
Mr. Sullivan. I don't know, sir.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If I may, Congressman.
Mr. Hurd. Sure.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The process is that the President
nominates a person. What has happened is that the President
nominated a person to be the Chairman. The process now has to
follow by the Senate to confirm.
Mr. Hurd. Confirmation, right.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. But, at this time, all that we have is a
name that the President has presented for consideration to the
Senate.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you for that clarification.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Ehrlich, let me clarify something that Mr. Hurd just
brought up. You are very confident when you said you only used
your personal emails only if you copied your official email.
Did you copy those personal emails to your official account at
a much later time than when you were actually having it back
and forth?
Mr. Ehrlich. Not to my recollection, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So--but you were very clear in your answer to
Mr. Hurd----
Mr. Ehrlich. I was.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. That you did that. So you are
confident that each time that you copied--when using your
personal email, that you copied it, because you're under oath.
Mr. Ehrlich. I understand that, sir.
Mr. Meadows. And you're confident of that. That's your
testimony here today.
Mr. Ehrlich. It is. My recollection is that that is exactly
true.
Mr. Meadows. Recollection is very different than what you
told Mr. Hurd.
But we'll go ahead and recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentleman, for being here today. We
appreciate your presence.
Let me ask you, Dr. Moure-Eraso, getting back to January 28
when, the motion was made to consolidate some powers, do you
think that was a pretty significant motion that was made that
day? Pretty significant change; would you agree?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The only thing that was different about
the meeting that we have in January 28 is that I have a clear
majority that was backing the position. That was the only thing
that was especially different.
Mr. Carter. I'm sorry, I didn't understand you.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. That I have a majority on the position
that was presented in a motion. That was the only thing that
was different in the----
Mr. Carter. I'm talking about the change that was made. The
change, was it significant? Would you consider it significant--
--
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, the change, of course, it was
significant, yes.
Mr. Carter. Who made it? Who made the motion?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. This is a process of 4 and a half years of
discussion on the governance of leadership that we have.
Mr. Carter. No, no, no. Who made the motion?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The motion was made by Board member
Ehrlich.
Mr. Carter. By Mr. Ehrlich.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Ehrlich, let me ask you, you made that
motion on January 28, right?
Mr. Ehrlich. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. When did you join the Board?
Mr. Ehrlich. I was appointed in December 2014.
Mr. Carter. You were appointed in December 2014, and then
you made what is admittedly, by the director, a significant
motion, a significant change. Is that correct?
Mr. Ehrlich. Yes.
Mr. Carter. Now, that's pretty quick. You're pretty
aggressive there. Let me ask you, you were appointed. Who
appointed you? How did you get appointed?
Mr. Ehrlich. I was nominated by the President, confirmed by
the Senate.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Mr. Ehrlich. Appointed by the President.
Mr. Carter. And during that confirmation process, did you
ever--did you ever discuss what you--I mean, obviously, you've
been thinking about doing this. Did you ever discuss that?
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, yes, I did. I watched what was going on
when I came in. I did a lot of reading. I was provided with a
lot of information before I came to Washington. And I saw this
as an opportunity, as you do, for example, in a business
environment to fix some things that didn't appear correct and
clear the slate for Mr. Engler and I to move forward in June.
Mr. Carter. Did you discuss it with anyone before you made
such a significant motion?
Mr. Ehrlich. I discussed it internally, yes.
Mr. Carter. Internally. With who?
Mr. Ehrlich. With the Chair, with the managing director, a
few of the people in the organization, staff members.
Mr. Carter. So you did discuss it with the Chair that you
were going to make this motion, and I assume he was in
agreement with that?
Mr. Ehrlich. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Was anyone in opposition to it? Did you talk to
anyone who said, No, I don't think that's a good idea?
Mr. Ehrlich. I did not.
Mr. Carter. OK. But you went ahead and did it anyway?
Mr. Ehrlich. I did.
Mr. Carter. You know, again, I find that--that significant,
to say the least. Did anyone help you with it, or you just came
up with that on your own?
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, no, I got help internally to put some of
the verbiage together, yes.
Mr. Carter. Who helped you?
Mr. Ehrlich. Managing director, general counsel, the Chair.
I talked to some of the senior investigators, or one of the
senior investigators.
Mr. Carter. So the Chair did help you in crafting this
motion?
Mr. Ehrlich. At some level, yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. You know, that's--that's pretty significant. It
seems--so would you--would you say that you had an agenda when
you came on the Board?
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, I had an agenda to the extent that I
wanted to see the Board--I wanted to see the agency function
more smoothly. I wanted rules and regulations that were up to
date. I wanted to apply a business model from my executive
management that would help bring it up----
Mr. Carter. OK. But were you aware of what existed at the
time? I mean, after only 3 weeks, you know, I'm not sure how
aware you could have been, and when I'm talking about then, I'm
talking about the morale of the employees, about just what has
obviously here been described as a very, very disruptive work
force.
Mr. Ehrlich. I have, and yes, I had talked to a number of
employees in that period of time. And I understand where some
of the problems were. And I felt that we could take action at
the time, at the Board meeting, since it was the only one--or
the community meeting, since it was the only one scheduled, to
correct some of the issues and move forward and clean the
slate.
Mr. Carter. So understanding that a lot of the concern
among the work force and in the workplace was that of the
director, instead you made a motion to give him even more
power.
Mr. Ehrlich. Sir, I never--when I talk to people--first of
all, I didn't give him any more power. He's not going to be
there. It gave Mr. Engler and I the ability to--and future
Chairs for power. I never talked to anybody in the organization
that had anything negative to say to me about the Chair. They
had things to say about communication. There was no finger
pointing as to who was responsible or not. They had issues
about the fact that we need to work on a--on a protocol, on a
style guide. All of these things, I would assume, had been
discussed on Mr. Griffon's shift.
Mr. Carter. You would assume.
Mr. Ehrlich. Well, I know some of them were discussed, yes,
OK. And just to clarify an issue from before, Mr. Engler and I
had a discussion about going back and looking, for example, at
an HF issue. In fact, we talked about how the research would be
done on it because I understood that that created some issues.
So we agreed that we were going to look at it and decide how we
could move forward collegially.
Mr. Meadows. The gentleman's time has expired, but the
chair is going to ask a followup question to this because the
gentleman from Georgia is exactly right.
Mr. Ehrlich, it is troubling that you--you are an
unbelievable quick study. After being there just a couple of
weeks, you made all of this unbelievable analysis. So who
drafted the motion, Mr. Ehrlich?
Mr. Ehrlich. I was----
Mr. Meadows. Because I have reason to believe that it was
not you that drafted the motion. Who drafted the motion?
Mr. Ehrlich. It was drafted within the organization----
Mr. Meadows. By who?
Mr. Ehrlich [continuing]. And I agreed to it.
Mr. Meadows. By who?
Mr. Ehrlich. By the Chair, by the managing director, by----
Mr. Meadows. So let me understand this. The Chair drafts a
motion for you to make the motion to give the Chair more power.
Mr. Ehrlich. Not in--not in its entirety. I wrote a lot of
it and I had----
Mr. Meadows. Well, we've got the transcript, and we'll----
Mr. Ehrlich. I wrote the verbiage----
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. Follow it up.
Mr. Ehrlich [continuing]. That----
Mr. Meadows. So did the general counsel--did the general
counsel draft the motion?
Mr. Ehrlich. No, but he talked to me about the verbiage.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you drafted it?
Mr. Ehrlich. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. So if we subpoena your records, it will be a
draft form in yours, Mr. Ehrlich? Is that your testimony? I
would be careful there.
Mr. Ehrlich. I believe so, but I'm not 100 percent sure.
Mr. Meadows. So is your testimony that you drafted it or
you didn't? I'm giving you a chance to back up.
Mr. Ehrlich. I signed off on the draft. I made----
Mr. Meadows. So you didn't draft----
Mr. Ehrlich [continuing]. Changes.
Mr. Meadows. You didn't draft it.
Mr. Ehrlich. So I needed--I needed assistance from inside--
--
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Ehrlich, I will remind you that you are
under oath, and when you--you're the one that used the word
``lie'' earlier, but when you do not tell the truth to this
committee, it is a major deal. So did you draft it? Is that
your testimony, yes or no?
Mr. Ehrlich. The final draft was mine, yes. Did I drew all
of the drafts? No.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
The chair will recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. OK. A followup question for you.
Mr. Meadows. Can the gentleman turn on his mic?
Mr. Grothman. Followup question for you. There was a
meeting on January 28. Did you provide a 1-week notice of the
Board vote on that meeting?
Mr. Ehrlich. I did not.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. If--might I say, you know, when we have a
public meeting, we have to put a public description of the
meeting in the Federal Register. It was in the Federal Register
according with law, and it was said in the Federal Register
that we were to discuss the Chairman report and we were going
to discuss administrative matters and vote on administrative
matters. All that is in the Federal Register.
Mr. Grothman. Did you provide Board Member Griffon a copy
of the motion prior to the hearing?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No. There is not a custom in our agency to
do that. As a matter of fact, I have experiences before in
which a Board orders--I mean, proposals for voting are kind of
sprung at the moment and voted immediately without providing
copies to other Board members.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So he didn't have an opportunity to
review the motion prior to the vote?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, all the issues that are related--
that appear in the motion have been in discussion for 3 and a
half years--issues of Board Order 28, as was mentioned, issues
of how we are going to do the recommendations, issues of how we
are going to do scoping of investigations, issues of what--what
have been produced in this for all investigations so that we
could basically administrative close with the problem that we
have already producing them. All those things have been in
continuous discussion with Mr. Griffon.
Mr. Grothman. I would like to ask Mr. Griffon to comment on
that, how much advance notice you were given.
Mr. Griffon. I had no notice of the motion, you know. Other
issues have been under discussion for years, but if you can't
get a majority to support amendments to Board orders, then they
don't move, so that's the way a Board should operate. This was
clearly a--planned out when the Chairman had the votes.
Mr. Grothman. OK. So you feel it was by design that you
weren't given a copy of the motion? Would that be an accurate
statement?
Mr. Griffon. Yes, I can't come to any other conclusion,
yes.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso, just one more question. Under the Sunshine
Act, it requires agencies to make public announcements at least
1 week in advance of--you should be noticing location, the
time, and the subject matter of the Board meeting. Do you feel
that you complied with that statute?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, pretty much. The Federal Register
notice that we put about the meeting speaks for itself. You can
read it.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I'll yield the rest of my time.
Mr. Meadows. So your testimony is you pretty much adhered
to it, is that correct, Dr. Eraso, pretty much? I mean, so----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes. Well, I----
Mr. Meadows. On a scale of 1 to 10 with being completely,
would you put it--is that a 7?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, I am unclear about what the Sunshine
Act requirements are to discussion about administrative matters
in public meetings. I am not clear about that.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Thank you, Doctor.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney, for a few followup questions before we have closing
remarks.
Mr. Mulvaney. I appreciate that, and I appreciate the panel
staying and the chairman allowing the indulgence of. Just a
couple of followup questions.
First, Dr. Moure-Eraso, the ranking member asked you why
you didn't sign the compliance statement when you turned over
your email documents. I have your letter, which you provided
earlier, and then I have the statement which isn't here, and
there are two things I want to draw to your attention, the
statement that you didn't sign.
This isn't the statement they asked you to sign. There's
the introductory paragraph about who you are, who you asked,
and by the inspector general to fill out some stuff. So if I
mention--the next sentence, In good faith, I have made a
diligent search of all the records and communications, and you
sort of say that in your--in your letter.
Then you say--the next thing in the section of the document
you didn't sign asked you to affirm that your methodology to
collect email records included conducting a search of personal
email, which is such and such, and to use the following search
term, ``Jason Zuckerman,'' ``Peter Broida,'' et cetera, et
cetera. And your document that you did draft or your counsel
drafted for you and that you signed said that you searched the
names that the IG had requested, so so far so good.
Then the next paragraph of the document you didn't sign
says, I also developed the additional search terms based upon
my review in order to make sure my search included the full
scope of email communications pertaining to official CSB
matters. And there is places where you could have filled in the
blank for additional search terms. Now, your letter didn't
speak to that. Did you use any other search terms other than
the names that were given to you by the IG?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I used--I think there was a long list,
more than 1-page long. I cannot tell you each one of them, but
you know, there was a number of search terms that were used.
Mr. Mulvaney. No, well, I'll read them to you. And again,
I'm not trying to trick you. The search terms were ``Jason
Zuckerman,'' ``Peter Broida,'' ``Daniel Horowitz,''
``Christopher Warner,'' ``Office of Special Counsel,'' ``OSC,''
``SC,'' and ``special counsel.'' So I guess the question is, in
the next paragraph of a document you didn't sign, there is an
opportunity to disclose other search terms that you might have
used in looking for the documents.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you use any search terms other than those
I've just read to you in searching your documents?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I might have. I mean, what happens is that
when we use those terms we drew a blank. This is working with
my chief information office at my computer. So we'll start
using--let's put some other terms to see what the IG is trying
to find.
Mr. Mulvaney. When you searched those terms, you drew
blanks in your private emails?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The ones that you have in there, some of
them, yes, I drew blanks.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK. All right. That's interesting.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Some for my Gmail, in which--for instance,
when I put ``CSB''----
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. It drew a blank. When I put
``Zuckerman,'' it drew a blank.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. So, you know, it was--I wanted to be
responsive, you know.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right.
The last paragraph says, ``The materials provided to the
EPA are genuine and complete,'' and you say that in your
document.
This is the last substantive sentence of the document you
didn't sign: ``I took no intentional action to destroy, delete,
or remove any official CSB email communication in my
possession.'' That's missing from here. Why is that?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Yes, it's missing. You are asking if I
destroyed any document?
Mr. Mulvaney. No, I'm asking----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. The answer is no.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why didn't you put that in your letter?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I guess--it wasn't required for me to put
that. But, you know, I----
Mr. Mulvaney. It wasn't required? No, it was required. It
was in a document that they sent you. And you didn't sign this
document.
Mr. Cummings asked you a question----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Well, but you are talking about a document
that I don't have. How could I answer the question?
Mr. Mulvaney. I can--I just read it to you.
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Without having it in front of
me and having time to evaluate what you're asking, I cannot----
Mr. Mulvaney. You haven't looked at this document?
Mr. Meadows. Would the gentleman--will the gentleman yield
for just----
Mr. Moure-Eraso [continuing]. Probably months ago.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you want to give him the document?
Mr. Meadows. Dr. Eraso, you're the one that gave that to
us.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No, I didn't.
Mr. Meadows. I'm not talking about the inspector general's
report, but----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I'm talking about Mr. Sullivan's document.
I don't have Mr. Sullivan's document.
Mr. Meadows. But you've seen the document that they asked
you to sign.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Probably 6 months ago, yes.
Mr. Meadows. OK.
Mr. Mulvaney. Dr. Moure-Eraso, did you intentionally, or I
guess unintentionally, destroy, delete, or remove any
official----
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentleman suspend for just a second?
Mr. Mulvaney. I'd be happy to.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No. The answer is no.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentleman suspend for just a second?
Dr. Eraso, the ranking member makes a very good
recommendation. We think you ought to read the document right
now. And I think that's a very fair request.
And, Mr. Mulvaney, if you'll give it to him.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Thank you.
Mr. Mulvaney. You're welcome.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. So I guess you were asking about this last
paragraph here?
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moure-Eraso. It says, ``The materials provided to the
EPA are genuine, complete, and in full compliance with the
request. I took no intentional action to destroy, delete, or
remove any official CSB email communications in my
possession.''
The answer to that question is that's correct. I absolutely
never took intentional action to destroy, delete, or remove any
official CSB communications in my possession.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right. Then I think we leave open for
now, Doctor, the question that the ranking member asked you,
which is why you didn't sign the document. But I appreciate
that.
Before we let you go, Mr. Ehrlich, you said some things
just a few minutes ago that caught my attention. It was not
part of my original questioning, but I'm fascinated by it.
What is a scoping document?
Mr. Ehrlich. A scoping document is a document that's used
to determine the magnitude of an incident and from a numerical
scale that's derived from it.
Mr. Mulvaney. When did you learn that? When did you learn
what a scoping document was?
Mr. Ehrlich. Right after I came to the agency.
Mr. Mulvaney. OK.
I'm looking at the motion that the gentleman from Georgia
asked you about--it's, I don't know, 10 pages double-sided--
that you said you offered after being there for about 3 weeks.
Is that correct?
I guess, let me ask the question a different way.
Dr. Moure-Eraso, were you involved in drafting this
document?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I had discussions with Mr. Ehrlich about
different details of the document.
Mr. Mulvaney. Were you involved in drafting this document?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Drafting itself? No.
Mr. Mulvaney. Did you instruct somebody to draft all or
part of it?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I didn't instruct anybody.
Mr. Mulvaney. You've never asked anybody to draft any part
of this amendment----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I never----
Mr. Mulvaney [continuing]. This motion?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. I never give instructions to anybody to
draft that motion.
Mr. Mulvaney. No, that wasn't my question. Did you ask
anybody to work on this motion?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. No.
Mr. Mulvaney. Who did?
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Mr. Ehrlich.
Mr. Mulvaney. So this is just your work.
Mr. Ehrlich. I worked with others on it because I needed to
know the language and the format. I worked with the managing
director, and I worked with general counsel.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I thank the gentleman from----
Mr. Mulvaney. Oh, I'm sorry. Yes, I'm out of time. Thanks.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. South Carolina, whose time has
expired.
I will say that the gentleman from Alabama has a followup
question. We're going to ask him to submit it, and it is an
answer that this committee does need. The gentleman from
Alabama has it. He will submit it to you in writing. We ask for
your response to be in writing.
Mr. Meadows. And because of the time, we go to the ranking
member for his closing statement.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Engler, what did you want to say?
Mr. Engler. Very briefly. Thank you. I just want to put two
short points on the record.
Mr. Cummings. Sure.
Mr. Engler. One is that there was a process prior to this
committee hearing to prepare for it, which involved going over
voluminous documents and involving an outside consultant at
some point to, frankly, spin what cannot be spun.
I want to go on the record to point out that I said--and I
believe this is pretty close to a precise quote--I refuse to
participate in this process.
I am dedicated to the mission of the agency. I want to move
forward. I hope to be back here before your committee and to
work with the inspector general, but based on whether we're
accomplishing the mission of the agency, not whether we're
taking steps that have been described today to interfere with
the mission of the agency.
This agency has no credibility whatsoever to tell anyone
outside the agency virtually anything if its internal practices
around issues like the right to know, of not informing people
about the actions of the agency--when we expect corporations
and government agencies and others to take steps to inform the
public and inform workers what materials they're working with,
what the risks are, and we can't set a standard for good
practice here?
I pledge to you that that's why I'm here, that's what I'm
going to work for. And I look forward to coming back to this
committee and to being accountable to all the relevant
stakeholders and the inspector general in the months ahead.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Engler, I really appreciate that.
I see you shaking your head, Mr. Griffon. Do you feel the
same way? Just yes or no, if you don't mind.
Mr. Griffon. Yes. Yes. Absolutely.
Mr. Ehrlich. And I feel the same way, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Very well.
I just--I want to thank you for that, your statement. And
after this long hearing, to hear that is refreshing.
And I think what happens in life so often is people can go
in circles, and never getting off the merry-go-round. And going
in those circles, you don't accomplish the things that you want
to accomplish or fully accomplish.
And I think what has happened is that we've gotten this--
the leadership here has basically become dysfunctional and has
been dysfunctional for a long time. And it's interesting that
the employees know that. They know it, and they figured it out.
And it affects their lives. They're probably good people trying
hard to be the very best that they can be. They take their jobs
very seriously, and they want to make sure that they address
the kind of important issues that you deal with. They want to
do it effectively and efficiently. But then they're almost
blocked and they're distracted, in many instances, because of
all of this stuff that's happening at the top.
And so, again, Mr. Chairman Moure-Eraso, I would ask that
maybe, you know, when you get a chance after you leave here
today, that you give some thought to taking an early retirement
and let this agency go forward so it can do the things that it
needs to do.
And I want you to understand, I don't say that lightly.
Very rarely have I asked anybody from this dais to leave. But I
just think that this is so important. And I do think that you
need to put a mirror up and ask the question, is it me? And I
think the Vantage report and the findings and a lot of what
we've heard here today points to you. And I hope that you'll
consider that.
Again, I thank you all.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. May I respond or----
Mr. Meadows. We are just doing closing statements at this
point. You've had more than enough time to share your
perspective, Dr.----
Mr. Moure-Eraso. Thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. Eraso. And so, I think at this
point it is important that we bring this to a close under a
number of different issues.
One is, Mr. Engler, thank you. Thank you for your comment.
It's not easy when you're on a Board to make those kind of
comments, so thank you so much for hopefully giving us a fresh
start.
And to the employees, who may or may not be watching this
particular hearing--the ranking member and I were talking about
this while some of the other questioning was going on. We've
got your back. And whether it's a whistleblower that is
receiving retaliation or whether it's other issues within this
agency that have not been properly handled, I can tell you that
the ranking member and the chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Chaffetz, are committed to working hand-in-glove to make sure
that the employees get treated fairly.
Some of what I've heard here today is very discouraging and
would certainly make for very low morale, because what
ultimately this has been about is the truth and power. And,
sadly, both of those have been left, really, in the hands of
the wrong people. And I find that very troubling. And so I'm
looking forward to a new day where we'll have a new Chairman
come before this committee and, indeed, everything would look a
little bit brighter.
I'm going to ask for unanimous consent for the following
items to be put in the record: the letter from the American
Chemistry Council to the committee; a letter from the United
Steelworkers to the committee; a letter from the former CSB
Board member William Wright to the committee; a letter from the
former CSB Board member Gerald Poje to the committee; a letter
from the former CSB Board member William Wright, a second one,
to the committee; written testimony from the former CSB Board
member Beth Rosenberg to the committee; a letter from the
former CSB Board member William Wark to the committee; a letter
from the former CSB Board member John Bresland to the
committee; February 12, 2015, Vantage report titled ``Briefing
to CSB Senior Leadership''; July 10, 2014, Carden Group report
titled ``U.S. Chemical Safety Board Path Forward Overview'';
July 7, 2014, letter to the President; Government in Sunshine
Act 5 U.S.C. 522b; Chemical Safety Board Order No. 28; and a
job posting on the USAJOBS for the new Senior Executive Service
position of managing director at the Chemical Safety Board,
posted on March the 2d, 2015; and the January 16, 2015, memo
from the EPA inspector general to the President; and a February
2d letter from the White House Counsel to this CSB Chairman.
Without objection, those will be entered into the record.
Mr. Meadows. And, with that, this committee hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:16 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
