- EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S EXCESS URANIUM MANAGEMENT PLAN

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S
EXCESS URANIUM MANAGEMENT PLAN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE INTERIOR

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 22, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-543 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Bill McGrath, Staff Director, Interior Subcommittee
Melissa Beaumont, Clerk

Subcommittee on the Interior

Cynthia M. Lummis, Wyoming, Chairman
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan,
Blake Farenthold, Texas                  Ranking Member
Ken Buck, Colorado, Vice Chair       Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama              Jim Cooper
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 22, 2015...................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. John Kotek, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of
Nuclear Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................     3
Written Statement............................................     5
Mr. David Trimble, Director, Natural Resources and Environment,
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12
Mr. Scott Melbye, Executive Vice President, Uranium Energy
Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    31
Written Statement............................................    33

APPENDIX

ERI Slides, submitted by Ms. Lawrence............................    52
Testimony of Mr. Frank Hahne, Uranium Barter, Manager Flvor-B&W
Portsmouth LLC, submitted by Mrs. Lummis.......................    57
Energy Resources International Market Analysis Reports, submitted
by Mrs. Lummis.................................................    74

EXAMINING THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S EXCESS URANIUM MANAGEMENT PLAN

----------

Wednesday, April 22, 2015,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Interior,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:12 a.m. in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Cynthia
Lummis [chairwoman of the subcommittee], presiding.
Present: Representatives Lummis, Buck, Farenthold, Palmer,
Gosar, Russell, Lawrence, Plaskett and Cummings.
Ms. Lummis. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
Good morning and welcome to today's hearing of the
Subcommittee on Interior of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
Our purpose today is to examine the Department of Energy's
management of the U.S. excess uranium inventories. This is
uranium, of varying grades, owned by the Federal Government
that has been declared surplus to the national security needs
of the United States. This uranium has significant value.
Selling it generates revenue for the Federal Government and
displaces uranium produced by private industry in the
marketplace.
The Department of Energy's management of this uranium has
prompted questions by the domestic uranium industry as well as
the Government Accountability Office, a non-partisan agency
that investigates how the Federal Government spends taxpayer
dollars.
The GAO found that the Department of Energy failed to
consistently value uranium that transferred to third parties in
exchange for other services. The GAO found that other transfers
violated the miscellaneous receipts statute which requires
government officials who receive money on the government's
behalf to deposit those funds with the Treasury, except where
otherwise provided by law.
By not depositing an amount equal to the value of the
uranium into the Treasury, DOE has inappropriately circumvented
the power of the purse granted to Congress under the
Constitution.
Further, the GAO found that the Department of Energy's
studies to assess the market impact of proposed uranium
transfers is required by the USEC Privatization Act of 1996
failed to show quality assurance guidance to provide detail
about the data, methodology and assumptions made in studies and
has had other shortcomings.
This raised questions about the validity of the conclusion
that the proposed transfers would have no adverse material
impact on domestic uranium industries. The domestic uranium
industry plays an important role in ensuring America is not
completely dependent on foreign sources of energy, particularly
in the area of uranium where we actually import about 90
percent of the uranium that we use here, completely unnecessary
to do so.
While I note that the DOE is in the process of revising its
procedures to determine the market impact on proposed transfers
of excess uranium, it is important to discuss previous problems
to ensure they are not repeated.
Today, we will hear from the GAO to discuss their reports.
We will also hear from the Department of Energy to learn more
about their management of excess uranium and their response to
the GAO. Finally, we will hear from a representative of the
domestic uranium industry to discuss how these transfers have
affected the industry.
A representative of the Fluor-B&W Portsmouth, the DOE
contractor for cleanup at the Portsmouth Gaseous Diffusion
Plant in Piketon, Ohio, was invited to the hearing to discuss
the importance of the cleanup that some of the transfers have
funded but was unable to attend.
I look forward to hearing the panel discuss ways the excess
uranium management can be improved to eliminate legal concerns
and ensure the best value for the taxpayer while not disrupting
the domestic uranium industry and continue to meet DOE's
obligation to clean up its legacy sites.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses in advance
for your testimony.
I now recognize Mrs. Lawrence, the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on the Interior, for her opening statement.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I want to thank
you for holding this hearing today and also want to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today.
One of the core missions of this committee is to oversee
the proper stewardship of government assets. Today, we will be
focusing our attention on an important asset, uranium, managed
by the Department of Energy.
It is important that the Department of Energy will be able
to sell and swap uranium in order to support objectives of the
agency. Selling uranium to nuclear power plants and swapping
uranium in exchange for environmental cleanup activities are
both necessary uses of the excess uranium.
However, the agency must be careful that all of its uranium
transactions are carried out in accordance with the law. I am
pleased that the GAO and the department are both here to help
us understand more about the laws pertaining to past and future
uranium transfers.
If the Congress needs to resolve different interpretations
of the law now is the time to let us know so we can begin that
process. It is also critical that we maintain a robust domestic
uranium industry which is particularly important to the States
of Wyoming and Utah where the bulk of our uranium is mined.
The department's decisions must be backed by sound market
studies on whether any particular sale or transfer would be a
negative impact on our domestic uranium industry.
Let us all keep an open mind--I will--to the testimony that
will be offered today and the information.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Lummis. I thank the Ranking Member.
I will hold open the record for five legislative days for
any member who would like to submit a written statement.
We will now recognize our panel of witnesses. I am pleased
to welcome Mr. John Kotek, Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary, Office of Nuclear Energy, U.S. Department of Energy;
Mr. David Trimble, Director, Natural Resources and Environment,
U.S. Government Accountability Office; and Mr. Scott Melbye,
Executive Vice President at Uranium Energy Corp. Welcome all.
Pursuant to this committee rules: all witnesses will be
sworn before they testify. Please rise and raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Ms. Lummis. In order to allow time for discussion, please
limit your testimony to 5 minutes even if your entire written
testimony is longer. It will be made part of the record.
I would first recognize Mr. John Kotek. Thank you so much
for being here.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOHN KOTEK

Mr. Kotek. Thank you, Chairman Lummis, Ranking Member
Lawrence and members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here today to discuss the Department of
Energy's management of its excess uranium.
I do have a longer written statement for the record.
Currently, I serve as the Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary in DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy where I am
responsible for helping to advance nuclear power to meet our
Nation's energy needs. I took this position about 3 months ago
but earlier in my career, I served in a number of roles in DOE
within the Department of Energy's National Lab system at
Argonne National Lab West in Idaho right over the border from
Wyoming.
I later served as Deputy Manager of the department's Idaho
Operations Office where I was responsible for Federal
management of the Idaho National Lab.
More recently, I had the honor of serving as Staff Director
to the blue ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future which
recommended a strategy for managing nuclear waste in the United
States.
When I am not serving in Washington, I still make my home
in Idaho with my wife and three kids.
As a legacy of the department's activities, DOE has an
inventory of uranium that exceeds its expected needs. This
uranium comes from various sources, including governmental
weapons programs from its own former enrichment activities and
from inventories of Russian origin natural uranium.
This excess uranium has value to taxpayers. Among the chief
uses in recent years, DOE barters excess uranium to fund work
under crucial DOE programs--the environmental cleanup of the
gaseous diffusion plant at Portsmouth, Ohio and the down
blending of highly enriched uranium to eliminate excess weapon
grade uranium, which occurs in Erwin, Tennessee.
The department manages its excess uranium inventory in
accordance with the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and other
applicable laws. Specifically, the Atomic Energy Act authorizes
DOE to transfer special nuclear material and source material.
However, the USEC Privatization Act places certain
limitations on DOE's authority to transfer uranium from its
excess uranium inventory. Before certain uranium transactions,
the Secretary of Energy must determine that the sale of uranium
will not have an adverse material impact on the domestic
uranium mining, conversion or enrichment industries.
In terms of our current work, the department plans to issue
a new secretarial determination covering continued transfers of
uranium for cleanup services in Ohio and for down blending of
highly enrichment uranium in Tennessee.
To inform its deliberations, the department is engaged in
two rounds of public comment seeking input from the public and
from the industry about the effects of continued uranium
transfers on the domestic uranium industries and
recommendations about factors it should consider in assessing
whether a given set of transfers would have an adverse material
impact on the domestic uranium industry.
The most recent comment period closed on April 6. We
appreciate the comments we received from the range of uranium
industries and from others, as well as from the recipients of
bartered uranium.
DOE's staff is still reviewing comments and preparing
recommendations for the Secretary so I will be limited in what
I can say on issues that are presently being addressed in our
pending proceedings. However, I can speak to the process we
have recently undertaken to solicit public comment.
In conclusion, Madam Chairman, I would like to emphasize
that the department understands the importance of the uranium
industry in many communities. DOE remains committed to managing
its uranium inventories in compliance with all statutory
requirements and in a manner that is consistent with and
supportive of a healthy, domestic nuclear industry.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Kotek follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Kotek.
Mr. Trimble, we would like to hear from you.

STATEMENT OF DAVID TRIMBLE

Mr. Trimble. Chairman Lummis, Ranking Member Lawrence and
members of the subcommittee, my testimony today discusses our
observations on DOE's management of its excess uranium
inventory.
My observations are drawn from GAO's work since 2006 in
which we have identified four key issues: one, DOE's
elimination of a guideline limiting its uranium sales and
transfers; two, DOE's efforts to insure the quality of its
uranium market impact studies; three, legal concerns related to
DOE's transfers of uranium; and four, DOE's stewardship of the
government's uranium resources.
In 2013, DOE announced that it would no longer use a 10
percent guideline to limit its uranium sales and transfers.
While DOE established the guideline in 2008 after soliciting
input from industry, DOE did not consult with industry before
deciding to abandon the guideline.
Industry officials told us that the elimination of the
guideline will diminish the transparency and predictability of
DOE's future transfers affecting an already depressed market.
In our report, we recommended that DOE obtain industry
input on the amount of DOE uranium transfers the market can
absorb annually and assess whether it needs to reinstitute a
guideline.
Second, our 2014 report found that DOE did not take steps
to assess the technical quality of its 2012 and 2013 market
impact studies. Such quality control efforts are called for in
the contract with the vendor as well as DOE's own quality
assurance guidelines.
These studies were used by the Secretary of Energy to
conclude that DOE's transfers would not have an adverse impact
on the domestic uranium market as required by the USEC
Privatization Act.
DOE officials told us they did not conduct an assessment of
the technical quality of the studies nor did they request
additional information requested from the contractor about
their methodology. DOE Stated they contracted for this work
since they did not have the technical capability to do the work
themselves and further, they wanted the contractor studies to
be independent.
Third, we have repeatedly noted legal concerns related to
certain DOE transfers of uranium. In 2006 and 2011, we found
that DOE violated the miscellaneous receipts statute when it
did not deposit the proceeds from uranium sales into the
Treasury.
Specifically, DOE provided uranium to USEC for sale to a
third party and allowed USEC to keep the proceeds as payment
for a new cleanup contract. Such actions undercut Congress'
authority to appropriate funds.
In addition, DOE transferred uranium without obtaining a
Presidential determination that the material was no longer
needed for national security purposes. Notably, just 1 year
earlier, DOE had acquired the same material for national
security purposes.
Finally, we have noted that DOE likely does not have
authority to sell or transfer depleted uranium and have
suggested that Congress clarify DOE's authority in this area.
Fourth, regarding DOE's stewardship of the government's
uranium resources, DOE has not established guidance on how
depleted uranium tails should be valued. Specifically, if DOE
does sell such material despite its apparent lack of authority
to do so, it must at least charge a fair price for it as the
Atomic Energy Act requires.
For example, in 2012, DOE developed multiple estimates for
the same transfer with values ranging from 0 to $300 million.
In this case, DOE decided to not charge anything for the tails
reasoning that they had no value since the tails could be
considered an environmental liability.
However, the tails were transferred for an economic
purpose, to be re-enriched in lieu of natural uranium. Further,
in a prior transaction, DOE charged a fee for tails that were
transferred for re-enrichment and in 2013, DOE entered
negotiations with another company for the sale of a portion of
its tails inventory. DOE disagreed with our recommendation that
it develop guidance for valuing tails.
We believe that until DOE develops such guidance, it cannot
ensure the government will be reasonably compensated for any
future tails transfers.
In closing, let me note that uranium is both an important
national security asset and a commodity with economic value.
Consequently, the government's inventory of uranium represents
a valuable asset that DOE must effectively and responsibly
manage.
To do this, DOE must ensure that disposition decisions
fully consider national security needs, provide the Nation's
taxpayers with value for these assets and ensure that transfers
do not adversely impact the domestic uranium industry.
Although DOE has disagreed with many of our
recommendations, we are encouraged by some recent steps DOE has
taken to increase transparency by seeking public input on its
proposed uranium transfers.
However, we continue to believe that DOE needs to take
additional steps to ensure that it conducts future transfers in
a more transparent manner, consistent with law and that such
transfers benefit taxpayers while not harming the uranium
industry.
Thank you. I would be happy to answer questions.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Trimble follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Trimble.
Mr. Melbye, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT MELBYE

Mr. Melbye. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Lummis,
Ranking Member Lawrence and members of the subcommittee.
My name is Scott Melbye. I am Executive Vice President of
Uranium Energy Corporation.
I am proud to be a second generation U.S. uranium miner, my
father having discovered and developed uranium deposits in
Wyoming's Powder River Basin and the Colorado plateau of the
western United States.
I have worked in the uranium industry now for more than
three decades, including senior roles at Cameco and Uranium
One. I also previously served as President of the Uranium
Producers of America.
While I remain firmly optimistic in the potential of U.S.
uranium production, we are facing the most challenging market
conditions in my career, with market prices having fallen below
the level of all but the most competitive production cost
operations.
My company, Uranium Energy Corporation, based in Corpus
Christi, Texas, has gone through what has become an all too
familiar development. We, like other U.S. uranium producers,
were incentivized by market conditions in 2009 and 2010 to
startup or expand uranium operations.
In South Texas, we brought on the first new mine there in
many years, employing as many as 85 people in 2012. Today,
however, we are idling operations, ceasing new well field
development, and cutting back our staff to 39 employees.
We recognize the department's transfers are not solely
responsible for the current market conditions. However they
have made the situation decidedly worse. All of us in the
mining industry understand and regularly deal with normal,
healthy competition and the ups and downs that are inherent in
our cyclical business.
However, what the DOE is doing in this market defies normal
business logic. At a time when producers in the United States,
and elsewhere, are reducing production, shutting in mines and
canceling new projects, the Federal Government has
substantially increased its sales volumes and become our
largest competition.
For context, the department sold nearly twice as much
uranium in 2014 as the entire domestic industry produced. Under
the volumes announced in the May 2014 Secretarial
Determination, the Federal uranium transfers account for more
than 100 percent of the global uncommitted utility demand for
2015, meaning there is no room for the domestic producers to
compete.
The UPA is not opposed to DOE leveraging America's uranium
assets. However, the disposition of the uranium inventory
should be predictable, transparent, and done in a way which
minimizes the impact on our industry and secures the highest
value for taxpayers.
As you know, under the USEC Privatization Act, before
making any uranium transfer, the department must certify the
transfer ``will not have an adverse material impact on the
domestic uranium mining, conversion, or enrichment
industries.'' The department also has a legal obligation to
ensure taxpayers receive fair value for this asset.
UPA maintains the department's recent actions, including
the May 2014 Secretarial Determination, fail to meet its legal
obligations under the USEC Privatization Act.
When prices crashed following Fukushima, domestic producers
throttled back operations. DOE's response was the exact
opposite. As uranium prices dropped, DOE pushed more material
into a market that was already oversupplied.
UPA recently commissioned a market report from Trade Tech,
a leading market industry analyst, to look at the impact of the
department's uranium transfers. Trade Tech found transfers of
DOE material outweighed other supply developments due to
Fukushima in the short-term.
In addition, Trade Tech concluded if DOE does not reduce
the amount of material entering the market, the transfers will
influence the fates of uranium producers, both existing and in
development, through its impact on prevailing prices and
producer margins.
Let me briefly outline UPA's recommendations regarding
steps the department could take to reduce the impact of future
transfers on the domestic industry.
1 would be to reinstate an annual cap on transfers. In
2008, the uranium industry, utilities, and the department
reached consensus on a plan to limit annual transfers to 10
percent of domestic utility requirements, about 5 million
pounds per year.
Unfortunately, the department quickly abandoned the cap and
has dramatically increased the amount of material entering the
market. UPA recommends reinstating a cap of 5 million pounds
per year that includes all categories of DOE material and would
be phased-in over 5 years.
2 would be to reform how material enters the market. The
manner in which DOE moves the material into the market,
primarily through the spot market or near-term contracts, is
nearly as damaging to our industry as the amount of material
being transferred.
UPA encourages the department to work with the domestic
converter uranium producers to minimize the impact of
government material coming into the market, as was done under
the Megatons to Megawatts Agreement.
Uranium producers, with a vested interest, can feed the
material into long-term contracts, which will ease some of the
pressure in the short-term when the market is oversupplied.
3 would be to subject future Secretarial Determinations to
full notice and comment before they are finalized with greater
transparency and oversight on DOE actions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify at today's
hearing. I would be pleased to take your questions.
[Prepared Statement of Mr. Melbye follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Melbye, you were spot on with
your 5 minutes.
Gentlemen, we will now begin questions. I would actually
like to recognize the Ranking Member first.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The testimony is clear that the uranium market is currently
facing depressed conditions. However, the department is
increasing the amount it transfers into the market.
Mr. Kotek, why has DOE elected to transfer its uranium now
rather than waiting for the market prices to rebound? Can you
please respond?
Mr. Kotek. Thank you for the question.
Of course the department has to make a determination about
the impact that such transfers would have on the industry. The
Secretary of Energy considers a variety of factors when making
such determinations and of course is very interested in
ensuring that we both protect a robust domestic nuclear
industry, including the uranium industry while also meeting our
other obligations for cleanup and non-proliferation.
What I will say going forward is that the department has
certainly heard the concerns expressed by this committee, the
industry and others and is trying to engage in a process going
forward that will address some of the concerns that have been
raised here today, particularly regarding the transparency and
the opportunity for comment.
As you may know, we issued a notice late last fall
requesting an initial input from the industry. We more recently
provided an opportunity for industry to provide feedback on
further information, a compilation of comments we received and
some other analyses so that we understand fully both the views
of market conditions and the opinions of participants in the
industry on other issues so that going forward we have provided
the types of opportunities for transparency and input that
participants in this marketplace are looking for.
Mrs. Lawrence. Does the DOE monitor real time market
conditions to maximize the value that it is obtaining or the
value of the uranium for the government? I am asking because
shouldn't it be the objective of DOE to prevent depressing the
market after marketing a transfer?
Can you delve into what have been the steps for you to have
a real price value? You are gathering this information but what
have you done to ensure we are not depressing the market?
Mr. Kotek. As mentioned this morning, we conduct regular
analysis that look at the amount of material or a range of the
amount of material that can go into the marketplace and get an
industry expert organization to help us understand what impacts
particular ranges of transactions could have.
We are, of course, very mindful of the value of the asset
that we hold in terms of this uranium. We try to structure our
transactions in a way that best serves the interests of the
taxpayers and our programs.
When actually structuring the transactions, we peg the
value of the uranium to be transferred on market indices and
publicly available at the time, so we try to ensure that the
taxpayers are, in fact, getting the best value for that
resource.
As you may know, in accordance with the law, we also
provide a 30-day advance notification to Congress on the
amounts, the value and the timing of the uranium transfers that
we will engage in for both the cleanup and for the non-
proliferation programs.
Mrs. Lawrence. It is my understanding that the DOE enters
into long term contracts for the environmental cleanup of the
gaseous diffusion plant in Portsmouth, Ohio and for the down
blending of weapons grade uranium in Erwin, Tennessee, is that
correct?
Mr. Kotek. We have contracts for both of those activities,
yes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Are those contracts funded by the transfer
of uranium in exchange for the cleanup services?
Mr. Kotek. Thank you for the question.
As part of fulfilling or obligations under those contracts,
there is uranium bartered to cover some of the services
provided under each contract. There are also appropriations
that cover I think in both cases the majority--certainly the
cleanup contract for the majority of the activity.
Mrs. Lawrence. When these transfers happen or are bartered,
do you use the market value at that current time for the
uranium that you are bartering?
Mr. Kotek. That is my understanding. I will confess, the
cleanup program and the non-proliferation programs are outside
of my program area but that is my understanding. If that is
incorrect, we will correct it as a followup.
Mrs. Lawrence. I yield my time.
Ms. Lummis. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Trimble, I want to start by asking what is the
miscellaneous receipts statute?
Mr. Trimble. I am not a lawyer so I would ask to take a
formal response for the record but the general principle is if
there is money coming in to the government, money should be
deposited to the Treasury so that it basically protects
Congress' authority and control over the purse.
Congress appropriates money. It has that authority. If you
didn't respect that, an agency could take in money and then
decide how to spend that money itself. It essentially prevents
the circumvention of the appropriations process.
Ms. Lummis. Between 2009 and 2011, DOE made seven transfers
of excess uranium to pay for cleanup services at a DOE
enrichment facility, is that correct?
Mr. Trimble. That is correct.
Ms. Lummis. Did that activity violate the miscellaneous
receipts statute?
Mr. Trimble. That was our finding in our 2011 report, yes.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Kotek, the Department of Energy has
contracted with Energy Resources International to conduct
market impact analysis of proposed transfers of excess uranium.
Prior to 2014, the analysis reached a determination that
there would be no adverse material impact on the domestic
uranium industry. It explicitly Stated that conclusion. In
2014, however, the ERI analysis did not make a determination of
market impact. Can you tell me why that is?
Mr. Kotek. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
First of all, I should point out, with the fact that the
2014 process is subject to litigation, there is a limit to what
I can say.
We did provide comment on the 2014 ERI draft as we always
do. Our comments conveyed this is ultimately the Secretary's
decision. The statute leaves it up to the Secretary to make
that determination.
[Slide.]
Ms. Lummis. I would like to show you some slides because we
requested from ERI documents regarding the process that is used
in its market impact analysis.
[Slide.]
Ms. Lummis. The first slide I am showing you shows the 2010
ERI market assessment. As you can see in the highlighted
language that is blocked off on the right, it finds no adverse
material impact. That is the 2010 report.
Now you go to the next slide which is the 2013 ERI market
assessment. It also finds no adverse material impact. There are
2010 and 2013.
[Slide.]
Ms. Lummis. Now let us go to the 2014 draft ERI market
assessment. It notes, in a departure from previous years, that
ERI can no longer make a definitive statement of no adverse
material impact.
[Slide.]
Ms. Lummis. Now go to slide four, please. This slide shows
the final 2014 ERI market assessment. It clearly States that
ERI makes no conclusion regarding an adverse material impact
which seems to be a departure from their draft.
[Slide.]
Ms. Lummis. Let me ask you to put up one more slide,
please. This fifth slide shows DOE's comments in response to
the 2014 draft assessment. In it, comments from DOE suggest
that it is not the place of ERI to determine if the transfers
would constitute an adverse material impact.
It appears that at one point, the fact that ERI was
concluding there was no adverse material impact was OK but then
when they decided, we cannot say that anymore, that was when
DOE intervened and said, oops that is a Secretarial
determination. Do you know who made those comments?
Mr. Kotek. I am afraid I do not. Having been with DOE for
less than 3 months in this position, I am afraid I do not have
the history.
Ms. Lummis. I appreciate the situation you are in but we
still thank you for being here today.
I do want to understand why when the contract provider
determined there was no adverse material impact, that was
accepted, but when they hit the point where they said we cannot
say that anymore, all of a sudden DOE says, oh, well, that is
not yours to say.
Thank you, Mr. Kotek and Mr. Trimble.
My time having expired, I will return to the normal order
of things and yield to Mr. Russell of Oklahoma for 5 minutes--
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Melbye, as a constituent, welcome to Washington.
I would like to ask Mr. Kotek a couple of questions. Is
there any disagreement that DOE transfers are depressing
uranium prices? You all are not disputing that, are you?
Mr. Kotek. As you see in our analyses, we certainly look at
the situation in the marketplace and have an evaluation done of
the potential impacts of transfers into the marketplace. Those
show some movement in prices certainly.
Mr. Farenthold. I am little concerned you are also using
the uranium to basically barter. If I sold my office furniture
to pay for a junket to China, I would be in a little bit of
trouble. Did you all not see this coming?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding is this practice has been
undertaken for some number of years.
Mr. Farenthold. I am a little concerned about it. That may
be something the overall committee needs to be looking at
governmentwide.
I see Congress has really kind of damaged our ability to
govern by surrendering some of the power of the purse. It is
probably a bigger issue beyond this hearing.
I would like to go to Mr. Melbye for a second. You and your
family have been in the uranium business for a long time. There
was some talk about the uranium being sold in the spot market.
Where is there a spot market for uranium? My understanding
is there are very limited uses for uranium. Obviously, you have
depleted uranium that is not a subject here that has some uses
but radioactive uranium--medical, nuclear energy and bombs--am
I missing something?
Mr. Melbye. In the commercial nuclear energy industry, the
uranium is used for production of electricity, so the spot
market for uranium is composed of electric utility companies
buying requirements for their nuclear power plants.
Mr. Farenthold. Do they normally buy on a long term
contract or do they just go out?
Mr. Melbye. That is an important point. These are big
investments in nuclear power plants and to fuel these reactors,
utilities generally cover their requirements well in advance of
the actual need.
The actual unfilled uranium requirements that fall into the
spot market being utilities needing to buy to fuel their
reactors are quite low. Hence, the focus of DOE uranium
dispositions in the spot and near term market has a
disproportionate impact on prices.
Mr. Farenthold. I guess that goes both ways though. You all
probably do not sell that much into the spot market. I guess
where I am going with this is where can you guys come together
and make this work? It seems like you tried but now it is all
in court. Is there another starting point we can get to?
Mr. Melbye. There certainly is, Mr. Farenthold. Really, the
solution that will provide the greatest benefit to the taxpayer
and have the least impact on industry really can be found in a
compromise solution.
The way the current barter program is working, it is really
kind of a senseless and self perpetuating, downward spiral
where the more uranium the DOE sells, the more it impacts
price. The more it impacts uranium price, the more uranium they
have to sell.
This was even something that was acknowledged by the Ohio
congressional delegation as a challenge faced by the Portsmouth
cleanup. Really, the solution is to have these measured caps,
predictable limits on the inventory sales and involve domestic
industries as much as possible.
Mr. Farenthold. Let me ask you one more question because I
am very limited on time.
The DOE has reported that domestic uranium production was
up 5 percent in 2014 compared to 2013. Given your remarks about
the State of the industry, I was surprised to see an uptick in
production. Again, you also have Fukushima and a potential
decrease in demand. What is the story behind that?
Mr. Melbye. Mr. Farenthold, that is an excellent question.
I am glad you asked it.
The mining business, not just uranium mining, has very long
lead times in terms of permitting, licensing, and development
of mines. A lot of the investment decisions that were made
particularly in the U.S., I think most of the major U.S.
uranium producers made investment decisions in the 2009-2010
timeframe and only now in 2013-2014 have seen production top
out.
I can assure you that the amount of exploration drilling,
drilling contractors in south Texas will tell you that the well
field development has absolutely ceased. In Wyoming, it is the
same story. The production levels we are going to see in 2015
and 2016 are certainly going to follow on the lack of
investment. It is just the lag time to ramp up.
Mr. Farenthold. Maybe the government will get some more
money for their uranium, but again, not good for your industry.
I see my time has expired. Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman.
Ms. Lummis. I thank the gentleman and apologize to the
gentlelady from the Virgin Islands. I should have recognized
her next. The gentlelady is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, gentlemen.
I wanted to go back to the slides the Chairperson had us
looking at earlier today. Chairman, did you put these into the
record as yet? I did not hear you ask for unanimous consent.
Ms. Lummis. I ask for unanimous consent that they be placed
in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Would you please bring up the draft 2014 market analysis
slide that was shown to you, if that is possible? Thank you.
[Slide.]
Ms. Plaskett. The sentence ``Given the current weak State
of the markets and the impact described in this report, ERI can
no longer make such a definitive statement'' is highlighted.
Then when I look several sentences down, I see the sentence
``Based on the analysis contained in the study, it is not clear
that a reduction in DOE inventory releases would cause the
overall market conditions to change enough to make a
significant difference in the health and status of the domestic
industry.''
The gentlewoman from Wyoming would appear to show that
there was some bias that DOE had put into this report but I
note that neither of these sentences, which are contradictory
sentences in the draft report, were in the final market
analysis report.
If you pull up the final market analysis, that same
context, you will see both of those sentences have been removed
which seems to me to negate each of those sentences being
contradictory conclusions and both of the sentences being
edited out, I do not believe the final slide proves any bias or
predetermined conclusions motivated by the edits since if they
were contradictory and they were both removed, that seems to be
pretty even handed and not to bring the scale one way or the
other.
I have other questions that I wanted to address this
morning related to the uranium industry.
One of the legal requirements for transferring excessive
uranium is that the Secretary must make a determination that
the transfers would not have a material adverse impact on the
domestic mining conversion or enrichment industries.
Mr. Kotek, for transfers in 2012 and 2013, the Secretary's
decisions were based on market studies by Energy Resources
International that concluded no adverse impacts were proposed
for sales, am I correct? Is that right?
Mr. Kotek. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. However, according to GAO's testimony, DOE
did not take steps outlined in its contracts or departmental
quality assurance guidelines to assess the technical quality of
these studies. Mr. Trimble, can you explain that?
Mr. Trimble. Yes, I can. Our 2014 report looked at these
studies and had similar findings to what we had in 2011 which
really addressed the conclusiveness. We questioned whether the
reports' sort of definitive conclusions could be reached given
the information we had.
Specifically in the 2014 report, we noted there was limited
information in the studies on their methodology, their
assumptions or their data sources. We noted that the
completeness of the data was in question.
Specifically, they were using general industry information
which was fine but they were reaching very specific information
with sort of general, sort of top level data which we thought
was a bit too much.
They assumed no cumulative effect or impact of transfers
over time. They sort of looked at each transfer in isolation of
the prior transfer.
Ms. Plaskett. Let us give Mr. Kotek a chance. What is your
department's response to the GAO's finding?
Mr. Kotek. Thank you for the question.
We have, of course, a detailed response to the GAO's
findings that can actually be found at the back of the GAO
report.
Ms. Plaskett. Just give me a high level--what is your
response?
Mr. Kotek. The department took issue with several of the
findings from the GAO report. With respect to the ERI report,
one of the things we are trying to do going forward is provide
more transparency and more opportunities for input to our
process.
For instance, fairly recently, we published in the Federal
Register a document providing some of the analysis that has
been prepared for us. We have made the ERI report broadly
available so that people can provide us with input where they
think the report might be off the mark.
Ms. Plaskett. What steps are you taking to mitigate the
negative market impacts that resulted from that when you used
that study for the 2014 transfers?
Mr. Kotek. Thank you for the question.
The 2014 process is all subject to litigation, so I am
limited in what I can say about that. What I can say is that
going forward, we have heard the concern about lack of
transparency and lack of opportunity for input.
We are trying something we have not done before in terms of
the number of opportunities for providing for input. We have
been very pleased with the number of responses and the quality
of responses we have received.
Those will be factored into the new determination that is
issued and it should be fairly soon. Frankly, we will adjust
the process going forward as we see how the situation unfolds.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, for the time.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Kotek, do you understand market forces?
Mr. Kotek. I have only been on the job now X amount of
time.
Dr. Gosar. But do you really understand market forces? I am
going to give you an example.
Do you understand the rare earth issue in the world--that
we have China that manipulates them, they have a monopoly. What
they actually do is they flood the market so it is
inconceivable that actually a mining process can do it and make
some type of a profit. Then they continue to raise it up to the
point that people want to get back in and then they cut it back
down?
Mr. Kotek. Sir, I can actually claim some understanding of
the rare earth issue. In a past life, I participated in some of
the communications work around a proposed rare earth mine in
the northeastern part of the great State of Wyoming in the Bear
Lodge District, so yes.
Thank you for calling attention to that issue. That is an
important one.
Dr. Gosar. Yes, it is manipulation of the marketplace. This
is what I want to go back through. I know my colleague from
Texas actually highlighted that.
With the Fukushima accident and subsequent shuttering of
the Japanese nuclear reactors, the price of uranium was dropped
from $70 per pound down to $55. With the subsequent flooding of
the market, we are down to $28 per pound and currently about
$37 per pound.
In my State of Arizona, there is now only one producer left
operating in the whole State. This has stunted economics. This
is an aspect of great job stability in rural Arizona. From my
standpoint, when you manipulate the marketplace without looking
at the consequences of it, it drives this marketplace very
differently.
Is your agency pro-mining?
Mr. Kotek. Our agency supports a strong domestic mining
industry and the uranium mining industry in particular.
Dr. Gosar. What efforts have you taken to help streamline
the rules and regulations in regard to mining?
Mr. Kotek. That doesn't really fall into the purview of our
agency, sir.
Dr. Gosar. Well, but it has inferences on it because you
want to promote it, right?
Mr. Kotek. If I could take just a minute to describe some
of the other things we are trying to do to promote a healthy
domestic uranium industry broadly which has implications for
the nuclear industry.
Our organization, the Nuclear Energy Office, is principally
an R&D organization. For example, it was our organization that
helped lay the technical groundwork for the license extensions
that allowed nuclear power plants in the U.S. to go from 40
years of operation to 60 years.
Dr. Gosar. That is fine and good. I understand but I have
limited time here. I understand that aspect but it is a
multilayered aspect. There are fuels in, diversified fuel out,
applications so you want not just one aspect of delivery,
right? You do not want spent fuels--new uranium and mining not
only from Texas and Arizona, you want dynamic markets and
diversified markets.
How have you looked at that from that diversified market,
how have you looked at it from the standpoint of the impact of
flooding the marketplace with current mining? You know, people
have to stay in business and have to make a profit. By flooding
the marketplace, you have actually taken away the application.
In my State, we are down to one and they are holding on by a
thread.
Mr. Kotek. Thank you, sir, for that concern. That is
something we have heard broadly from the industry, particularly
as it pertained to the 2014 determination and the 2013
management plan.
That is why we are engaged in a process this year that is
designed to provide more input into the Secretary's
determination process prior to his making that determination.
Dr. Gosar. I keep coming back to this. The highest grade of
uranium is found in my district and found in my State and
southern Utah. Yet, we have had this predilection in regard to
eliminating that type of mining. We have not seen a cohesive
aspect of support for that mining aspect.
Mr. Melbye, have you seen that? You are very well aware of
the Breccia Pipes up in northern Arizona and southern Utah. We
are down to one mine that is barely holding on. We have an
Administration continuing on with this advancement of
potentially extending the Antiquities Act even further on this
application.
Do you see DOE actually engaging you in an active aspect of
having a diversified mining application to help with this?
Mr. Melbye. Thank you, Mr. Gosar.
It is ironic that the Administration does support nuclear
energy as a way to provide energy security to the United States
and have an impact on carbon emissions, yet it seems like our
biggest competitor in a very difficult market condition.
U.S. uranium producers we can compete with any other
producers in the world. We have advantages and environmentally
clean operations. We are in safe and peaceful jurisdictions
with strong regulation.
Utilities want to buy from us but if we cannot get over the
head winds that we are facing from DOE and dumping material
into our markets, we just cannot really fulfill our potential.
Dr. Gosar. Your story is very unique because it is one of
the cleanest mining processes around. Mitigation, I have taken
numerous people up to the northern rim of the Grand Canyon and
people cannot even find it. In fact, it may even help
percolation of water into subsurface areas in a cleaner
fashion. I want to compliment you on that.
I do not envy you the problems because the Administration
obviously does not understand market factors.
Ms. Lummis. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you.
Unless there is an objection, we will move to round two and
unless there is objection, we will return to the regular order.
Do you object to returning to the regular order?
Mrs. Lawrence. No objection.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you. In round two, I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Trimble, your May 2014 report identified legal concerns
with another series of transfers undertaken by DOE. How did the
DOE value the materials they were transferring?
Mr. Trimble. In our report, we looked at a series of
transactions. The key finding regarding value was there was
inconsistent practice at DOE in terms of how it valued tails.
In my opening statement, I made reference to one transaction,
which was a large transaction, ultimately I believe DOE saw
benefit or cited benefits over $700 million in this
transaction.
Internally, they estimated the value to be zero or $300
million. Ultimately, they chose zero for the transaction even
though it was being transferred for the purpose of re-
enrichment, so it had economic value.
The problem we cite in the report is simply that there is
no internal guidance or policy governing how such decisions are
to be made. That leads to inconsistent applications. Prior
transfers going back several years, they had set a price for
similar transactions for a similar purpose and they also
entered negotiations for the disposition of some of its tails
for re-enrichment, again, suggesting there is value and the
price should be set.
Moreover, under the law, both the Atomic Energy Act as well
as the USEC Privatization Act, they are required to set a price
to obtain a fair value for the commodity. By setting the price
to zero, they were not consistent with that law.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Kotek, does the department review the
contracts between Fluor and Trexus that outline how the uranium
transferred by DOE to Fluor will be sold into the market and at
what price?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding is that is an arms-length
arrangement. We do not get involved in the specifics. Again,
that falls into a different program office. If I have that
wrong, I will be corrected here shortly.
Ms. Lummis. OK. If not, how does DOE ensure that these
transfers are receiving fair value and not resulting in an
adverse material impact on the domestic industry?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding is that when we are engaged in
our bartering arrangement with the cleanup contractor, that is
when we have to ensure we get the fair value. We ensure that
takes place at that transaction.
Ms. Lummis. You do ensure that takes place. How do you
ensure that takes place?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding is that is based on an
evaluation of the market conditions and prices at the time.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Melbye, following up on that, you indicated
in your testimony that DOE may not be securing the highest
value for the government's uranium assets. Can you explain that
statement?
Mr. Melbye. In this regard, meaning the domestic industry
and the taxpayers, are completely aligned in getting the
highest value for those government assets I think by limiting
the amount that DOE puts into the market particularly in
periods of market weakness.
The value of the uranium that they do sell is going to be
at a higher price, so that goes to the measured predictable and
limited caps. Also, I think if you involve the domestic
industry, meaning the converter and the United States and the
uranium producers, no one has more of a vested interest to
ensure that the uranium does not have an adverse impact on our
markets.
I think our ability to put it into portfolios of long term
contracts--we do not mean spot or near term, forward carried
trades the commodity traders are adept at doing--we are talking
about the market that uranium producers sell to electric
utilities over five to 8 year agreements at higher prices.
We think that would certainly lift all the boats in this
issue and get higher value for the taxpayer and less adverse
impact on the industry.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Trimble, how can we be sure the taxpayer is
being reasonably compensated for all this?
Mr. Trimble. Sort of following up the recommendations from
our 2014 report, I think there are two things that jump to
mind. One is we have recommended and believe that DOE should
establish guidance and internal policies on how such transfers
will be valued and priced so there is clarity as to how that
process is carried out and there is transparency regarding how
those prices will be set.
Second is we talked a bit about the market impact studies.
The second part of this is that we have recommended DOE follow
its own guidelines to ensure the quality of those studies. When
it contracted out with the vendor for these market impact
studies, it did not take steps to verify the quality of those
studies as called for by its own guidance.
We think, at a minimum, those steps should be taken to flag
early any problems with that analysis.
Ms. Lummis. I thank the gentlemen.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mrs. Lawrence,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Trimble, according to your testimony,
the Department of Energy published the excess uranium inventory
management plan based on your agency's recommendation back in
2008, correct?
Mr. Trimble. That is correct.
Mrs. Lawrence. Was that recommendation based on a GAO
finding that the department needed transparency in planning the
use of excess uranium? Could you explain?
Mr. Trimble. Our work in this area goes back at least as
far as 2006, so we were flagging several of these issues back
then and identified the need for the department to come up with
a plan. The department had been working on something so we
recommended that they complete that and develop a comprehensive
plan.
We also recommended that they clarify the legal authority
as I highlighted in my statement.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Kotek, the management plan established
the guideline that it would cap its uranium at 10 percent of
industry needs, is that correct? In 2008, the plan established
that.
Mr. Kotek. That was not a cap, that was a guideline.
Mrs. Lawrence. It was a guideline, so you did not perceive
it as a cap?
Mr. Kotek. That is my understanding, yes.
Mrs. Lawrence. The department has never operated that there
was an established cap. Did you adhere to the guideline?
Mr. Kotek. The guideline, I believe was adhered to, yes, in
the first several years of the transactions.
Mrs. Lawrence. Currently, what is the amount or the cap
that you are using or is there a cap or a guideline existing
now?
Mr. Kotek. There is not one now. The 2013 Uranium
Management Plan made clear the department was moving away from
the 10 percent but was continuing to, of course, meets its
obligation that the Secretary assess the situation and make a
determination that there was no adverse material impact on the
uranium markets.
Mrs. Lawrence. Do you know if the department consulted with
the domestic industry representations in deciding how this
uranium--you call it a guideline, some call it a cap--was there
any interaction with the domestic market?
Mr. Kotek. Having not been here then, I cannot speak to the
specifics. I know there is regular interface between my
organization and the department broadly and the uranium
industry but certainly, the desire for more industry input is
one of the things that has informed the process we are using
this year with the 2015 Secretarial Determination.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Melbye, as far as you know, did the
Energy Department seek industry input when it moved from what
we are being told was not a cap but a guideline on the transfer
and did it seek industry input when it significantly ramped up
its uranium transfers into the market? Were you consulted?
Mr. Melbye. Thank you, Ranking Member Lawrence.
They did not consult us when they decided to ramp up. It
was very troubling. It wasn't a couple years after they
established the 2008 Inventory Management Plan. It was really
less than 6 months after it was put in place.
I will say that the industry was consulted in the formation
of the so-called industry consensus which involved the Nuclear
Energy Institute, the electricity companies and the domestic
producers. That recommended--it was not a guideline, it was a
cap on how much uranium DOE puts into the market.
That is critically important when financial institutions or
shareholders are looking to invest in our companies, that they
know there is an upside limit to how much the government is
going to impact our markets.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Kotek, you Stated DOE sought comment
from the public about the effects of the continuous uranium
transfers on domestic industries and recommendations about the
factors it should consider in assessing whether to give these
transfers and the adverse material impact.
Was this request for comment part of the department's
response to concerns that the management process is no longer
transparent and what was the decision of DOE when we looked at
the impact of not having a cap? It seems like you just sell now
and there are no guidelines.
Mr. Kotek. Thank you for the question.
In the feedback we have received, first, to respond to your
question about what we are doing in response to the expression
of concern, yes, we have heard from the market participants. We
understand their desire for more opportunity for input to the
process and greater transparency. We are trying to achieve
that.
In response to the first round of comment that we received
from industry, in March of this year, we published a list of
six factors that we would intend to consider as a part of
future determinations: market prices; realized prices for
current operators; production and existing facilities;
employment levels in the industry; changes in capital
improvement plans and development for future facilities; and
then, the long term viability and health of the industry.
We published those for comment. We have received comment.
While I have not read each of the comments we received back, my
understanding from the response we have received back is that
those factors seem to be a pretty good and thorough set of
things for the Secretary to consider in making determinations
going forward.
Mrs. Lawrence. Madam Chair, I just want to say there are
clearly two different experiences when it comes to input and
responses to the industry and what the DOE is saying. I think
that is a flag that this committee needs to really explore.
Thank you.
Ms. Lummis. The Ranking Member yields. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. I am not going to use
the entire 5 minutes.
Mr. Melbye, I just want to make sure I heard right a second
ago. You guys in the industry viewed the 10 percent as a cap,
not a guideline, is that correct?
Mr. Melbye. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Farenthold. You went to your bankers, you decided to
buy equipment, you made leases, you went with business
decisions based on what you believed were good faith
representations by the government?
Mr. Melbye. It is something that the investment community
watches very closely. When they try to model our businesses and
our industry, they need to know how much impact the government
is going to have on our business.
Mr. Farenthold. So it wasn't just you guys that thought it
was a cap, your lenders and investors thought it was a cap too?
Mr. Melbye. Correct, and the utilities and the NEI-led
consensus.
Mr. Farenthold. I just wanted to make sure that was clear
in the record.
I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Lummis. I thank the gentleman.
I do have one more question. Does the Ranking Member have
any more questions?
Mrs. Lawrence. No, Madam Chair.
Ms. Lummis. With your indulgence, I will ask my final
question.
Mr. Kotek, you said earlier that your contract with Fluor
is an arms-length transaction, did I get that right?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding, Madam Chairman, is that it is
the contract between Fluor and I think it is Trexus. That is
the arms-length relationship I was talking about.
Ms. Lummis. I am going to ask once again, do you review the
contract between Fluor and Trexus?
Mr. Kotek. My understanding is no, Madam Chairman--
unfortunately, that is not in my program area in DOE, so I
would like to offer to have folks get back to you with the
specifics on that if I am incorrect.
Ms. Lummis. That would be perfect. I would request that you
respond in writing or have a colleague respond in writing to
that specific question.
Do you have an additional question?
Mrs. Lawrence. Madam Chair, I really would like the agency
to respond to the definition of a cap and a guideline. When we
have the industry and lending industries clearly operating on a
cap--it was removed and I would like clarification. Is there a
guideline, as DOE calls it, or is there a perceived cap in that
industry? I would really like clarification on that through the
Chair.
Ms. Lummis. Mr. Kotek, I believe the question is directed
to you.
Mr. Kotek. I am sorry, I thought that was a request to
respond for the record.
Ms. Lummis. Would you rather have the response in writing
for the record?
Mrs. Lawrence. Yes, I would rather have the response for
the record.
Ms. Lummis. Do you understand the question?
Mr. Kotek. Yes. Thank you very much.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you.
Mr. Kotek. Just to reiterate, having not been here at the
time, my understanding is that at least the folks on our side
view the 10 percent number showing in the 2008 report as,
again, a guideline, not a cap, that we could go higher or lower
each year but certainly, we have heard a different perspective
here. We would be happy to followup with you.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you, Mr. Kotek.
The gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer, has just arrived.
Mr. Palmer, do you have any questions?
Mr. Palmer. Nothing.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you.
There appearing to be no further questions, I want to thank
the Ranking Member and others for being here today.
Mr. Kotek, I want you to thank Secretary Moniz, on my
behalf, for taking time when he was in Wyoming last summer, to
meet with me and others regarding this issue.
Would you please also pass along to him that this committee
has document requests outstanding with the department,
including those regarding Mr. Poneman. I would like to
reiterate my request for those documents.
Mr. Kotek. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I will be sure to
pass that along.
Ms. Lummis. Thank you.
That being said, I think it is important that the committee
conducts oversight of the workings of the Federal Government,
not just to find problems, but to help identify solutions. In
that regard, I want to thank all three of the gentlemen for
being here today.
In 2008, the DOE and domestic industry met and negotiated
ways to ensure that both parties benefited from the transfer
program. It is my hope that the Department of Energy can work
with the domestic industry and those involved in cleanup to
develop a way to ensure that excess uranium can be used to meet
cleanup needs while ensuring a strong uranium industry in
America that lessens our dependence on foreign sources of
energy.
I am sure that Congress would be interested in legislation
that does so. I am hopeful that the Administration and industry
can work toward those ends.
I would like to thank our witnesses for taking time to
appear before us today. Given the requests that we have
submitted, we hope to hear from you soon in writing, Mr. Kotek.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
