- INCORPORATING SOCIAL MEDIA INTO FEDERAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INCORPORATING SOCIAL MEDIA INTO FEDERAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
NATIONAL SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 13, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-158

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-067 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
Jack Thorlin, Counsel
William Marx, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
------

Subcommittee on National Security

RON DeSANTIS, Florida, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee           Ranking Minority Member
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                ROBIN KELLY, Illinois
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma, Vice Chair  BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
WILL HURD, Texas                     TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 13, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. William Evanina, Director of National Counterintelligence and
Security Center, Office of the Director of National
Intelligence
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Ms. Beth Cobert, Acting Director, U.S. Office of Personnel
Management
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13
Mr. Tony Scott, U.S. Chief Information Officer, U.S. Office of
Management and Budget
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    18

INCORPORATING SOCIAL MEDIA INTO FEDERAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS

----------

Friday, May 13, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations, Joint with
Subcommittee on National Security,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Meadows
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Meadows, DeSantis, Walberg,
Jordan, Mica, Hice, Massie, Hurd, Mulvaney, Carter, Grothman,
Chaffetz, Connolly, Lynch, Maloney, Lieu, and Kelly.
Mr. Meadows. The Subcommittee on Government Operations and
the Subcommittee on National Security will come to order. And
without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess
at any time.
We're here today to discuss incorporating social media into
the Federal security clearance and background investigations.
Having a security clearance means, by definition, you have
access to information that would hurt our national security if
it got out, and that is why we perform background
investigations on individuals who want a security clearance.
The goal of our background investigations must be to find out
if an individual is trustworthy. Back in the 1950s, that meant
talking to neighbors and family.
Today, with more than a billion individuals on Facebook,
what a person says and does on social media can often give a
better insight on who they really are. Since 2008, various
Federal agencies have conducted studies on using social media
data in investigations, and they all find the same thing, that
there is a wealth of important information on social media.
This issue now facing the Federal Government is how to use
social media information while respecting the legitimate
privacy concerns that are often brought forth. The good news is
that using social media checks in security clearance
investigation does not have to be a binary decision between big
brother and an ineffective system. There are several reasonable
options available to us to use social media data in a
responsible way.
It is encouraging to see that ODNI announced this morning,
in advance of today's hearing, a new policy that will allow
Federal agencies to review publicly available social media
information as part of the clearance investigation process. We
will continue to work with the agencies to ensure that the
social media data of people with security clearances is used in
a safe and responsible way.
Mr. Meadows. I would like to thank the witnesses for coming
here today and I look forward to their testimony.
And with that, I would recognize the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Government Operations, my good friend, Mr.
Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend, the chairman, for holding
this hearing to examine the usefulness of social media and
other crucial enhancements to the Federal background
investigation process.
On January 22, the administration announced that the
Federal Investigative Services, a former entity of OPM, would
transfer its functions to a new national background
investigations bureau. The Department of Defense assumed
responsibility for designing and operating all information
technology for the new NBIB. I think it makes abundant sense to
task our national security experts with protecting the
sensitive personal information of millions of clearance
holders.
Today, we're discussing another enhancement, the inclusion
of social media in the background investigation process. The
Army has a pilot program which used publicly available data
from social media sites to enhance information available to
investigators during background check processes. Currently, the
Department of Defense is also conducting a pilot program that
looks at all publicly available information online, such as
news articles and commercial Web sites. I'm interested in
learning the major findings and lessons learned from these
pilot programs.
While social media is a promising and valuable source,
potentially, of information, I remain concerned that the
government should not retain social media data of third parties
who happen to engage with the applicant but have not consented
to waiving their privacy rights. We must not forget to discuss
other ways to enhance security clearance processes.
The Performance Accountability Council is establishing a
law enforcement liaison office that will communicate with local
governments to expedite the requests for local criminal
records. That's a major enhancement. We must remember that on
September 16, 2013, Aaron Alexis, a Federal subcontractor with
a secret-level clearance, entered the Washington Navy Yard and
tragically killed 12 people and injured 4 others. He had a
security clearance. The background investigation failed to
identify that Mr. Alexis had a history of gun violence. The
local police record of Mr. Alexis' 2004 firearms arrest had not
been provided to Federal investigators. Improvements in
communication between local law enforcement and Federal
background investigators could prevent and could perhaps have
prevented a tragedy like that that occurred in the Washington
Navy Yard.
I welcome each of the witnesses back from the full
committee's February hearing and look forward to hearing about
their progress on the administration's plan to reform the
security clearance and background investigation process, while
preserving privacy rights.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the chairman of the Subcommittee
on National Security, Mr. DeSantis, for his opening statement.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Chairman Meadows. I just wanted to
say, I think this is an important issue. And it looks like that
we just got a directive late last night where this is now going
to be an implemented policy. So I'm interested in hearing how
that's going to be implemented, but I'm sure that's partly as a
result of your oversight. So thank you for doing that and I
look forward to hearing the witness testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. Well, Chairman DeSantis, thank you for your
leadership on so many of these issues and I look forward to
continuing to work with you.
I now recognize the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
National Security, the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would also like
to thank Chairman DeSantis and my friend, Mr. Connolly, for
holding this hearing. It's important for a number of reasons,
which you both have touched on already.
When an individual applies to receive an initial or renewed
security clearance, the Federal Government conducts a
background investigation to determine whether he or she may be
eligible to access classified national security information.
Every security clearance candidate is required to complete a
Standard Form 86. I have one right here; rather lengthy. It
goes into a number of very personal aspects of each person's
life. This 127-page form already requests a variety of personal
applicant information, such as criminal history, any history of
alcohol use or illegal drug use, any mental health counseling.
It does not currently request social media information.
But as Chairman DeSantis noted, last night about 11
o'clock, we got copies of this policy. And I want to say thank
you. You know, I--we have not always had information
forthcoming in a timely manner. Even 11 o'clock at night,
that's timely around here, you know, a few hours before the
hearing. But I appreciate you sending it.
I thought it might be a mistake, actually, that you sent
the policy over. I did have a chance to read it a couple of
times last night and it raises some questions, but I think it's
a very good first effort. And we appreciate it.
In December of 2015, Congress passed and President Obama
signed a bipartisan funding legislation that included a robust
directive to enhance the security clearance process. The recent
Omnibus Appropriations Act also requires the director of DNI to
direct the Federal agencies to use social media and other
publicly available government and commercial data when
conducting periodic reviews of their security clearance or
clearance holders. The law also provides guidance on the types
of information that could be obtained from social media and
other sources and it may prove relevant to a determination of
whether an individual should be granted clearance at all.
Now, this includes information suggesting a change in
ideology or ill intent or vulnerability to blackmail in
allegiance to another country. The main impetus, as Mr.
Connolly noted, was the terrible situation at the Washington
Navy Yard. And also I would add, there has been exploitation of
Twitter, Facebook, WhatsApp, and Telegram by the Islamic State.
And also at one point we had everyone who filled out a Standard
Form 86 hacked by the Chinese as well. So they have a list of
everybody who filled out, you know, an 86 requesting security
clearance, which is very troubling.
There's a lot that needs to be talked about here. We're
going to gather all this information on individuals in one
place. In light of what has happened with the Chinese hack, I'm
concerned about putting medical information, all of this about
people who apply in one place where it might be accessed by
hostile or nefarious actors. So we're going to talk a little
bit about that this morning.
As I said, I appreciate the Security Executive Agent
Directive Number 5 and, you know, I think it's a very good
first effort and I appreciate your transparency with us. Thank
you.
I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman. And I will hold the
record open for 5 legislative days for any member who would
like to submit a written statement.
We'll now recognize our panel of witnesses. I'm pleased to
welcome Mr. William Evanina, Director of the National
Counterintelligence and Security Center in the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence; Ms. Beth Cobert, Acting
Director of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. And I
might add, in her new role working incredibly well in a
bipartisan and very transparent way that is recognized by this
committee. So thank you so much. Mr. Tony Scott, the U.S. Chief
Information Officer at the U.S. Office of Management and
Budget.
Welcome to you all. And pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses will be sworn in before they testify. So if you would
please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you're
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative. In order to allow time for discussion, please
limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes. You're very familiar
with the process. But your entire written statement will be
made part of the record.
And so, Mr. Evanina, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM EVANINA

Mr. Evanina. Good morning. Good morning, everyone. Chairman
Meadows, Chairman DeSantis, Ranking Member Connolly, Ranking
Member Lynch, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
having me here as part of this team to participate in today's
hearing.
As the National Counterintelligence executive and the
director of the National Counterintelligence Security Center,
I'm responsible for leading and supporting the
counterintelligence and security activities of the United
States Government, which includes the entire U.S. Government
and the private sector throughout the intelligence community.
In addition, I'm responsible for providing outreach to U.S.
private sector entities who are at risk of becoming a target of
intelligence collection, penetration, or attack by foreign and
other adversaries.
I also support the Director of National Intelligence's
responsibilities as a security executive agent, the role under
which the social media directive was developed. And I work
close in partnership with the Office of Management and Budget
and the Office of Personnel Management, and my colleagues to my
left. Department of Defense also partners in this effort as
well as part of the PAC. Agencies across the executive branch
are also part of today's process and the successes we have
achieved with this policy.
When I last appeared before this committee on February 25,
we discussed the formation of the National Background
Investigations Bureau and security clearance reforms. Today,
I've been asked to discuss the administration's policy on the
use of social media as part of the personnel security
background investigation and adjudication process.
Mr. Chairman, we have been steadfastly at work on a
directive that addresses the collection and use of publicly
available social media information during the conduct of
personal security, background investigations, and
adjudications. I want to acknowledge the important
contributions to this effort made by our entire executive
branch colleagues, particularly at the Office of Management and
Budget and OPM. And I'm pleased, as you referenced, to announce
that the Director of National Intelligence has recently
approved this directive which is being publicly released.
The data gathered via social media will enhance our ability
to determine initial and continued eligibility for access to
classified national security information and eligibility for
sensitive positions.
I realize that the Federal Government's authority to
collect and review publicly available social media information
in the course of a personnel security background investigation
and adjudication raises some important legitimate civil
liberties and privacy concerns. Nevertheless, let me be clear.
I am strongly of the view that being able to collect and review
publicly available social media and other information available
to the public is an important and valuable capability to ensure
that those individuals with access to our secrets continue to
protect them and that the capability can be aligned with
appropriate civil liberties and privacy protections.
I would note to the committee that by the term ``publicly
available social media information,'' we mean social media
information that has been published or broadcast for public
consumption, is available on request to the public, is
accessible online to the public, is available to the public by
subscription or purchase, or is otherwise lawfully accessible
to the public.
I believe the new directive on social media strikes this
important balance. Under this new directive, only publicly
available social media information pertaining to the individual
under investigation will be intentionally collected. Absent a
national security concern or criminal reporting requirement,
information pertaining to the individuals, other than the
individual being investigated, will not be investigated or
pursued.
In addition, the U.S. Government may not request or require
individuals subject to the background investigation to provide
passwords or login into private accounts or to take any action
that would disclose nonpublicly available social media
information. The complexity of these issues has led to a
lengthy and thorough review by the departments and agencies
that would be affected by this policy, as well as coordination
with different members of civil liberties and privacy offices,
privacy act offices, and office of general counsel.
Mr. Chairman, the new guidelines approved by the Director
of National Intelligence for the collection and use of publicly
available social media information and security clearance
investigations ensure this valuable avenue investigation can be
pursued consistent with subjects' civil liberties and privacy
rights.
The use of social media has become an integral and very
public part of the fabric of most American's daily lives. It is
critical that we use this important source of information to
help protect our Nation's security.
Mr. Chairman, I welcome any questions that you and your
colleagues have regarding this directive.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Evanina follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Cobert, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BETH COBERT

Ms. Cobert. Chairman Meadows, Chairman DeSantis, Ranking
Members Connolly and Lynch, and members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today on
the use of social media in the Federal background investigation
process.
OPM plays an important role in conducting background
investigations for the vast majority of the Federal Government.
Currently, OPM's Federal Investigative Services, FIS, annually
conducts approximately 1 million investigations for over 100
Federal agencies, approximately 95 percent of the total
background investigations governmentwide. These background
investigations include more than 600,000 national security
investigations and 400,000 investigations related to
suitability, fitness, or credentialing each year.
As we discussed in February, we are in the process of
transitioning to the new National Background Investigations
Bureau, NBIB, which will absorb FIS and its mission to be the
governmentwide service provider for background investigations.
The Department of Defense, with its unique national security
perspective, will design, build, secure, and operate the NBIB's
investigative IT systems in coordination with the NBIB.
To provide some context for our discussion today, I would
like to take a few minutes to review how the current security
clearance process operates in most cases.
First, an executive branch agency will make a requirements
determination as to the sensitivity and risk level of the
position. If an agency determines that a position requires a
clearance, the employee completes an SF-86 and submits
fingerprints, both of which are sent to OPM, along with an
investigation request. OPM, through FIS now and NBIB in the
future, conducts the investigation by doing all of the checks
required by the Federal investigative standards. The results of
the investigation are then sent to the requesting agency for
adjudication.
The clearance decision is made from the information in the
investigative report in conformance with the adjudicative
guidelines that are the purview of the Office of the Director
of National Intelligence, ODNI.
The requesting agency sends their decision back to OPM, who
maintains the records for reciprocity purposes. The individual
will also be reinvestigated on a periodic basis.
As the committee is aware, agencies make security clearance
decisions using a whole-person approach, meaning that
available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered by
adjudicators in reaching a determination.
One component of that approach in the 21st century is the
topic of today's hearing, social media. ODNI, in its role as
the security executive agent, has developed a social media
policy that has undergone extensive coordination with relevant
departments and agency officials. OPM looks forward to
implementing the policy as part of its ongoing efforts to
strengthen its investigative processes.
In April, OPM issued a request for information seeking to
better understand the market and the types of products vendors
can provide to meet social media requirements. The RFI is in
preparation for a pilot that OPM is planning to conduct this
year that will incorporate automated searches of publicly
available social media into the background investigation
process. This planned pilot will be conducted by OPM in
coordination with the ODNI.
The pilot will obtain the results of searches of publicly
available electronic information, including public posts on
social media from a commercial vendor for a population of
security clearance investigations using pertinent investigative
and adjudicative criteria. This pilot is distinct from other
pilots in that it will assess the practical aspects of
incorporating social media searches into the operational end-
to-end process; the mechanics of adding this type of report to
a background investigation and the affects on quality, costs,
and timeliness.
In addition, the pilot will assess the uniqueness of the
information provided through social media checks as compared to
information provided through traditional investigative sources.
Supporting the implementation of the NBIB and aiding its
success in all areas will continue to be a core focus for OPM,
as well as the Performance Accountability Council, the PAC. Our
goal is to have the NBIB's initial operating capability
officially established with a new organizational design and
leader in place by October 2016. The implementation work will
remain to be done after that date.
On behalf of OPM, I am proud to be part of this most recent
effort by the administration, and I look forward to working
with my colleagues on this panel and with this committee in a
bipartisan manner on this important issue. I'm happy to answer
any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Cobert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Scott, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TONY SCOTT

Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Meadows, Chairman DeSantis, Ranking Member
Connolly, Ranking Member Lynch, and members of the
subcommittees, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
you today.
The administration recognizes the importance of gathering
accurate up-to-date and relevant information in its background
investigations to determine Federal employment and security
clearance eligibility. And as a government, we must continue to
improve and modernize the methods by which we obtain relevant
information for these background investigations.
Since 2009, various government agencies have conducted
pilots and studies of the feasibility, effectiveness, and
efficiency of collecting publicly available electronic
information as a part of the background investigations process.
Those pilots have informed the development of a new social
media policy that has been issued by the director of National
Intelligence in his role as the security executive agent. And I
will defer to ODNI on the further details of this policy.
But as you know, OMB chairs the interagency Security and
Suitability Performance Accountability Council, or PAC, to
ensure interagency coordination. And the new policy will
reflect, I believe, an appropriate balance of a number of
considerations, such as protecting national security; ensuring
the privacy of and fairness to individuals seeking security
clearances and associates of that individual; the veracity of
the information collected from social media; and the resources
required to process the collection, adjudication, and retention
of the relevant data collected.
As the policy is implemented, the administration will
continue to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the
policy. To do so, the government must keep pace with
advancements in technology to anticipate, detect, and counter
external and internal threats to the Federal Government's
personnel, property, and information. This need must also be
considered with the full legal and national security
implications in mind. I'm confident that this new policy will
strike the correct balance between all of these considerations.
I thank the committee for holding this hearing and for your
commitment to improving this process. We look forward to
working with Congress, and I'm pleased to answer any questions
you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeSantis. [Presiding.] I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
And this is for each of you. Are your agencies utilizing
commercially available software to vet security clearance
applicants, monitor security clearance holders, and detect any
cybertheft of these individuals' personal information?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, in the process of the
investigations, we do work with commercial vendors of publicly
available vetted information. That is sort of our core element.
We use that and other methods to gather the information in the
investigative process. I'm not sure if I've completely answered
your question.
Mr. DeSantis. Well, there's certain off-the-shelf
technology that the Federal Government will use in other
instances, and I just wanted to ask if there is any type of
prohibition on doing that or if you guys just aren't doing that
or you're actually trying to using all the tools that are
potentially at your disposal?
Ms. Cobert. We use a variety of tools to gather information
from public sources, from both governmental and
nongovernmental, so there's a variety of tools we use to do
that. Those are used to, you know, gather some of the
information, whether there's a national, you know, law
enforcement database from which we get information. We do, for
example, use electronic methods to gather appropriate--
appropriately gather information about financial history. So we
do use some of those tools. I'd be happy to get back to you
with more of the specifics, if that would be helpful.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I would concur with my colleague. I think
we encourage the most robust and effective, efficient tools
that are processed for ensuring a speedy, effective background
investigation. That's going to be different--this process will
be different, depending which agency is doing the background
investigation, the tools that they are capable of, the expense,
and the number of--the volume of people that are applying for a
clearance.
Obviously, we would encourage the ODNI, the most effective
and efficient off-the-shelf capabilities, as long as it's
within the rules, regulations, and policies set forth.
Mr. DeSantis. Let me ask you this: In the years leading up
to Edward Snowden's theft of classified info, he made several
posts to online forums using a consistent user name complaining
about government surveillance. And these posts may have alerted
authorities that he could be an insider threat. Have any of the
social media pilot programs evaluated to date been capable of
detecting that sort of post where the subject is posting under
an online identity that is not explicitly the individual's
name?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I'm not specific to the exact nature of
the depth and granularity of those particular pilots. But I can
tell you, those particular posts from Mr. Snowden that he did
would not have been caught in the social media because it's not
public facing and there was private chats with other
individuals beyond the password protection.
Mr. DeSantis. So if they're using semi-anonymous names, to
the extent that there are public forums, would requiring the
disclosure of any alternative online identities on the FS-86
form be something that would be helpful?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, we're currently not planning on asking
anyone to provide any other alternative passwords or email
accounts or individual reference to their online persona.
Mr. DeSantis. So, basically, if--so we'll look at social
media, if they're posting. If John Smith applies for security
clearance and you'll look for John Smith, but if he goes by,
you know, Jack Scott, then you're just not going to require
that. So they can post whatever there and that's not going to
be something that would be considered?
Mr. Evanina. Not currently, unless they're willing to
consent to provide that information to us.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. What reason could allow extensive
questioning of friends--so I mean, the FS-86 is a very
intensive investigation. I mean, you'll call up people's
college roommates. You'll call up people's neighbors when
they've lived--even if they've lived in a place for a short
period of time. So there's a lot of extensive investigation. So
why would you want to do that? And I'm not saying you shouldn't
do that, but why would you want to do that but then not get the
whole, I guess, picture of their online identities?
Mr. Evanina. Well, I think if the additional information is
obtained that an individual has a pseudonym or has--an
individual has an offline persona that's different than his
name, that can be pursued investigatively, but that's not
something we are going to ask, or there's really not a way for
us to identify Bob Smith who is really Dave Jones online
without someone telling us that.
Mr. DeSantis. But what would be the reason to just--since
there's so much information required in the FS-86, what would
be the negative of just asking, hey, do you post online under
any type of pseudonym?
Mr. Evanina. I think when you get past the public-facing
interface of social media, you get to the, I think, the border
of privacy and civil liberties in terms of what are your
practices beyond what you would do in the course of your daily
lives. And by this, the analogy would be, we don't look at
their emails and we don't look at their telephone conversations
as part of the background investigation as well.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. My time is up.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome.
Help me understand how this works. Because it's one thing
for a private individual to be sort of trolling in Facebook;
it's another for the government to be doing it. And so how does
this work? I mean, I--somebody in government gets on the
Internet and looks up your Facebook history? You're subject--
you're Harry Houdini. You've applied for a security clearance
and we're looking at, you know, through social media, anything
that you used, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Hulu, whatever it
might be. So we just go online and look at whatever we can find
under his, Harry Houdini or Shirley Jones' name. Is that right?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I'll start--I think----
Mr. Connolly. If you could pull the mic closer. Thank you.
Mr. Evanina. I'm sorry, sir.
Congressman, I think when we set forth this policy, we
looked at it and tried to provide the most flexibility for
investigative agencies and service providers to do what they
feel is most practicable and most reasonable for their
individual agency. So, for instance, some of the bigger
agencies may provide a data service provider, they aggregate
this data for multiple people to go out and do the search. We
are clearly acknowledging that the effort will be exhaustive
initially to identify people's social media footprint that's
out there.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. What are the red lights, though, that
flag for us, got to follow up on this? So, you know, my
Facebook posting, you know, we're talking about the block party
for July in my cul-de-sac. You know, talking about maybe a
family reunion and interspersed with all of that, oh, by the
way, the President needs to die. How do we flag the serious
from the trivial and how do we make sure that if it's all
trivial, that's the end of it. It's deleted, it's not retained,
because there may be other names in that Facebook. There may be
pictures of other people who are not the subject of an
investigation, unless that association is suspect.
How do we make sure that we don't just have some enormous
government depository of personal information of American
citizens that's really not at all relevant, or parts of it may
be? How do we do that?
Mr. Evanina. That's a great question, Congressman. I think,
putting this in context, the social media utilization is just
one tool of many that we currently already use in background
investigations. And the collection and retention of that data
will be parallel to any other data we collect on an individual.
And to your example of Facebook, and the examples you gave, the
only relevant information that were there for investigative
adjudicative processes would be the issue to the President. All
the other stuff would not be retained, although we would
collect and retain the Presidential, if----
Mr. Connolly. Let me interrupt, though.
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. God forbid, but should there be such a
reference, well, the other stuff is not being retained.
Actually, I might now want to take a fresh look at your
associations because maybe they're involved or--I mean,
wouldn't we want to check that out?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, so I was going to say----
Mr. Connolly. If for no other reason than to talk to the
neighbors to say, does Harry Houdini talk this way often? Have
you ever heard him--you know, right?
Mr. Evanina. Right. So the social media application here,
like many other tools that are at the disposal of
investigators, would provide an investigative lead. So that
particular post on your Web site would lead to an investigative
lead to be furthered up with your colleagues, your family, your
friends, your neighbors as just another lead; no different than
we would find in an anomalous financial disclosure.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Cobert and Mr. Scott, in the time I have
left, I'd be derelict on behalf of my constituents if I didn't
return to the OPM security breach, and if you can take some
time to bring us up to date. Weaknesses identified, have they
been addressed so that there can't be a recurrence? And how are
we coming in trying to make people whole again in terms of the
compromise of their personal information?
Ms. Cobert. Let me start in the response to that one. In
terms of improving the security of our systems, we have made
significant strides in our ongoing effort and we will continue
to do so. Working closely with DHS, with DOD as part of the
NBIB standup, we actually have staff from DOD now on site
working with us as well as ongoing working sessions. We've
installed the latest versions of EINSTEIN. We've got a whole
series of improvements that we've made to our firewalls. We now
have the ability to much----
Mr. Connolly. Excuse me, EINSTEIN 3 is in place now?
Ms. Cobert. We are one of the first agencies to put that in
place.
Mr. Connolly. Because it wasn't in place at the time of the
breach, right?
Ms. Cobert. No.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Excuse me.
Ms. Cobert. So we continue to work to try and put in place
a whole series of tools and we've seen real improvements in
that, as well as strengthening. We have a new chief information
security officer. I could go on and on, but we still will
continue to work at that issue.
In terms of the individuals whose information was taken, we
have the identity theft, identity monitoring contracts in
place. We continue to monitor those in terms of the quality of
their customer service. We are also actively working to put in
place the provisions to extend the identity theft insurance to
$5 million, as well as being in the process of figuring out how
to extend those to the 10 years that was also approved by
Congress. So we continue to work at these quite closely,
including with Tony and the team from OMB.
Mr. Scott. And I would just add, I'm seeing almost as much
of Beth as I did when she was at OMB as we work on this
project. And Beth and I and the DOD CIO meet regularly to
review the progress that the teams are making in both the
transition, but also ensuring the security and integrity of the
existing system. So I'm pleased with the progress.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DeSantis. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Evanina, let me begin with you. As we all know, in
2008, there was a commissioned study in regard to showing the
benefits of examining certain aspects of social media. Why has
it taken 8 years to implement this thing, to get it started?
Mr. Evanina. Congressman, I can't really answer the 8-year
issue, but I can tell you that to get to where we are took a
lot of extensive effort and interagency coordination to be able
to strike the right balance between what we need to obtain or
should be obtained reasonably from social media in the ever-
growing Internet age and balance that with the civil liberties
and privacy of our, not only clearance holders, but U.S.
citizens. So that process not only was exhaustive, but it was
the right thing to do.
Also, I think with the pilots that have started and
continue to move on, we haven't really identified the correct
value or weighted measure for what the efforts of social media
collection will be or has been. So we're still efforting the
pilot process to identify, is the effort resource allocation
worthy of collecting other social media and using it as part of
the background investigation process, number one. And number
two, if it is, where do we allocate that within the
investigative process, the beginning, the middle, the end?
Because it will be resource intensive.
Mr. Hice. Well, it seems like 8 years is an awfully long
time to try to find a balance between privacy and, you know,
that which is public information. I mean, this is not highly
private information that people are publicizing out on social
media like this, and I understand that we want to be very
careful with that. We all do. But----
Well, let me ask you this: It seems that the new policy
that we saw this morning, that within there--and correct me if
I'm wrong, but it seems like finding information on an
individual's background appears to be largely at the discretion
of individual agencies. Can you tell me why ODNI decided to
leave that decision to individual agencies rather than opening
this up for all departments of our Federal Government?
Mr. Evanina. That's a great question, Congressman, but I
will say that there's only 22 agencies who have the authority
to conduct background investigations. So--and they do that on
behest of all the other Federal organizations or agencies'
departments who require that. So those individuals, the ones
who are covered under this policy, the policy was purposely
made flexible because I will proffer that from 2008 till 2
years ago, the social media definition has changed dramatically
and will continue to change.
So in order to provide the agencies who conducted the
investigations the maximum flexibility to go about utilizing
social media as part of this process was paramount in this
effort. Because I'm pretty sure a year from now, the social
media definition may change, and we wanted to make sure that
each agency had the flexibility, from a resource perspective,
to identify the best, most efficient way to implement this
policy.
Mr. Hice. Do you believe those other 22 agencies will begin
utilizing this?
Mr. Evanina. I do.
Mr. Hice. Okay.
Ms. Cobert, could you explain how OPM plans to implement
this policy?
Ms. Cobert. Thank you, Congressman. As I mentioned in my
testimony, we are working through this pilot process to figure
out the best way to utilize social media as a standard,
consistent part of the process. As Mr. Evanina described, we
are committed to its value. It's a question of how.
We need a way to make sure that when we gather information
on social media, it's accurate. It's is not always accurate.
What you find is not always the reality. We need to find a way
to make sure, as we do this, that we have the resources to
follow up on whatever information is revealed. How do we get
those resources to follow up on those things?
And so that is the goal of this pilot, is to embed it into
the operational process. Are there places where, by using
social media or other tools, we can replace some steps that
exist today, take those resources and deploy them to something
else? Are there other cases where the value of the information
will merit adding additional resources? So that is the issue
we're working through.
And the pilot process that we are starting, we'll be
starting that pilot before the end of this fiscal year. We also
will continue, through the PAC and other forums, working with
DOD and other agencies as they start to implement this so we
all can learn from each other. We've got to figure out how to
do this right and to do it at scale, and we want to move
expeditiously but cautiously as we do that.
Mr. Hice. Thank you. Could you provide the committee with a
timeframe for implementation, besides just by the end of the
year, a more specific timeframe?
Ms. Cobert. We'll get back to you. The first piece is the
pilot and then we will take that learning. But we're happy to
provide you some more information on what we're doing next.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. DeSantis. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Lynch from Massachusetts for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
everybody for holding this hearing and thank the witnesses for
their help.
You know, every once in a while, my happy talk alarm goes
off and sometimes I think I'm hearing happy talk and I think I
just heard some.
Look, I appreciate the idea that, you know, we got this 8-
year continuum of improvement and we're trying to improve our
systems and, you know, there's this cautious progress of
protecting and balancing, you know, private information,
versus, you know, doing these background checks. But the
reality on this committee is 10 months ago, Ms. Cobert, your
predecessor, Ms. Archuleta, sat there and told me that, 10
months ago, we were not even encrypting the Social Security
numbers of the 4 million people who were hacked at OPM. That's
the reality. Ten months ago we weren't even encrypting Social
Security numbers. And she painfully had to admit that, and her
legal counsel was with her and they confirmed that fact.
So I'm very concerned about what is happening. And I am
very encouraged that DOD is going to take over cybersecurity in
your shop and you're going to help them with that. How is that
going? And what steps have you taken--be specific--that should
give me some level of reassurance that we don't have another
problem like that?
Ms. Cobert. Thank you, Congressman. Let me start with how
we're working with DOD in the standup of the NBIB, and then I
can come back to some things we have underway and that we will
be doing in that context.
We are working very closely with DOD, as Mr. Scott
described, in a process to do two things.
Mr. Lynch. Let me just cut you off because I don't want to
go into this long diatribe. But have you encrypted the Social
Security numbers for all of the employees right now at OPM?
Ms. Cobert. There are still elements of the OPM systems
that are difficult to encrypt. We have a multilayer defense.
Mr. Lynch. And you've got all of these different systems
and I understand that. I'be been at this a while, okay, and we
have tried to get ahold of this. And I've been here for years
working on this problem and it's been very difficult. And
there's no shame in admitting how difficult that is. What I
don't want is happy talk that it's all going well. That's the
problem. Because then we'll have another hearing and, you know,
there will be a lot of gnashing of teeth and criticisms, you
know, and there will be somebody else in your spot.
So what I'm trying to get at is, what are we actually--what
are we getting done and where are the obstacles? If there are
obstacles here in terms of what you're trying to do--and I
believe you're all trying to do the right thing. Mr. Scott as
well. You can get in on this because you're part of this.
You know, what are we actually doing to try to protect the
information that we do gather?
Mr. Scott. Well, I would say, as Beth was saying, there's
been all kinds of work done in this area, penetration testing,
new tools deployed, multiple examinations, and ongoing help
from DOD, DHS, and so on. So I think OPM actually is leading
Federal agencies right now in terms of, you know, their efforts
and the amount of progress that they've made. They've applied
tools to the limits that they can within the limits of current
technology. But as Beth said, there's some things that just
can't be encrypted because the technology doesn't allow it.
Mr. Lynch. DOD's funding in this area is much better than
OPM's and some of the other departments. And so are we using
their personnel now? Have they come over and taken over this?
Mr. Scott. Absolutely. They've been in there side by side
with the team at OPM helping not only review, but look at
architecture and also build out the plans for the future NBIB
technology. So I'm pleased with where it's going. I don't think
there's anybody who would say our job is done or that we're
not, you know, interested in pursuing what else we can do.
Mr. Lynch. The cost estimate, you know, we've had some
pilot programs that tell us it's somewhere between, you know,
$100 and $500 per person for a private vendor to do these
screenings, this gathering of social media information. Is that
pretty close to what the--in practice what we're finding?
Mr. Scott. Yeah, I would say some of the pilots that have
run, the estimates have been in that range. Clearly, one of the
things that will have to happen, and I think the pilots will
inform this, is some greater level of automation. As you can
probably appreciate, when you do a search, you get a ton of
data that has to be sifted through and adjudicated.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Scott. And I happen to be a person who has a name
that's shared with, you know, a professional baseball player, a
professional musician, a movie director, and a bunch of other
things, and just a simple search would turn up a bunch of crazy
stuff that wouldn't be relevant.
Mr. Lynch. Yeah.
Mr. Scott. So some degree of automation, ultimately, is
going to have to help bring the cost down of that.
Mr. Lynch. All right. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence, and I yield
back.
Mr. Meadows. [Presiding.] I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr.
Massie, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a great
hearing. Thank you for conducting it.
I have a friend who suggests that the government should
outsource this background research to the consultants that do
opposition research on us, on the politicians, because they
seem to find anything all the way back to junior high. But on a
serious note, though, you know, I see Edward Snowden as an
example here in our notes as somebody who maybe you would have
known something about if you had done social media research.
That may or may not be true.
But one thing that does stand out is that political
contributions are available online and they--and I suppose even
before social media and the online availability of this, they
were available. So you already have an analog or probably a way
of considering whether you should consider or not consider
political contributions when doing background research.
But now that you have social media available to you,
there's another layer of transparency--or layer of opaqueness
that has been removed. You can see where somebody supports a
political candidate or not. By the way, Edward Snowden and I
have similar contribution histories so--and my colleague here
suggested that you should be suspect of anybody that
contributes to me as well.
But my question is this: Do you, Mr. Evanina, do you take
into account political support when you're doing background
research in social media?
Mr. Evanina. We do not. I mean, I think it's important for
the committee to understand that the investigators who conduct
the background investigations are very well trained and they
follow the Federal investigative standards. And there are
plenty of policies that they put forth in their rigorous
background investigation and they conduct investigations on
information obtained that's relevant to whether or not you're
capable of obtaining and holding a security clearance. So a
political contribution would not be one of those.
Mr. Massie. So if they encountered somebody who in their
social media supported a candidate who was strong on the Fourth
Amendment and believed very strongly in the right to privacy--
and there are different interpretations of the Fourth
Amendment. I'm not saying everybody doesn't believe strongly in
the Fourth Amendment--that wouldn't be a consideration?
Mr. Evanina. Absolutely not. Whether you believe in the
Fourth Amendment would not have any predication on whether you
could hold or maintain a security clearance.
Mr. Massie. Thank you very much.
And I will yield back my time.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Many of us have become so accustomed to using technology in
our day-to-day lives that it seems second nature to examine the
social media accounts of individuals applying for security
clearance. However, it's important to note that when
incorporating social media into the Federal background check
process, a number of steps must be taken that go far beyond
those we view as a friend's Facebook profile.
Ms. Cobert, OPM conducts approximately 95 percent of
background checks governmentwide. That's in our notes. The
initial data collection portion of these investigations is
completed by Federal contractors, in part, because you must
comply with the various laws governing what information can be
collected, used, and stored by the Federal Government. Is that
accurate?
Ms. Cobert. Congresswoman, we work with Federal contractors
in the investigative process to enhance our capacity to conduct
background investigations. They have to follow the same Federal
investigative standards that Mr. Evanina referenced. There, the
individuals from those contractors who work on investigations
also have to undergo thorough training against those standards,
and we work to ensure that that is the appropriate training.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. The incorporation of social media data is
not as simple as it may sound to many people, so I'd like to
delve a little deeper into how we get from a vendor running
query for publicly available information to the point at which
we have valuable verified information for use in the
adjudication process. Again, to begin with, contractors must
conduct social media checks on clearance applicants based on
guidance from you about the kind of information relevant to
clearance investigations. Correct?
Ms. Cobert. We are going to start with the social media
thing, the social media efforts with the pilot I mentioned.
That will help us understand what kind of guidance we should be
putting in place when individuals are conducting social media
searches to verify that information, to ensure we're focused on
the pieces that are relevant to a security clearance, not the
other issues that are not part of the process. That's why we're
going to work this through in a pilot so we can create
standards and processes that will get us relevant information,
reliable information, and protect privacy.
Ms. Kelly. And then your current contractors will need
proper training and proper guidance to do all of that.
Ms. Cobert. They will need training. Yes, they will.
Ms. Kelly. Once the data has been collected, a human being
is necessary to make a judgment and verify that it does, in
fact, belong to the individual in question.
Ms. Cobert. We are working to find the processes that will
enable us to, in fact, match individuals. As Mr. Scott
described, there are multiple Tony Scotts. So we are working
through the pilots, and I think this will be an ongoing
process, to see where are the places where we need human
intervention; where are the places where technology can help
with that resolution?
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Mr. Evanina, can you speak to some of the
challenges associated with verifying identities in social media
data?
Mr. Evanina. Yes, Congresswoman. I think the challenges
cannot be understated in where we're headed in terms of, number
one, identity resolution. As my colleagues have mentioned, the
ability to identify Bob from--or Mr. Scott from Mr. Scott and
all that goes with it, the resources that it will take to make
sure that we are firmly in agreement that Mr. Scott is Mr.
Scott. Then, what we found out on Mr. Scott, is it
investigatively and adjudicatively relevant? Does it make sense
to put forward? And if it is, then it gets put in the same box
all other investigative data would be to make sure that it
follows the policies, procedures, and the investigative
standards and guidelines.
I want to reiterate that social media identification of
information is in the same box of all other tools and
techniques investigators have.
Ms. Kelly. And even after we have verified an individual's
account, additional manual processing is needed in order to
analyze, interpret, and contextualize information, particularly
photographs. Is there any way to fully automate the analysis of
photographs?
Mr. Evanina. Well, I want to refer back to my colleague,
Ms. Cobert, in terms of the ability to maximize any type of
automation we can to facilitate not only the effectiveness of
this tool, but at the end of the game. But I want to inform the
committee that at the end of the day, no matter what we
identify, the adjudicator is a fundamentally government role.
So the adjudicator will make the ultimate decision if the
individual is Mr. Scott, the information pertaining to him is
investigatively relevant, and it should be a value-add to
whether or not he gets a clearance or not.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman for the opportunity.
Thank you all for coming. I've just got a couple sort of random
questions.
Mr. Evanina, you said something during your opening
statement I want to go back to, which is you--and a couple of
you used the same terminology and maybe I just don't understand
the issue. And full disclosure. Mr. Massie and I are sort of in
the libertarian-leaning wing of the party, so we take civil
liberties very seriously. And you mentioned that there were
civil liberties concerns, I think, in doing this research in
the first place. I don't get that.
What civil liberty of mine could be at risk from you doing
research on me?
Mr. Evanina. Well, I--correct. I don't think in terms of
the previous pilots and this particular policy----
Mr. Mulvaney. Right.
Mr. Evanina. --in order to get to where we were, we had to
negotiate strongly to ensure that each individual who applies
for a security clearance, we are going to protect their privacy
and civil liberties, at the same time collect the information
that we deem necessary to ensure they can get a clearance.
Mr. Mulvaney. And, again, I'm not trying to split hairs
with you, but if I'm coming to you--and we've had this--a very
similar discussion, Mr. Chairman, when it comes to folks who
want to come into the country on various visas. The lady who
shot the people in San Bernardino came on a fiance visa, and we
didn't do any social media on her. And one of the arguments we
got from customs enforcement was that it would violate her
civil liberties to go and do that. Okay?
If I come to you and I'm asking for a job, or I'm asking in
my current job to get a security clearance, can't you just get
my permission to go look at everything?
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir. As a matter of fact, when you apply
on an SF-86, the very first thing you get to do is consent to
the government searching you, not only with regard to social
media, but all your other financial, medical records, you
consent to do that on the SF-86.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. So there's no privacy concerns. Because
I have the right to waive that and I do. Right?
Mr. Evanina. That's correct.
Mr. Mulvaney. So there's absolutely no privacy issue on the
front end when you're doing your background research on me,
correct?
Mr. Evanina. As long you consent to it----
Mr. Mulvaney. Right.
Mr. Evanina. --on your SF-86.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. Good. Good. Then we're all on the same
page. Because then the real privacy concerns comes with what
Mr. Lynch mentioned, which is what do you do with the
information on me after you have it? Because while I consent to
let you go and get it, I certainly don't consent with you
giving it to other people.
So I think that's why the focus, I think, for many of us
who are interested in our civil liberties there is what are you
doing after you have it. And I want to go a little bit deeper
than just the Social Security numbers, because I think Mr.
Lynch properly pointed out, what are you doing with Mr.
Massie's medical records when you're doing the research on him?
How are we----
Mr. Connolly. Massie.
Mr. Mulvaney. Yeah, especially on Massie, right? And his
mental health records. No.
Mr. Connolly. Actually, I've got it right here. Page 17 is
kind of interesting.
Mr. Mulvaney. So tell me about that. Because, again, we all
know about the risks. Everyone in the country now has gotten a
hard wire to sort of think, well, my Social Security thing is
really important. I hope they're protecting that. But what
about the stuff that doesn't, on its face, look like it could
be damaging to us?
You know, maybe Mr. Scott went to marriage counseling.
Okay. Not illegal. And I don't even know if that's true, and I
am not even suggesting it is. I am using it as an example. It's
not illegal. It's certainly not the type of thing, though, that
you want to have public. What are you doing to protect that
kind of information? Not just the number data, not just the
Social Security numbers, but the detail, the meat of the stuff
that you might find on anybody that you're looking at.
Mr. Evanina. I'll start and pass to my colleague, but I
want to ensure that the only collection and retention of data
will be what is investigatively relevant to completing and
authorizing a background investigation. If it's not relevant to
you obtaining a clearance, it won't be retained.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. Let's focus on that one word then,
because again, that's an open-ended questions that I've asked.
Let's narrow it down.
Nothing is not retained anymore. Okay. Once you have it,
it's some place. Even if you hit erase on your hard drive, it's
some place. So what are you doing to make sure the stuff that
you don't retain really isn't retained?
Ms. Cobert. Congressman, when we get the records of your
background investigation, we have a set of rules and guidelines
that govern those, that govern the sharing of those. So it is
used for the investigative decision, but there are very
specific guidelines about how that information is used. We have
specific guidelines about records retention consistent with
NARA and their policies.
And a core element in the cybersecurity design of our
systems, particularly as we're thinking about as we go forward,
is how do we make sure we've got the appropriate protections in
place for all of that information, not just Social Security
numbers?
But there are very explicit policies around records
retention, around records sharing, both externally within the
government. Right. This information was gathered for a specific
purpose. That's what it was used for, and there are guidelines
around that in place.
Mr. Mulvaney. Just a quick question, and I honestly don't
know the answer. But when the data was hacked that Mr. Lynch
mentioned before, was it just Social Security numbers that were
lost or was it other information as well?
Ms. Cobert. The information that was lost was data in
people's backgrounds investigation, so it included a range of
information, not exclusively Social Security numbers.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lieu, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My questions are for Mr. Evanina. First of all, thank you
for your service, and I support incorporating social media into
Federal background investigations.
I have a broader concern which is whether race or ethnicity
play a role in security clearance denial or granting. And let
me give you some context for this. Recently, four American
citizens were arrested and indicted for espionage, and then all
charges were dropped. These were in different cases, and it
turned out that the government just got it wrong. And the one
fact that was the same among all these cases is the defendants
looked like me. They happened to be Asian Americans. The cases
of Sherry Chen, Xiaoxing Xi, Guoqing Cao, and Shuyu Li. Their
lives were turned upside down because of what our government
did. The New York Times has asked our government to apologize.
I wrote a letter signed by over 40 Members of Congress
asking the Department of Justice to investigate. Since I wrote
that letter, our office has been contacted by Federal employees
who happen to be Asian American alleging that their security
clearance was denied because of their race or ethnicity. And so
my question to you is, does race or ethnicity play a role in
Federal background investigations?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, absolutely not, and it's unequivocally
not. I don't think there has ever been a situation where an
investigator has used race or ethnicity for any determination
of a clearance for a U.S. citizen, number one.
Number two, the situation you referenced, I could say that
with 19 years in the FBI, I could assure you that the FBI does
not conduct investigations relevant to whether your race or
ethnicity comes to play.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. Let me ask you a question about how
this policy would be implemented in terms of social media.
Let's say a Japanese American Federal employee has a Facebook
page, and friends of this Federal employee living in Japan or
relatives post on that Facebook page. Does this Federal
employee become more suspicious because of that?
Mr. Evanina. Absolutely not. And the only issue would be if
on that public facing Facebook page there is derogatory or
negative information that's relevant to an adjudication of
investigation, will result in a followup lead. But otherwise,
it would not.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. The U.S. Government, under the Obama
administration, runs something called the insider threat
program, where Federal employees are asked to report on other
Federal employees who may be suspicious. Is race or ethnicity
allowed to be taken into account under that program?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, first of all, the National Insider Threat
Task Force is housed within my shop, National
Counterintelligence Security Center. And, again, unequivocally,
race or ethnicity has no part in the insider threat process or
the criticality that we have across the government.
Mr. Lieu. Are Federal employees, when they're given
training on the insider threat program and how to report, are
they given that training about race and ethnicity playing no
part?
Mr. Evanina. Well, I think the race--any fundamental
training regarding race and ethnicity crosses all boundaries,
not just investigative. That's part of the Federal workforce
and our fabric as Americans, number one.
But in terms of the Insider Threat Task Force, race,
ethnicity, or any other type of genre of covered classes is
never a part of the Insider Threat Task Force. We are--our
number one mission is to identify potential insiders, spies,
espionage matters, or those who seek to do harm to others.
Mr. Lieu. Could you provide my office with guidance in how
you train Federal employees?
Mr. Evanina. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Lieu. Great. Thank you.
I've gone to a number of national security events and
briefings, and I think it's not a secret that our national
security establishment looks very nondiverse. And there's been
articles about the State Department having trouble recruiting
people who are minorities. And I'm wondering if that has
anything to do with security clearances and the inability of
some folks, who are minorities, who might not be able to get
them. Could you provide my office with some data or statistics
on who gets security clearances based on race and ethnicity?
Mr. Evanina. I'm sure we can, sir.
Mr. Lieu. Great. Thank you.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes himself for a series of questions, and
I'll be very brief.
Let me follow up on a couple of clarifying things. You have
obviously put out this new policy, and we applaud that. We
thank you for that.
Is there any particular legal reason or practical reason
why we would not be asking them for their online identities?
Mr. Evanina. Well, sir, I think as part of the SF-86
application, and when you write your name, Bill Evanina, it's
asked, do I have any other names or aliases that I go by. So
that's the first----
Mr. Meadows. Yeah, but I'm talking about online identity.
So, I mean, you know, Twitter, Facebook, you know. Because I'm
not going to give it in a public forum, but I have actually
Twitter accounts that don't actually have my name associated
with them, and yet I would tweet out things based on that. So
is there any reason why we wouldn't ask for those types of
things, practical or legal?
Mr. Evanina. I don't believe it's a legal issue. I think
it's a policy issue, and I think we have to have some clear
differentiation between what is investigatively relevant. And
we can get to those areas of----
Mr. Meadows. But if we're talking about social media, that
would be relevant. I mean, there's no expectation of privacy,
other than--well, you know, you could perhaps make the case if
I'm wanting to be private about it, I'm not putting my name.
But if you just ask for those online identities, would the
online identities be synonymous with an alias?
Mr. Evanina. They could be, sir. There absolutely could be,
but we----
Mr. Meadows. So I guess if there's no legal or practical
reason why we wouldn't do it, why would it not be part of your
new policy?
Mr. Evanina. Again, I will say that the policy is a start
where we're going right now to get where we are.
Mr. Meadows. So are you willing to look at that particular
component about asking for other online identities and maybe
report back and your philosophy here within the next 60 days to
this committee?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I think we're willing to look at all
suspects of social media and how it pertains to the background
investigation process.
Mr. Meadows. But, specifically, with regards to that
question, are you willing to look at it and just report back?
I'm not asking----
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. --you to give me a definitive answer; just
that you get back to this committee on what your opinion is----
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. --on why you should or should not do that.
Mr. Evanina. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Cobert, I'm going to finish with you, and it's really
something from in the past. And I just would like to ask you,
with regards to the CIO and IG relationship, how would you
characterize that from where it has been and where it is today?
And if you can speak to that.
Ms. Cobert. Thank you, Congressman. Let me turn it on.
Thank you, Congressman. We have been working across the agency
to strengthen our effectiveness of our dialogue with the CIO,
and I believe we've made real progress in a number of different
areas.
We've set up a cadence of regular communications at my
level with the inspector general, currently acting inspector
general. On a biweekly basis we meet and get an overview of the
issues. We have specific working teams that meet on a periodic
basis as well, both around the CIO, around procurement. We set
up that same kind of mechanism around the standup of the NBIB,
given the oversight issues there and making--wanting to make
sure we get those right.
So I think we've made considerable progress in terms of the
dialogue, the clarity of the communications. We welcome their
input on what we could be doing as better, as we welcome input
from our colleagues here and elsewhere.
Mr. Meadows. So you would characterize it as much improved
under your leadership?
Ms. Cobert. I would characterize it as much improved, yes,
sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Thank you.
The chair recognizes Mr. Lynch for a closing question or
statement.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, I want to thank you for being here. I want to
ask you a question sort of off the grid here. I appreciate that
you're making progress, and that's a good thing, and we're
working together with DOD to secure our systems.
There's another issue. You know, these hackers have become
so proficient. You know, this morning we got news that the
SWIFT, you know, commercial bank system--I think it's 11,000
banks and companies that handle international banking
transactions, they were hacked again. They were just hacked
through Bangladesh and the New York Fed, which is troubling, to
the tune of about $81 million. Now we find out there's another
hack going on similar to that one. So they are being breached.
The FDIC, Chinese hackers, news, again, this morning, that
the FDIC has been hacked. And these are entities that have
fairly robust, you know, protections. And we're about to enter
into this--well, we're about to debate the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, and one of the provisions in that Trans-Pacific
Partnership requires U.S. companies to establish databases in
the foreign countries. There's about 12 countries. But, you
know, one of them is Vietnam, a Communist country.
So we would have to--the U.S. companies will have to
establish, physically, databases in those countries, Malaysia,
Vietnam. And a lot of the banks and companies involved here are
very concerned about the security aspect of this overseas.
And I just wonder, especially, Mr. Evanina, you know, I
know you worry about this stuff all the time; as well, you
know, Ms. Cobert, you are dealing with; Mr. Scott, you as well.
What about that dimension of this? I know it's not--you know,
you weren't prepared this morning to address this question, and
I appreciate it if you want to take a pass, but I'm just
worried about that, about it's tough enough to protect the data
when it's in the United States. And now we're being asked to
force our companies, if they're dealing in international trade,
to actually deposit their data in these foreign countries that
don't have the security protections that even we have.
Mr. Evanina?
Mr. Evanina. Sir, I concur with your concern for
cybersecurity and the need for us to be prepared to at least
meet where we are in the global economy. I'm not particularly
familiar with the requirements contained within this policy, so
I can't speak to that. But under the purview of national
security, the cyber threat is real. And I think we have to take
that into consideration for anything we do moving forward,
whether here domestically in the United States or any of our
businesses and government operations overseas.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Cobert, Mr. Scott, you want to take a bite at that, or
you all set?
Mr. Scott. Well, I would just say, one of the lessons
learned, I think, worldwide has been that cybersecurity knows
no national boundaries and, you know, concerns about
cybersecurity are, you know, global. Physical location is one
element, but probably in the case of cybersecurity, not the
most dispositive in terms of the concerns I would have. It's
more about the secure-by-design sort of notion, you know, what
have you put in place and how well is it implemented, and so
on. So those would be more my primary concerns.
Mr. Lynch. Yeah, my----
Mr. Scott. In some cases, the physical location.
Mr. Lynch. Right. My concern is obviously the Communist
government in Vietnam is going to require access. So that was
my concern. You have suffered enough.
I want to yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank you.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today.
And if there's no further business before the subcommittees,
the subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:15 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
