- THE INTERNET OF CARS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE INTERNET OF CARS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC ASSETS

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 18, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-974 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Massachusetts              BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Michael Kido, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Transportation and Public
Assetts
Troy Stock, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Information Technology
Sarah Vance, Clerk
Subcommittee on Transportation & Public Assets

JOHN L. MICA Florida, Chairman
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois, Ranking
JOHN J. DUNCAN, JR. Tennessee            Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARK DESAULNIER, California
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin, Vice      BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chair

Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 18, 2015................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Nat Beuse, Associate Administrator, Vehicle Safety Research,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. Department
of Transportation
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Harry M. Lightsey, III, Executive Director, Global Connected
Customer Experience, Global Public Policy, General Motors
Company
Oral Statement...............................................     9
Written Statement............................................    10
Mr. Sandy Lobenstein, Vice President, Connected Services and
Product Planning, Toyota Motor Sales, USA
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12
Mr. Diarmuid O'Connell, Vice President of Corporate and Business
Development, Tesla Motors, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    13
Mr. Dean C. Garfield, President and CEO, Information Technology
Industry Council
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15
Ms. Khaliah Barnes, Associate Director, Administrative Law
Counsel, Electronic Privacy Information Center
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

APPENDIX

Letter from Consumer Technology Association......................    44

THE INTERNET OF CARS

----------

Wednesday, November 18, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation and Public Assets,
joint with the Subcommittee on Information
Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John L. Mica
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Transportation and Public
Assets] presiding.
Present from the Subcommittee on Transportation and Public
Assets: Representatives Mica, Amash, Duckworth, DeSaulnier, and
Boyle.
Present from the Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd, Farenthold, Walker, Blum, Kelly,
Connolly, and Lieu.
Also Present: Representative Chaffetz.
Mr. Mica. Good afternoon. I'd like to welcome everyone to
the Subcommittee on Transportation and Public Assets and also
the Subcommittee on Information Technology hearing today. And
this meeting will come to order. Without objection, the chair
is authorized to declare at any time a recess.
The order of business will be as follows. Since we have a
joint subcommittee hearing today, we'll have opening statements
from myself, Mr. Hurd, Ms. Duckworth, Ms. Kelly. And after that
we will hear from our witnesses. And then--well, after we have
heard from all the witnesses we'll go into questions.
So with that, I'll give the first opening statement. And,
again, welcome everyone.
It's interesting the age that we live in of new technology
and communications. With all of the incredible technology that
we see and take for granted every day, we're entering a new era
in transportation technology. And there's some of the older
panelists or members and audience will remember when you used
to open the hood of a car and you could take out the various
parts, identify everything. Now you need almost a Ph.D. degree
to figure out what's in there, and its capabilities are just
astounding. A lot of safety features in cars we didn't have
before.
But we today are going to address the issues relating to,
again, what we call the Internet of Cars and look at some of
the implications of that technology. And I think some of this
was highlighted just some time ago when, I guess it was a Jeep
vehicle was hacked. And fortunately it wasn't folks who chose
to do harm, but it did demonstrate that vehicles with certain
types of electronic capability can, in fact, be hacked, and it
does pose some questions.
We've called together today leaders of industry and some
others. We have NHTSA. But I particularly want to thank the
private sector partners.
Several weeks ago we had a roundtable and an open and frank
discussion of kind of where we are and where we're going and
what the industry's doing to deal with some of these issues.
And I think they've been most cooperative and I appreciate
that. And we learned a lot from that particular informal
meeting.
Today is a little bit more formal. We do have a lot that we
can--a lot of benefits too. In 2010, there were 1.2 million
deaths on the world's highways. The United States, some 10
years ago, we had 43,000 deaths. We have taken that down to
33,000. And there are a lot of positive things that have been
done, again through safety, technology, warning systems, a
whole host of electronic devices now in our vehicles that make
us safer.
The positive economic benefit from connected vehicles is
estimated to be $500 billion. And we want to ensure that the
electronic systems we have in these vehicles can't be hacked,
that, in fact, that we have safety provisions put in and
protections for the consumer and for the public.
In 2012, when I helped author the MAP-21 bill, we directed
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to complete
a review and ultimately determine the needs for safety in
vehicles and electronic systems. We'll hear from some folks
today where they are in the requirement that we crafted and put
in that bill. We're now a year and a half past the deadline we
set in law.
Automakers have fortunately been setting their own
cybersecurity standards, which is the good news. The bad news
is that we have a lot of variety and people going in different
directions. While the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration continues to move forward mandating dictated
short-range communication devices in cars, we must make certain
that this technology hasn't been surpassed by the next best
thing that's coming up, and advances in technology are rapid.
We've spent over $500 million on testing just this
technology that was discovered in 1999. And in 1999 the state
of the art for some of our communications was the flip phones.
And we've come a little bit further from that.
So while I fully support connected vehicle technology and
help with its advancement, in the future we'll see vehicles
that can talk to each other, we'll see safety provisions in
vehicles that will make cars safer and more reliable and have a
whole host of features that will benefit the consumer and the
traveling public. But we must be able to allow a bridge to get
to that environment as the new technologies come to light while
remaining cognizant of the need for consumer privacy.
So this afternoon I look forward to hearing testimony from
our potential witnesses. And I pledge to work collaboratively
with everyone here on this side, both sides of the aisle, and
with the industry. I think we're entering a new exciting era,
but we want to be ready for it.
Let me now recognize Ms. Duckworth, the ranking member of
the Subcommittee on Transportation and Public Assets, for her
opening statement.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Chairman Mica. And welcome both
to Chairman Hurd and Ranking Member Kelly. Welcome also to our
witnesses.
Today there are an estimated 5 billion devices that make up
the ecosystem that we call the Internet of Things. It's not
just Fitbits, smartphones, and baby monitors that communicate
over the Internet. Our motor vehicles are computers on wheels
that rely on the same methods of communication. And as we've
seen too many times, computers and computer networks are
regularly the victims of hackers.
We've already mentioned the July instance this year when a
vehicle was hacked. Less than a month later from that instance
a researcher demonstrated how vulnerabilities in a different
manufacturer's vehicle could also let hackers learn the owner's
home address, steal credit card information, and much more.
So far there have been no known incidents of malicious
attempts to hack vehicles. But I have to ask the witnesses here
today, is that because the overall security of the vehicle
computers is that good or have we simply been that lucky?
Congress gave the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration the responsibility to regulate cybersecurity in
vehicles. But manufacturers and suppliers are in the best
position to identify weaknesses in their own products. Ensuring
the cyber safety of cars, vans, trucks, and motorcycles on the
nearly 4 million miles of roads that crisscross the United
States requires partnership of government, industry, and
researchers. Each has an important role to play.
That's why I find it especially troubling that, according
to Bloomberg, one of the automobile manufacturers involved in
the July hack waited 18 months--18 months--to tell Federal
safety regulators about the security flaw, while the other
manufacturer reportedly knew about this vulnerability for 5
years.
Those failures by manufacturers to report cybersecurity
vulnerabilities to the Federal Government undermine the
partnership that is necessary to protect the public safety from
cybersecurity threats. That is simply unacceptable.
As Transportation Secretary Foxx said in May, ``Connected
automated vehicles that can sense the environment around them
and communicate with other vehicles have the potential to
revolutionize road safety and save thousands of lives.'' I
agree with him.
I look forward to examining these issues in more detail and
thank the chairman for bringing this hearing. Thank you.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Ms. Duckworth.
I'd now like to recognize Mr. Hurd, who chairs the
Subcommittee on Information Technology, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman Mica.
Today's hearing is one of a series of hearings the IT
Subcommittee intends to hold on emerging technologies. And we
are proud to join with you and the Transportation Subcommittee
here today.
My first car was as a Toyota 4Runner, and I liked to call
her Shirley Marie. I got her in the summer of 2000 and had the
car up until the summer of 2013. We had a lot of adventures
together, but one thing she couldn't do was connect to the
Internet.
And flash forward to 2020. Gartner forecasts that about one
in five vehicles on the road worldwide will have some form of
wireless network connection by 2020, amounting to more than 250
million connected vehicles. A recent study by the McKinsey
Global Institute predicts that the Internet of Things, which
includes the Internet of Cars, could have a total potential
economic impact of between $4 and $11 trillion by 2025. The
report further states that the hype around the Internet of
Things may actually understate the full potential.
I agree. The hype likely does understate the full
potential, but only if policymakers, industry, consumers,
privacy advocates, and other stakeholders understand where real
value can be created and focus on supporting innovation and
cybersecurity and privacy best practices. I worry that
overeager regulators in Congress will overact to a stunt hack
with restrictive regulations and heavy-handed legislation.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses from the
automotive industry today on what steps they are taking
proactively to secure their connected vehicles and protect
people's safety as well as their privacy.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Garfield on what the
many innovative companies he represents are doing to ensure the
same, that people are safe, that their information is secure,
so that they can be confident and embrace the benefits offered
by connected vehicles.
And I look forward to hearing from Mr. Beuse on what NHTSA
is doing to achieve the highest standards of excellence in
motor vehicle and highway safety while staying strictly within
their statutory authority and taking care not to hamper
innovation.
I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Hurd.
And I'm please now to recognize Ms. Kelly, who is the
ranking member of the Subcommittee on Information Technology.
Welcome again, and you're recommended.
Ms. Kelly. I thank Chairman Hurd and Chairman Mica, as well
as Ranking Member Duckworth and our witnesses for today's
important conversation.
Today's cars have been dubbed computers on four wheels.
They gather and store a vast array of personal information
about their drivers, affording greater convenience and safety,
but also greater erosion of privacy and security. Our
automakers, as they long have, are inventing new technologies
that have made the driver's experience more enjoyable and
efficient. Over-the-air and vehicle-to-vehicle technologies,
things that were once only science fiction, can save lives and
help prevent accidents.
But with great innovation comes new questions over security
challenges and how data is stored and used. As the number of
Internet-connected cars grows, so too does the threat of
vehicle hacking. If cars are going to store personal sensitive
information about where the driver lives, the route the driver
takes to get there, and where the driver stops along the way,
there should be assurances that the information is stored
securely and protects the identify of the driver.
Our subcommittee's review of previous cyber attacks on
government and corporate computer networks revealed that the
same vulnerabilities show up time and time again. The
interconnectivity of seemingly unrelated parts of the networks
makes it substantially easier for a hacker to move through a
network and locate sensitive personal information.
But it's not just computer systems that lack segmentation.
Seemingly unrelated components of Internet-connected cars do as
well. A modern car's brakes can talk to its radio. The radio
can tell whether the doors are locked and the doors know
whether the windshield wipers are on.
One of the key topics of today's hearing for me is whether
the auto industry is designing cars with operating systems that
securely store personal and technological innovation, I'll be
focused on how automakers, Congress, and regulators can work
together to secure our vehicles from malicious attacks and
protect Americans and their data.
I thank our witnesses for their participation today and
look forward to hearing your thoughts on how we can achieve
this goal.
Chairman Hurd, Chairman Mica, I'd like to yield the
remainder of my time to the gentleman from California,
Representative Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Ranking Member Kelly, for yielding the
time.
And thank you, Chairman Mica, Chairman Hurd, and Ranking
Member Duckworth, for calling this important hearing.
The Internet of Things brings technology and connectivity
into every corner of our lives, including our cars. With the
pervasiveness of technology, cybersecurity standards and
privacy protections become more important than ever. Unlike
other sectors, security and privacy by design are not yet fully
engrained in automotive manufacturing culture, as evidenced by
the news regarding cars' cybersecurity issues with wireless
entry keys and hacks of cars.
However, regulation can be slow, rigid, and discourage
innovation if done wrong. Rushing to regulation is not, in my
opinion, the answer, but neither is a lack of accountability or
standards. The advances that the industry has made in the past
year, such as setting up an Information Sharing and Analysis
Center and a set of enforceable privacy principles, have been
done in part because of public and government pressure.
The Security and Privacy in Your Car Study Act, also known
as the SPY Car Study Act, a bipartisan bill cosponsored by
Congressman Joe Wilson and myself, is a step in bringing
industry advocates and government together to strike a balance
between innovation and consumer protection.
I serve on Active Duty in the military. I'm still in the
Reserves, and I'm trained to think about worst-case scenarios.
So there are three overarching scenarios and questions I'd like
to pose to the panel. Hopefully during the time today you might
be able to answer it.
The first is, is it possible now or in the future for a
hacker to remotely take control of a car and use it either as a
weapon or cause an accident?
Second, is it possible now or in the future for a hacker to
take control of a fleet of cars and use them as weapons or
cause accidents?
And then, third, is it possible for a hacker now or in the
future to take partial control over cars? So let's say you're
going down a highway at 60 miles per hour and suddenly the
brakes go on without your knowledge thereby causing an
accident. And I'd be curious to know if, one, those are
theoretical possibilities, and then, second, if so, what can be
done to mitigate that aspect.
Americans have a right to drive cars that are safe and to
keep their information about their daily lives private. I look
forward to hearing the testimony from today's panel of
witnesses and look forward to asking additional questions on
this issue of public importance.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank the gentleman.
Since thereare no other statements, any other members have
any quick statements?
Okay. Then the chair will hold the record open for 5
legislative days for any member who'd like to submit a written
statement.
Mr. Mica. Let's turn now to recognizing our panel of
witnesses. I'm pleased to welcome first Nat Beuse, who is the
associate administrator, vehicle safety research, at the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration at the United
States Department of Transportation. Mr. Harry Lightsey, who's
the executive director of global connected consumer experience
and global public policy at General Motors Company. Mr. Sandy
Lobenstein, and he is the vice president of connected services
and product planning at Toyota Motor North America. And Mr.
Diarmuid O'Connell, and he is vice president of corporate and
business development at Tesla Motors, Inc. Mr. Dean Garfield,
he is the president and CEO of the Information Technology
Industry Council. And finally, Ms. Khaliah Barnes, and she is
the associate director and administrative law counsel at the
Electronic Privacy Information Center.
So welcome all of our witnesses. I might tell you too in
advance that I'll swear you in, in just a second. And we also
try to get you to limit your statement, your verbal statement
before the committee to 5 minutes. You can ask through the
chair to have additional information or data put into the
record.
So with that, we are an investigative and oversight
committee and subcommittees of Congress. If you'd please stand
and I'll swear you in. Raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give before this joint subcommittee meeting of
Congress is the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
Let the record reflect that all the witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
Thank you. Be seated.
Okay. We'll go right to our witnesses. And let me start
first with Mr. Beuse. Welcome him again, and all of you, and
thank you for your cooperation today. And he is the
administrator of the vehicle safety research at the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Welcome, and you're recognized, sir.
And you all bring the mics up as close as you can so we can
hear you.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF NAT BEUSE

Mr. Beuse. Good afternoon, Chairmen Mica and Hurd, Ranking
Members Duckworth and Kelly, and members of the subcommittees.
I appreciate this opportunity to testify about how the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, or NHTSA, is addressing
emerging challenges associated with new connected vehicle
technologies.
In 2013, there were over 5.7 million vehicle crashes in the
United States that resulted in 32,719 deaths. The consequences
of these crashes ranged from personal tragedies that will
impact individual families forever to the billions in economic
dollars that we can actually measure.
NHTSA's mission is to address these crashes and the
increasing use of connected and automated vehicle technologies
we believe can help us do that. When combined together, new
technologies such as vehicle-to-vehicle communications, or V2V,
and automated technologies have the potential to dramatically
change the safety picture in the United States.
However, as the chairman pointed out, these new
technologies also bring new and different challenges. For
example, consumers hear a lot about cybersecurity as it is
related to banks and personal information. Indeed, it often
seems like every day or every other day there is a breach
reported in the media. Now in the auto space cybersecurity is
taking on new visibility, even showing up in TV shows as
recently as this past weekend. NHTSA understands these dynamics
but believes that the challenges associated with connected
vehicles are addressable and they should not keep us from
pursuing the innovations that can save lives.
Testing and analysis indicates that V2V can address up to
approximately 80 percent of crashes involving two or more motor
vehicles. This technology promises to be transformative and
could even enable a new era of safety that not only saves
lives, but brings other benefits as well.
When fully realized, this communication technology is
extendable even beyond vehicles and the infrastructure. It can
be deployed to other devices that would be carried by
pedestrians and cyclists, thereby addressing those types of
crashes as well. However, for V2V to be effective, it relies on
a robust security system and for the vehicles themselves to be
secure.
In exploring the potential of connected vehicles and other
advanced technologies, NHTSA understood that cybersecurity
would be essential to the public acceptance of new vehicle
systems and to fulfill the safety promise they hold. To develop
a robust cybersecurity environment, NHTSA modified its
organizational structure, developed vital partnerships, adopted
a layered approach, considered legislative actions, and
encouraged members of the industry to take independent steps to
help improve the cybersecurity posture of vehicles. NHTSA's
goal is to be ahead of potential vehicle cybersecurity
challenges and seek ways to address them.
NHTSA consulted other government agencies, vehicle
manufacturers, suppliers, and the public to develop its cyber
program. The approach covers various safety-critical
applications deployed on current vehicles, as well as those
envisioned for future vehicles that may feature more advanced
forms of communications and automation.
However, we also believe there are tremendous opportunities
in this realm for proactive steps. In fact, such steps are
essential. Regulation and enforcement alone will not be
sufficient to address these risks. Cybersecurity threats simply
move too fast and are too varied for regulations to be the only
answer.
The auto industry can play an essential role by
cooperatively establishing rigorous best practices that address
the broad range of cyber threats, by reacting quickly and
appropriately when such threats emerge, and by working closely
with the government and independent security analysts to
identify and defeat attacks.
NHTSA and DOT have also given special consideration to the
security system that enables V2V technology. USDOT and many,
many partners have spent some time developing the network and
this trusted architecture that goes along with this system.
While we have made significant progress, we believe that more
testing is necessary and we plan to undertake that work.
The trust aspect of the system is based on PKI. Though
extensively used today, NHTSA and its research partners
actually tweak the design to balance security and privacy. We
take consumers' privacy very seriously, and in the context of
our notice of proposed rulemaking on vehicle-to-vehicle
communications, we will address privacy as it relates to that
system.
The effectiveness of V2V technology also relies on an
allocated portion of spectrum. In light of growing demand for
spectrum, spectrum sharing has been a topic of much discussion.
DOT is not opposed to sharing the spectrum. Toward that end,
DOT is working closely with FCC, NTIA, members of the industry,
and other stakeholders on an expedited basis to test and
evaluate potential sharing solutions for the 5.9 gigahertz
spectrum. We are waiting for devices.
Under the leadership of Secretary Foxx, the Department has
taken several steps to support the deployment of V2V and V2I
technology. In August 2014, NHTSA issued an advanced notice of
proposed of rulemaking. In 2016, we plan to follow that up with
a proposal. And just recently the secretary announced some
pilot programs, all aimed to further deploy this technology.
Connected and automated vehicles that can sense the
environment around them and communicate with these other
vehicles and with the infrastructure have the potential to
revolutionize road safety and save thousands of lives. NHTSA is
already laying the groundwork needed for the road ahead and
looks forward to working with Congress, manufacturers,
suppliers, others in the administration, and the American
public in this exciting transportation future.
I look forward to addressing your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Beuse follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. Thank you. And we'll withhold questions until
we've heard from everyone.
Let me introduce and welcome again Harry Lightsey, who is
the executive director of global connected customer experience
and global public policy a General Motors.
Welcome. You're recommended.

STATEMENT OF HARRY M. LIGHTSEY, III

Mr. Lightsey. Thank you very much, Chairman Mica, Chairman
Hurd, Ranking Member Duckworth, and Ranking Member Kelly. And
thank you for the opportunity to testify before your
subcommittees.
In the roughly 100 years of its existence, the automobile
has impacted American life in ways unique to any other machine.
It has impacted how we live and work, where we live and work,
how our cities have grown, and how our country has grown.
Yet the machine itself remains basically what it was at the
time of its inception: a gasoline combustion engine connected
by a drive train to wheels on the road, driven by a human
being. But we are now entering an era where all those basic
tenets will change dramatically. Cars will more and more have
different modes of mobility other than a gasoline engine. They
will be connected to each other in ways that will make the
driving experience safer and more enjoyable. And they will more
and more relieve the human being of the driving task.
Because we know that humans are fallible and will have
crashes in cars, the automobile industry and the National
Highway Transportation Safety Administration, or NHTSA, have
spent the last half century designing and building automobiles
to be safer when they crash, with innovations like seat belts,
air bags, and crumple zones. Today we are designing and
building automobiles to avoid collisions entirely, with
technologies like forward and rear collision warning, backup
cameras, lane keeping, and blind spot warnings.
Increasingly, these technologies allow the machine to
assist in the driving task itself when the human driver does
not react appropriately or quickly enough to prevent a crash.
Soon technologies like vehicle-to-vehicle communications will
be deployed with the promise to impact over 80 percent of the
crashes on today's roads. The savings in terms of lives saved,
property damage prevented, medical costs, and congestion will
be enormous.
At General Motors, we are moving quickly to take advantage
of these innovations. We are the first automobile manufacturer
to build connectivity into our vehicles. And GM OnStar has over
6 million customers in the United States and over 1 million
customers connected on our 4G LTE broadband platform. We have
deployed many advanced safety technologies into our vehicles,
including announcing the deployment of vehicles with advanced
review mirrors. And we are the only automaker that has
announced the commitment to deploy vehicles with V2V technology
with our Cadillac CTS model next year.
However, we must acknowledge that with change comes
challenge. We must deploy these innovations in the safest
manner possible. We must commit to our customers that we
respect their privacy and will protect their information. Our
automobiles contain software that may have vulnerabilities that
bad actors could exploit to threaten our customers' safety and
privacy, and we must do all we can to prevent automobile
hacking.
We must realize that we are competing with other
technologies for the use of scare resources like spectrum. We
must be able to use these resources in an efficient manner so
long as that use does not interfere with the safety-critical
mission of our systems. If we have the freedom to innovate
within these parameters, the promise of the future cannot be
imagined today.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Lightsey follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And we'll now hear from Mr. Sandy Lobenstein, vice
president of connected services and product planning at Toyota.
Welcome, and you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF SANDY LOBENSTEIN

Mr. Lobenstein. Thank you. Good afternoon.
It's an exciting time for the auto industry. More vehicles
are being connected and outfitted with advanced safety features
and onboard connected safety services, as well as infotainment
systems, and we have the ability to interact with these from a
smartphone. The truth is, though, that we are only at the
beginning of the beginning. The connected car of the future
will far surpass the connected car of today with its features
and capabilities.
To address questions about the use of vehicle data, the
auto industry came together and developed privacy principles
for vehicle technologies and services. These privacy principles
include meaningful protections, including heightened
protections on the use of certain vehicle data, like the
vehicle's location or how someone drives.
For example, automakers agreed not to share data with third
parties for their own use or to use this type of data for
marketing purposes without the affirmative consent of the
vehicle owner.
With the privacy principles, the auto industry is at the
forefront of protecting consumer data in the emerging Internet
of Things. This code of conduct is precisely the type of effort
that the government has encouraged from the private sector and
it should serve as a model for other Internet of Things
sectors.
Cybersecurity is also a key focus, and although no criminal
cyber attack on a vehicle has occurred, the auto industry is
well aware that the cybersecurity risks that exist for other
connected devices also exist for connected cars. We fully grasp
the potential consequences of a successful real world attack.
In that light, the auto industry is forming an ISAC to
exchange information about cybersecurity threats to vehicles.
Toyota is pleased to be serving as the first Auto-ISAC board
chair, and we're fully committed to the Auto-ISAC's success. We
expect initial information sharing from the Auto-ISAC beginning
by the end of this year.
Some are making the case that automotive-specific
cybersecurity best practices and standards are needed. The
question is whether automotive best practices will look any
different than existing best practices that guide cybersecurity
in other contexts.
That being said, the auto industry recognizes that an
effort to adapt existing best practices to the vehicle may be
appropriate. That is why the industry has recently embarked on
an effort to identify existing best practices that are being
and can be applied to vehicles and to address any potential
gaps.
For the very same reasons that the government has refrained
from mandating cybersecurity standards in other sectors, there
is a significant risk with the government mandating
cybersecurity standards for vehicles. Industry can move quicker
than government to update out-of-date practices or to adjust to
new threats. In addition, setting specific government standards
may encourage some companies to simply comply, not to do more
to protect consumers.
Finally, a sector-specific approach will almost certainly
have significant implications for the harmonious development of
the Internet of Things at large.
As the Internet of Cars evolves, we are also on the cusp of
a radical transformation in vehicle safety that will be made
possible by vehicle-to-vehicle communications. Dedicated short-
range communication, or DSRC, is a technology that will allow
us to overcome the range, field-of-view, and line-of-sight
challenges posed by sensor technology, enabling vehicles to
identify collision threats at a greater distance or around a
corner.
When the FCC allocated spectrum in the 5.9 gigahertz band
for DSRC, it spurred an extensive collaboration between the
USDOT and the automobile industry on DRC development. The FCC
is also currently exploring opening up the band to unlicensed
devices.
Due to the spectrum crunch, we support the prospect of
sharing spectrum if it can be proven that no harmful
interference will impair DSRC's safety-of-life mission. A
promising proposal has been offered that has the potential to
accomplish this goal. The proposal's developer and the auto
industry have recently proceeded to validation testing, and we
remain confident that it will be proven out as a workable
spectrum-sharing solution.
In closing, I'd like to provide two final observations.
First, the Internet of Cars ecosystem is evolving. Technology
companies, telecommunications providers, insurance companies,
and others have introduced and will continue to introduce
products and technologies designed to directly communicate with
vehicles. As the ecosystem continues to evolve, responsibility
for protecting vehicles from potential cyber attacks and for
preserving consumer privacy should also evolve to include all
relevant players in this space.
Second, there's a number of Federal agencies that are
seeking to oversee, regulate, or influence cybersecurity and
privacy related to the Internet of Things either broadly or
within narrow subsets. The resulting cacophony of working
groups' efforts, initiatives, and proposals is exceedingly
difficult to manage and prioritize. Without consolidation of
these efforts, clarification of the roles of various agencies
and better coordination, the opportunity provided by the
Internet of Things will almost certainly suffer.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Lobenstein follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you.
And we'll recognize Mr. Diarmuid O'Connell, and he's vice
president of business development for Tesla.
Welcome, sir, and you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF DIARMUID O'CONNELL

Mr. O'Connell. Good afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. We appreciate the opportunity to come
here today and for the opportunity to speak.
Tesla cars are known for being exceptionally safe.
Independent testing by NHTSA has awarded Tesla Model S, our
current offering, the highest possible safety rating, five
stars, not just overall, but in every subcategory without
exception. Approximately 1 percent of all cars tested by the
Federal Government achieve five stars across the board. Safety
is a watchword at Tesla.
Automotive injury and fatality rates have fallen
significantly over the last several decades as a result of
crash safety improvements such as air bags, energy-absorbing
vehicle structures. And Tesla believes that in order to
maintain the pace of reducing injuries and fatality rates,
vehicles need to increasingly use computerized vehicle systems
to avoid crashes with particular opportunity afforded in the
fully connected vehicle space.
Two examples of Tesla's connected car functionality leading
to significant safety benefits compared to nonconnected
vehicles are the following. The first would be automatic
emergency braking, a vehicle feature which attempts to avoid
accidents by applying brakes when a collision is believed
imminent. Tesla is one of 10 vehicle manufacturers whohave
committed to making this a standard feature in all vehicles and
Tesla has already delivered on this promise.
The same connected vehicle technology is applied to Tesla's
autopilot functionality, where improvements are constant as
vehicles effectively learn from varying road conditions and
share those learnings with the entire fleet through
connectivity.
Several studies demonstrate that uptake rates of recalls in
general are about 70 percent. That is to say that for a given
vehicle fault that warrants a recall, about 70 percent of the
vehicles affected will get repaired. Put another way, 30
percent of vehicles will be left driving around in
contravention of Federal safety standards or with a safety-
related defect.
Connected vehicle technology offers a significant
opportunity for us to do better. Modern vehicles are heavily
software controlled and therefore software changes alone can
often resolve a safety issue. In late 2013, Tesla became aware
of a potential hazard believed to be related to incorrect
third-party receptacle installation and wiring. After rapid
investigation, a vehicle software change was identified. It was
capable of detecting and solving the third-party fault. Because
of Tesla's leading connected vehicle capabilities, the software
solution was automatically delivered to the entire fleet.
In contrast to the industry average, recall uptakes of 70
percent, Tesla's automatic software updates can achieve uptake
rates of nearly 100 percent within a short amount of time,
measured in days.
So precautions and concerns as we go forward. The first
precaution is to ensure that any software updates to a vehicle
are authorized by the manufacturer. This can be achieved by
using industry standard cryptography, a technology referred to
as signing.
The second precaution is to strongly isolate networks from
the mechanical systems of the vehicle. If a processor on the
vehicle has network connectivity, the processor should not also
have direct connections to the vehicle's mechanical systems,
i.e., steering, acceleration, brakes, and gear selection. We
don't have gear selection, but that's a separate matter. Some
manufacturers implement this isolation with technology referred
to as a gateway.
The third precaution is to use industry standard encrypted
communications protocols for connections to the vehicle. This
ensures privacy and the integrity of data as it's transferred
to and from the vehicle.
With respect to regulation. We're in a period of rapid
innovation for automotive safety. Tesla vehicle safety already
significantly benefits from investments in vehicle
connectivity. We expect innovation and success in delivering
enhanced safety to only continue as the full potential of
connected vehicles is realized. Overzealous or more
particularly premature regulation that does not allow for
innovation or creative solutions can actually deter or block
safety innovations, and as a result, any move in this direction
must be considered carefully and only to the extent absolutely
necessary, in our view.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony, and we'll welcome any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. O'Connell follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. I'd like to recognize Mr. Garfield. And he's with
ITI.
Welcome, and you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF DEAN C. GARFIELD

Mr. Garfield. Thank you, Chairman Mica, Chairman Hurd,
Ranking Member Duckworth, Ranking Member Kelly, members of the
committee. On behalf of 65 of the most dynamic and innovative
companies in the world, we thank you for hosting this hearing.
It is perfectly timed before 42 million Americans get on the
road to engage in their Thanksgiving commute. And I would
suspect that 5 to 10 years from now the cars in that commute
will look quite different. And so I'll focus my testimony on
that issue, which is the transformation that's occurring, the
innovation that's taking place in that space, first. And then,
second, what we're doing to ensure that we accelerate
deployment, but in a secure and safe way.
It's often said that it's difficult to appreciate history
when you're experiencing it and living in the middle of it. But
from my conversation with our companies, we're living in an
innovation renaissance. The convergence of almost ubiquitous
broadband with exponential improvement in computational
processing, as well as with low cost and almost unlimited
storage, is transforming mobile computing. That includes the
original mobile technology, which is the car.
We see that manifested today in advanced driver assistance
systems, whether that is the adaptive cruise control or
automatic braking, which I have in my car, which has prevented
accidents on multiple occasions. We'll see that in the future
in what the other panelists have mentioned, whether it's
vehicle-to-vehicle or vehicle-to-infrastructure communication
or in autonomous vehicles.
Our companies are working hard at deploying technologies to
make those types of vehicles available sooner rather than
later, whether that's dedicated short-range communications,
advanced LTE, or 5G wireless. As a number of the panelists have
noted, it is early days yet, and so it's impossible to tell
which technology will work most effectively. What we do know is
that there will be radical transformative improvement in
safety, access, as well as how we view our cities.
The other panelists have spoken about some of the safety
issues, so I won't repeat that. But think about all of people
today who aren't able to drive because of a disability or
because they're too old or because they're too young. Through
connected vehicles or autonomous vehicles, those people will
have access to transportation in a way that they don't today.
Similarly, when we don't have to think about cars being
parked all the time, the way we think about our landscape on
our cities will change dramatically. Our companies are
investing billions of dollars to bring that to the market
sooner rather than later and are partnering with many of the
companies on this panel in order to make that possible, and as
well working with the public sector to enable that.
A big part of our work is ensuring that consumers have
confidence in the safety and security of those vehicles and
security will become even more prominent in the future. For us,
we have long experience working on security issues,
particularly cybersecurity, whether it's protecting networks
from the network edge to the cloud and everything in between.
And increasingly the norm is security by design, which is
building in robustness, resiliency, and redundancy at the
software and hardware level so it's not a latch-on later on.
What that means is you can actually build into a chip set the
encryption protocols to protect on unintended encroachment, as
well as the ability to adapt if that encryption is
circumvented.
We have found it quite productive to work with NIST in
advancing that work. NIST has taken a collaborative approach in
working with the public and private sector, working together in
coming up with a framework of standards and best practices
while allowing sufficient flexibility for innovation.
There is still work left to be done, and that speaks to the
role that Congress can play. A number of the members of the
panel have pointed to the number of efforts and initiatives
that are being undertaken in this space. Congress can play an
important role in bringing order to that cacophony, as Mr.
Lobenstein identified.
Second, there is really a need, and Ranking Member
Duckworth made this point, for a national Information of Things
strategy. There is so much work taking place in this space, but
not much of it is well coordinated into a national strategy
that serves our economic, security, and safety interests.
Finally, once we look at what's being done and develop a
strategy, there is an appropriate place for regulation to deal
with market gaps, and we would advocate that the approach
that's been taken by NIST in developing a regulatory framework
that's based on best practices that also allows for flexibility
is the appropriate approach.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Garfield follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
And we'll recognize waiting patiently Khaliah Barnes,
associate director and administrative law counsel at the
Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Welcome, and you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF KHALIAH BARNES

Ms. Barnes. Thank you, Chairman Mica, Chairman Hurd,
Ranking Member Kelly and Ranking Member Duckworth. I'm Khaliah
Barnes, associate director and administrative law counsel for
the Electronic Privacy Information Center.
EPIC is an independent nonprofit research organization
focused on emerging privacy and related human rights issues. We
thank you for holding the hearing today and for taking time to
consider the important privacy implications of the Internet of
Cars.
New vehicle technologies offer a variety of new services to
American drivers and are quickly being implemented by car
companies. But these new technologies, typically based on
Internet connectivity, also raise substantial privacy and
security concerns that Congress needs to address.
As cars become more technologically sophisticated, they
collect a lot of personal data, including physical locations,
destinations, text messages, and phone records. Most car
companies and other companies, including Google, fail to inform
consumers of their data-collection practices, and few give
consumers true control over their data.
Auto companies also use personal driving information for
various but vague purposes, which leaves consumers in the dark
about who has access to their information and why. This
information is often retained for years, if not indefinitely.
The very real possibility of remote car hacking poses
substantial risk to driver safety and security. Connected cars
can be remotely hacked and controlled from anywhere in the
world via the Internet where hackers can take control of
various features, including brakes, steering, and car locks.
Wireless hacking can also provide access to the car's physical
location using built-in GPS navigation systems, which can
facilitate crimes such as stalking, harassment, and car theft.
Congress must enact meaningful safeguards to protect
privacy and security in the Internet of Cars. Last year a group
over 20 automakers, including General Motors and Toyota, signed
a voluntary pledge for privacy and security. While the pledge
is an important first step, it is no substitute for Federal
baseline privacy and data security regulations. The pledge
fails to provide essential privacy protections, lacks any
meaningful enforcement, and supports the status quo of the
wholesale collection of sensitive driver data.
To protect the privacy and security of American drivers,
Congress will need to do more. First, Congress should act on
pending legislation. The SPY Car Act of 2015 would establish
Federal standards for connected cars. The act empowers NHTSA,
in consultation with the FTC, to develop cybersecurity and
privacy regulations for driver data. The SPY Car Act provides a
good framework for meaningful safeguards.
There's also the House draft bill that would require car
companies to develop modest privacy policies for the collection
and use of driver information. The House draft falls short of
providing robust privacy protections. The draft would not
require manufacturers to actually develop or even implement
privacy-protecting measures. Instead, the companies would only
inform drivers about whether the company chooses to take
various privacy-protecting measures. The draft also immunizes
car companies from FTC scrutiny for simply developing a privacy
policy. The draft would broadly criminalize vehicle hacking,
including for research purposes.
The Senate bill comes much closer to safeguarding the
interests of American drivers than does the House draft. In
fact, we would oppose enactment of the House draft, which would
be a step backwards for Americans who are concerned about
privacy and security.
Second, Congress should establish fines for hacking
connected cars, but only where there's malicious intent. This
will permit research to uncover security vulnerabilities, many
of which we've discussed today, while punishing hacking that is
intended to cause harm.
Third, Congress should grant NHTSA authority to issue
privacy rules. The SPY Car Act of 2015, with its emphasis on
enforceable NHTSA rules and civil fines for offenders, provides
the type of privacy and security safeguards drivers need. As
Congress moves forward, it is critical that NHTSA has
rulemaking authority over the emerging industry. NHTSA's rules
should incorporate practices detailed in the Consumer Privacy
Bill of Rights, which is a sensible comprehensive framework for
privacy protections that provide substantive privacy
protections and would help establish fairness and
accountability for the collection and use of driver
information.
Every day without car privacy and safety protections places
countless drivers at risk of having their personal information,
or worse their physical safety, compromised. It's time to put
consumers back in the driver's seat when it comes to privacy.
Congress must act swiftly to combat the current and future
privacy threats posed by the Internet of Cars.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this afternoon,
and I would be pleased to answer your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Barnes follows:]
[Written statements can be found here: https://
oversight.house.gov/hearing/the-internet-of-cars/]
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you. And I'll thank all of our
witnesses. And we'll go right into questions.
First, let me get to Mr. Beuse with the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration. In 2012, when I helped craft the
MAP-21 legislation, I put a section 31402, Electronic Systems
Performance, and it said specifically, ``Not later than 2 years
after the date of enactment''--that was July, I'd give you
August of 2012--that ``the Secretary shall complete an
examination of the need for safety standards with regard to
electronic systems in passenger motor vehicles.'' Then it has a
couple of criteria.
It says, ``Upon completion of the examination...the
Secretary shall submit a report to committees.'' And I see I
screwed up. I should have put the Department of Transportation
in here too, because they don't have one, but we have Commerce,
Science, and Transportation of the Senate, and Energy and
Commerce in the House.
Have you completed that report?
Mr. Beuse. No, Mr. Chairman, that report is still under
review. What we have done, which is unprecedented, which was we
put the entire research program that we developed in
consultation with other government agencies, the private
industry, et cetera, out for public comment.
Mr. Mica. So it's not--I mean, I guess I just put these
things in law and then we just forget them. But it should have
been July, we'll give you August, of 2014.
Ms. Duckworth, isn't this 2015 and November? Okay. So we're
a little bit behind.
Mr. Beuse. Agree, it's taken way too long.
Mr. Mica. And is there a draft?
Mr. Beuse. There is a draft that's entering----
Mr. Mica. Because I tried to get a draft from the
committee, and they said they did not have one. This is from
the--either of the committees. Can you submit to the joint
subcommittees here a draft?
Mr. Beuse. I'm not sure if I can, but we will take that
back.
Mr. Mica. You're not sure if you can?
Mr. Beuse. The work that has been done that my office is
responsible for----
Mr. Mica. Yeah, well, we want to see it. You can, and you
will, and we'll have it here within 10 days, okay?
Mr. Beuse. Okay.
Mr. Mica. All right. That's the way we operate here. So you
didn't comply.
We don't have any penalties now, do we, if someone hacks a
vehicle? Ms. Barnes?
Ms. Barnes. That is correct.
Mr. Mica. Yeah, so the law is still pending. You favor the
Senate's side as far as privacy in your testimony. But we have
seen that they can be hacked. That's also correct.
Ms. Barnes. That's also correct.
Mr. Mica. Yeah. And so far no one with malintent has
hacked, but you could probably stop an engine, you could
disable brakes or steering, because all of those have
electronic components. Would that be a good assumption? I'm not
technologically competent, but----
Ms. Barnes. That is correct, Chairman.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Ms. Barnes. You would be able to disable those features.
Mr. Mica. So they haven't acted and Congress hasn't acted.
I have to put blame also on us.
Then we gave a lot of money, maybe----
Mr. Garfield. If I may.
Mr. Mica. Yes, go right ahead, Mr. Garfield.
Mr. Garfield. To suggest the implication of that colloquy
suggests nothing is being done, when, in fact, much is being
done.
Mr. Mica. Well, it's not that nothing is being done.
Mr. Garfield. Particularly on cybersecurity.
Mr. Mica. We give certain directives. I was going to get to
the question of them working with you all, both, and you did
talk to NIST----
Mr. Garfield. Correct.
Mr. Mica. --which sets standards, and had pretty good
report back, and NHTSA, both--everybody has participated?
Have you participated, Mr. Lightsey, with them?
Mr. Lightsey. Yes, Mr. Chairman, we embrace the NIST
framework. We have adopted that into our----
Mr. Mica. With both of those Federal agencies or with a
private sector group?
Mr. Lightsey. We have had discussions with NIST and with
NHTSA.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
And you, Mr. Lobenstein? Yes?
Mr. Lobenstein. Yes. We have also had discussions.
Mr. Mica. Mr. O'Connell?
Mr. O'Connell. To be factually perfectly accurate, I'm
certain we are absolutely involved with NHTSA on an ongoing
basis. I can't testify to the involvement with NIST.
Mr. Mica. Okay. I just want to find out. And again, I
commend you for coming together as an industry and working, and
I don't want to imply that nothing has been done. But my job is
to give certain directives to agencies, and then see if--I'm
not here just, you know, to look good. I know I do. But----
Mr. Garfield. Yes, you do, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. But my job is to hold their feet to the fire, and
when you put something in law, some of the newer members will
find around here, you can put it in law, I put things in law
three, four times, and they still don't comply. But we won't go
there today.
Again, we gave you a lot of money. We spent about $500
million in taxpayer funds testing the dedicated short-range
radio communications devices. What's NHTSA currently doing to
address the potential issues with security credential
management system? Where are we on that?
Mr. Beuse. Those funds are not NHTSA funds. Those are the
JPO funds, Joint Program Office funds.
Mr. Mica. Is that under you or----
Mr. Beuse. That is not under me, sir.
Mr. Mica. Who is it under?
Mr. Beuse. It's under the Joint Program Office, which is
now part of the Office of the Secretary. I can't tell you----
Mr. Mica. It's under DOT.
Mr. Beuse. It is under DOT, sir.
Mr. Mica. Yeah, okay. So I can say under you, okay, under
DOT. But they have had half a million. What's the result there?
Mr. Beuse. Sure. So what we're doing, what the Department
is doing----
Mr. Mica. Half a billion.
Mr. Beuse. --is putting sort of hardware behind that
system. I alluded to it in my testimony. What's been done to
date has been a lot of hard work with a lot of smart people
coming up with the design, but now we feel we need to actually
build this and operate it to see what are the vulnerabilities
and do some large-scale testing.
Mr. Mica. Do you have any idea exactly where? I'm told that
some of what you have done were really actually slid behind
sort of the advances in technology. And how much more money,
how much more time will it take? Do you know?
Mr. Beuse. I think that's exactly why the Secretary of
Transportation has committed to putting this technology out for
public comment as part of a NHTSA proposal in 2016.
Mr. Mica. So that's not till next year?
Mr. Beuse. I guess in 2 months or so we'll start 2016, but
that is the goal. He asked us to accelerate that rulemaking,
which we have.
Mr. Mica. Well, we have spent a lot of money and we don't
see a lot of progress. And when would you have your final
report, the report that I requested here? It's in draft. You're
going to give us the draft. When will you have that finalized?
Mr. Beuse. I can get back to you on the record on that,
sir.
Mr. Mica. Within the next 10 days.
Mr. Beuse. Absolutely.
Mr. Mica. I want a date, a firm date.
Mr. Beuse. Absolutely.
Mr. Mica. And then I want it made part of the record, okay.
Mr. Beuse. Absolutely.
Mr. Mica. I'm sorry. Don't mean to be, you know, demanding,
but----
Mr. Beuse. Sir, I understand your frustration.
Mr. Mica. Okay. Again, we try to act responsibly and we
expect the agencies to do the same thing.
So right now, just my final question, cars can be hacked
with electronic systems. We don't have in place either a
standard or ability to stop that. I guess that's a simple way
to put it. Is that correct, Mr. Lightsey?
Mr. Lightsey. Mr. Chairman, thank you. GM has invested a
lot of time and effort into making it as difficult as possible
to hack into cars. As I indicated, we have embraced the NIST
framework.
Mr. Mica. No, that's an individual effort. We applaud you
for that. But my question is, we really don't have a standard,
we don't have the ability to prevent that developed, do we?
Mr. Lightsey. We have the ability to implement things as a
business, which is what we are doing.
Mr. Mica. So your cars can't--General Motors' cars can't be
hacked?
Mr. Lightsey. I can't say whether they can be hacked or
not. I can say that we are making them as difficult as we
possibly can.
Mr. Mica. Okay, but that's your individual, and I'm asking
about do we have a standard. We don't that I know.
Mr. Lobenstein.
Mr. Lobenstein. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I think we are trying to
be proactive. We----
Mr. Mica. But again, the question--and I applaud each of
you, and Telsa--Tesla--that's wrong--but Tesla will tell us
they are five star and all of that. But my question was, is
there a standard developed and is there a protection in place?
The answer is for you.
Mr. Lobenstein. We have actually begun working as an
industry----
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Mr. Lobenstein. --to establish cybersecurity.
Mr. Mica. But we don't have that in place.
Mr. O'Connell.
Mr. O'Connell. I'm not aware of an industry standard. The
one thing I would add, sir, is that there is a difference
between sort of hard access hacking and wireless hacking, and
that's something--we've seen the former, which is people with
access to a vehicle then being able to modify certain access.
Mr. Mica. So hard access can----
Mr. O'Connell. Hard access hacking has happened on isolated
cases. I am personally unaware of any wireless hacking that has
gone----
Mr. Mica. But there are no protections or standards.
Mr. Lobenstein. As I said, no standards that I'm aware of.
Mr. Mica. Or if it can be done.
And then, again, part of the responsibility is Congress has
set no penalties. We haven't held the agency's feet to the
fire.
I will give you the last word, Ms. Barnes. Anything you
want to comment?
Ms. Barnes. Sure. I will just point out, and it is in our
written testimony, key examples of computer scientists and
other researchers finding ways to wirelessly hack into
vehicles.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Mr. Garfield.
Mr. Garfield. There is a difference between there being
standards and there being laws. There are certainly standards
being developed around cybersecurity, and there are certainly
laws in place that would punish someone, whether it's the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act or the Digital Millennium Computer
Act, from folks hacking into cars or anything else. The
question is, are there laws mandating particular standards, and
I would argue that mandating a particular standard would be the
absolute wrong approach.
Mr. Mica. Well, we don't have that, but we still don't have
industry-wide standards or protections on hacking, on privacy,
a whole host of things we have heard today.
Let me, I have taken more than my time.
Mr. Beuse. Mr. Chairman, just on that last question. The
industry group, the SAE International, just recently, like
within the last week, has developed a set of voluntary industry
best practices. We just got it, so we are just looking at it,
but I just wanted to make sure you knew that that was out
there.
Mr. Mica. Usually things happen just before the hearing.
Let's go to Ms. Duckworth.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I want to speak, gentlemen and Ms. Barnes, to ISACs, the
sector-specific Information Sharing Analysis Centers, which are
nonprofit, member-driven organizations formed by critical
infrastructure owners and operators who share information
between government and industry about cyber threats and lessons
learned; not necessarily in the automobile industry, but in
other areas.
Mr. Beuse, can you talk about what sort of mechanisms or
organizations have been instituted by NHTSA, and also by the
industry, to work towards secure Internet-connected vehicles?
Mr. Beuse. Sure. There has actually been quite a bit of
work done. NHTSA was really at the forefront in trying to
encourage the development of the ISAC, and we are very pleased
that it is actually up and running now. There are some
additional steps that we think probably are necessary. One is
clarifying what the role that it will have in its interactions
with the agency, and also how that group will be expanded to
other sectors, including suppliers.
Ms. Duckworth. I would like to speak to the suppliers
portion of it. This is something that has come up in my work on
the Armed Services Committee on military equipment.
Cybersecurity is certainly something of great, great potential
harm to our military. And one of the things that I found out,
that for a military weapons platform, something as critical as
the new F-35 fighter jet, there is not complete security of the
supplier network.
Could any of the three gentlemen from the three automobile
manufacturers here talk a little bit about what you have done
to secure or safeguard or ensure that your supplier network is
one that you can trust? I have in my congressional district
Huawei, which is a chip manufacturer, which has been identified
by the U.S. Government and different folks as a problematic
company that actually engages significantly in espionage, both
in corporate espionage as well as in governmental intelligent
espionage as well.
What are you doing to make sure that the chips that you
are--I'm assuming you don't make your own chips. But what are
you doing to make sure that your supply network is also secure?
Mr. Lightsey. Thank you, Ranking Member.
GM, as I was indicating to the chairman, we have invested a
substantial amount of resources and time into the whole
cybersecurity issue. In fact, we created a global organization
whose sole mission is end-to-end cybersecurity of our products
and services. And that organization is headed by our chief
product cybersecurity officer who reports to the senior
management of the company, including the CEO, and to the board
at regular intervals about the cybersecurity status of our
products and services.
That includes our supply chain, and we have requirements
that our suppliers must meet. We audit them on those
requirements, and we test their products, and we have those
products as part of--we certainly embrace security by design.
So from the very beginning of the design of those products, all
the way through to production, those products are tested by
both internal and external experts.
Ms. Duckworth. For cyber vulnerabilities are you talking
about----
Mr. Lightsey. Yes, for cyber vulnerabilities, penetration
testing, other techniques that are common and standard.
Ms. Duckworth. Okay. Mr. Lobenstein, and then Mr.
O'Connell.
Mr. Lobenstein. Yes, for Toyota, cybersecurity and safety
is of paramount interest to us, and we also use industry
standard best security practices, including security by design,
risk assessments, multilayer defense. Even in our telematics
group we have our cybersecurity team embedded in our activities
from the day that we put pen to paper on a strategy, 4 years
before a product is launched, through development, through
engineering, and even through the operations.
One thing I also wanted to mention is that in the Auto-ISAC
we have also invited our automotive suppliers to participate in
that. So we are bringing them in that ISAC so we can share
information with them as well.
Ms. Duckworth. Mr. O'Connell.
Mr. O'Connell. Yeah, a couple of thoughts. Many of the
things we do are consistent with what my colleagues have just
mentioned with respect to looking at cybersecurity and general
robustness of the system. A couple of things that differentiate
Tesla, one is our concern, based on being an industry leader in
the electric vehicle space, we have a unique concern about the
integrity of our operations, because as a new industry entrant
we are uniquely subject to these risks.
That said, we take a systems-level approach especially in
our software development, but also on our vehicle side. So we
have a much higher degree of vertical integration. Many of our
software systems are designed from the ground up as a whole
system rather than relying on outside providers of software.
With respect to our chip technologies, we are largely, to
my knowledge, sourcing from domestic sources. But we are
wholly, you know, focused on the vulnerabilities as any Silicon
Valley company would be.
Ms. Duckworth. I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. [Presiding.] Thank you, Ms. Duckworth, and I
always appreciate your insightfulness in your questioning.
I now recognize my colleague from the great State of Texas,
Mr. Farenthold, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the opportunity to be here.
Are you pronouncing your name Mr. Beuse? Is that correct?
Mr. Beuse. Beuse, yes.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay, Mr. Beuse.
There is a huge amount of investment that automakers and
U.S. tech companies like Google, Uber, Intel are making in
autonomous vehicles overall and autonomous vehicle crash
prevention technologies that don't rely on DSRC at all. What if
any steps is NHTSA taking to support this type of innovation
which is one of the reasons the U.S. leads globally in
intelligent transportation systems?
Mr. Beuse. So with respect to the automated vehicle
technologies we couldn't agree more. We think that there is a
future for both connected and automated. So we are pushing hard
on both. If you see recent examples by the Secretary on
automatic emergency braking, for example, we just included that
technology into our new car assessment program, which is one of
the most visible programs at the Department in terms of
consumer information.
The other thing we have done is we have encouraged industry
to slowly make that technology standard, slowly by meaning
trying to get to a place where they can offer that as a
standard feature on all vehicle models without a regulation.
And that was the September announcement that just happened. And
so you can see we are pushing on those automated technologies.
Likewise, on connected vehicle technology, we believe that it's
a mandate that's necessary to get that market to go.
Mr. Farenthold. So how are we going to tie this in with the
proposal to mandate DSRC in all light vehicles? Are you going
to require these companies to put DSRC on top of their own
technologies and are we forcing a standard on folks that we may
not be ready for?
Mr. Beuse. I think that's exactly what the proposal is
meant to find out, sir. I think if you look at the approach of
the Department, it is to try to get this technology out of the
research phase and ready to deploy and ask some of these very
difficult questions of the technology about if it's ready to
deploy. We certainly believe it's ready to deploy. We believe
the two technologies are complementary, they are not in
competition with each other, and there is a role for both.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Well, thank you very much.
And, Mr. O'Connell, I want to visit a little bit about what
you guys are doing at Tesla. You all take a different approach
to determining security issues and other concerns where you
basically have a bug bounty on there and employ white hat
hackers. Can you talk a little bit about what you do and why
that's a good thing and how it's working?
Mr. O'Connell. Sure. Our approach is really consistent with
the sort of software development, if you will, Silicon Valley
approach to hardening software over the course of time, and it
relies on a system of incentives whereby we encourage folks to
test our system, both in professional and informal
environments, and we reward them when they identify
vulnerabilities.
This is consistent with the sort of incentives and
disincentive systems that I think generally works in the human
environment. But we find it works. It's worked very well in
most software environments, and it's working very well for us
as well. And it allows us to rapidly identify problems and
rectify them and then through connectivity, as I mentioned
before, implement the solutions.
Mr. Farenthold. All right.
And, Mr. Beuse, recently the U.S. on an international basis
supported a global standard for DSRC in the W band at 77
gigahertz, while we are looking locally at a whole different
frequency range, around 50 gigahertz. Is this an example of one
hand not talking to the other? Wouldn't we be better off with
one international global standard?
Mr. Beuse. I'm not exactly familiar with that particular
issue. I do know that on the technology radio side of things we
have worked very hard to make sure that we have same standards
on both sides of the Atlantic, so to speak, so that we can have
one common set of hardware.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Lobenstein, would you like to address
that?
Mr. Lobenstein. So we fully support the idea of spectrum
sharing. There has been some deployment actually in the
Japanese market near the 5.8 gigahertz band. We also think it's
important to protect this bandwidth within the United States
because DSRC provides lifesaving services, and we need to make
sure that that----
Mr. Farenthold. Is there a technical reason it is not going
to work at 77 gigahertz like the rest of the world is talking
about?
Mr. Lobenstein. I'm sorry, Mr. Farenthold, but I'm not a
technologist, so I'll have to pass on that.
Mr. Garfield. Well, actually, if I might?
Mr. Farenthold. Sure.
Mr. Garfield. It speaks to the point we were making earlier
about all of the different--the disparate efforts in this area
and why an agency that is focused on standards and standards
development globally like NIST has to be a part of this
conversation.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay. I see I'm out of time. I look forward
to a second round of questions.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Congressman Farenthold.
Now I'd like to recognize the ranking member of the IT
Subcommittee, and my friend, from the great State of Illinois,
Robin Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The promise of Internet-connected vehicles is that they
bring greater levels of comfort, convenience, and safety, but
that same Internet connectivity means that these computers on
wheels face the same cyber threats and vulnerabilities as other
computers.
Mr. Garfield, given the volume of successful compromises of
corporate and government networks, in your estimation, how
likely is it that we will see hackers instead of just
researchers succeed in hacking connected cars and especially in
light of Ms. Barnes' testimony?
Mr. Garfield. It's hard to predict the future, but I think
the likelihood is real and that it is likely. I think the
information that Mr. O'Connell shared about the approach in the
software industry on taking an agile approach where we adjust
continually, we are testing continually, and integrating
security and privacy by design with redundancy, resiliency, and
robustness, so we are not compromised completely, is the proper
approach.
Ms. Kelly. Is there anything that keeps you up at night,
any scenario that concerns you the most?
Mr. Garfield. Generally, I sleep quite well. But actually,
I think part of my worry is that all of the great things we
have been talking about will be a dream deferred because our
policy apparatus won't be as agile as our software development
to keep up with these shifts. And so I get the instinct to act,
and we should act. What we are suggesting is that we act in a
strategic coordinated fashion that ensures our shared interests
are achieved.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
And Mr. O'Connell, Mr. Lobenstein, and Mr. Lightsey, when
you think of new features that you are adding to your cars, is
there anything, not that you would do it on purpose, but that
you're adding that you think could be negatively compromised as
you're getting more connected, I guess?
Mr. Lightsey. Yes. So as we have said, we certainly embrace
all the tenets that Mr. Garfield has spoken about, and we
incorporate security by design, defense in-depth strategies
throughout our review. And so from the very beginning that any
service or hardware begins to go through the design cycle for
our automobiles, that cybersecurity posture of that particular
element is being evaluated, the risk is being assessed, and
appropriate measures are being taken to mitigate that risk. And
that goes all the way through production and into the lifecycle
of the vehicle itself.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Lobenstein. For Toyota the safety and trust of our
customers is paramount. And as I mentioned before, on the
telematic side we employ the same cybersecurity best practices
that have been mentioned here today. We include our
cybersecurity experts from the very beginning and they provide
feedback to us that we implement, and I think as we go forward
we will continue to expand on that. And we also look forward to
working as an industry to develop cybersecurity best practices
that we can all employ.
Mr. O'Connell. You didn't ask me, but I sleep well at night
too, and for two reasons. One, I know that we are employing
within Tesla some of the industry's best, as far as developing
new applications and considering issues, important issues such
as privacy and cybersecurity.
The other piece that gives me peace at night is that we are
working within a context, as Representative Farenthold referred
to, of open innovation whereby it's not wholly--the integrity
of our systems is not wholly reliant on the capabilities of
Tesla, but rather looks to resources outside of Tesla to
improve the systems that we are developing and to rapidly
implement those systems.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Lastly, at the beginning of your testimony, Mr. Beuse, you
talked about some of the statistics of people dying on the
highway.
Mr. Garfield, your testimony references the tremendous
economic and societal benefits that can be derived from
autonomous and connected vehicles. In your opinion, what should
Congress be doing and the Federal Government more broadly to
ensure the potential of this technology is realized? What more
can we do?
Mr. Garfield. Yeah, thanks for asking. There is certainly
important work for Congress. There are so many different
agencies that are working on the Internet of Things, and
connected cars are a part of that. Congress can play a great
role in bringing clarity on a path forward in filling gaps
where they exist. So, for example, Representative Lieu spoke
about the SPY Act that's going through the House and trying to
bring order to all of the work that's going on. We think that
would be quite valuable.
Ms. Kelly. Okay, thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Now, I'd like to recognize the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
About 5 or 6 years in the early 1990s I worked in the
automobile industry on the retail side, and I can look back on
those 20 years and see how much paperwork on the dealer side
was required then to how much is required now. So the last
thing that we want is more Federal regulations on these men and
women who are working hard to provide jobs out in the industry.
So I do have a couple of questions, though, to make sure
that we are headed in the right direction for Mr. Beuse. What
role, if any, in the Internet of Cars can only be filled by the
Federal Government? I'd like to hear your thoughts on that.
Mr. Beuse. So one of the things we're doing is really
trying to ensure kind of proactive steps from the get-go. It's
been mentioned a couple times about security by design. We
think that's absolutely paramount. And one of the things we
have been doing all along is we saw this coming from very far
away, that in order to see the vision of the future with
automated and connected vehicles we really had to start
focusing on that. And so we have been pushing and prodding as
best we can to get that happening.
Mr. Walker. Sure. In your opinion, do we really need an
auto industry-specific regulator and auto industry-specific
best practices an standards here, or is the National Institute
of Standards and Technology voluntarily cybersecurity framework
sufficient enough or the right approach? Can you address that?
Mr. Beuse. Sure. It might be all of that, sir. It really
might be all of that. Right now what we have concentrated on is
a kind of a two-prong approach with that. First is actually
working directly with NIST to work with the auto industry on a
set of best practices. But as a regulatory agency, we have to
keep in mind that that is our job, and if there's a need to set
a floor, we will do so.
Mr. Walker. Fair enough. Let me switch gears here but stay
with you, Mr. Beuse, for just another minute or 2.
Does the Federal Trade Commission currently have
jurisdiction under Section 5 to police the privacy policies of
automakers to the extent they collect customer personal
information from these connected car devices?
Mr. Beuse. So that's probably a question more directly
directed at the FTC, but what I can tell you is that we have
been working very closely with the FTC on privacy issues.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Does the Department of Transportation, or
the NHTSA, have particular expertise that would warrant having
them, rather than the FTC, to answer your response, oversee the
privacy policies related to the connected car devices?
Mr. Beuse. So we have do have privacy experts. That is one
of the things we will be addressing in our V2V rulemaking. And
so we have expertise at the agency, in our Department.
Mr. Walker. Is there a certain timeframe that you're--is
this a date or conference or meeting that you will be
addressing this? Is there a specific meeting for that?
Mr. Beuse. Sure. Sure. What we will be doing is in the
context of our notice of proposed rulemaking on V2V
communications we will have much discussion on the privacy
aspects of V2V.
Mr. Walker. Last question for you. And I've got--hopefully
have time for one more for someone else on the panel.
Most of the technologies that are in development are
independent of the DSRC and do not rely on the DSRC. What is
the NHTSA doing to enable further technology adoption and take
care not to hamper the innovation that we're seeing?
Mr. Beuse. We're using all the tools at our disposal,
including consumer information, regulations where appropriate.
It really is an era that we can--when we see lifesaving
technology, we really want to push to get it deployed as soon
as possible.
Mr. Walker. All right. Let me slide over to Ms. Barnes for
just a minute if I could please.
In your testimony you noted the sensitivity of consumer
information collected by the connected vehicles. You did a
great job sharing that. But just to review, can you describe
what types of personal identification information might be
collected and what entities would be collecting it other than
the vehicle manufacturers?
Ms. Barnes. Thank you for your question. Some examples of
personally identifiable information that can be collected is
location information, which can reveal an individual's pattern,
her habits. There's also the collection of biometric
information, also the collection of credit card information
with certain telematics placed inside of the car. Individuals
can within their car speak into their system for a text
message, so that's audio and that's also text messages.
And looking at the privacy policies of certain auto
manufacturers, it's almost an endless amount of outside
entities. Oftentimes car manufacturers do not specify the
various third-party entities to which they give information to.
We know in certain contexts it's marketers. We know that there
is an increased market for insurance companies to gain
additional access. And without sufficient legal requirements,
law enforcement could also gain access to this sensitive
information.
Mr. Walker. All right, thank you. That was very well
articulated.
I have got a few seconds left, but just maybe get a quick
answer from our manufacture guys. Regarding connected vehicles,
in what countries are we seeing the most innovation on this
right now? Are you able to address that and just maybe just go
down the line in 8, 9 seconds? And with that, I'll yield back
then.
Mr. Lightsey. I think this is certainly a very globally
competitive part of our industry. I think right now the United
States, it leads in terms of deployment of advanced
technologies. But I think this is rapidly changing, and I think
the proper policies need to be in place to assure that this
innovation continues in the United States.
Mr. Lobenstein. Thank you.
I agree. I think we are moving very quickly in the United
States to adopt these types of technologies, although in
countries like Japan technologies, for instance DSRC, V2V, and
V2I, have already been put in place.
Mr. O'Connell. I won't refer to our unique regional hubris,
but I think that the most advanced efforts are taking place in
the U.S. right now and I would like to see us continue to be on
the leading edge of this.
Mr. Walker. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. DeSaulnier, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
the chairmen and the ranking members for this hearing.
Mr. O'Connell, you can go on and talk about the hubris of
the Bay Area as long as you want to. I'm representing that area
of the country.
First of all, Mr. Chairman, I request that a statement from
the Center of Democracy and Technology be entered into the
record.
Mr. Hurd. Without objection.
Mr. DeSaulnier. And then maybe to Toyota and General
Motors. The whole issue of independent researchers, Mr.
O'Connell has talked to Tesla's advocacy for such comments, a
colleague talked about other technology companies doing that.
Could you tell me if Toyota and General Motors has the same
feeling that they will allow for independent researchers to
help them to make sure that their software is working properly?
And I say this somewhat in the context of what's happened in
the industry vis--vis Volkswagen. So maybe you could respond to
whether you agree with Mr. O'Connell and Tesla's approach or
whether you have a different one.
Mr. Lightsey. Yes. So we generally agree with this
approach. We have specific relationships with certain groups of
security researchers and academics. As I said, they perform
valuable services for us in terms of testing the vehicle
software and the systems on the vehicle to help us design, make
them better in design, so that hacking them is more difficult.
We also publicly disclose that we're looking very hard at a
security vulnerability program. Whether or not it's exactly
like the one that Tesla described will be determined. But we
should be rolling that out very quickly. And we want to know,
if our software has vulnerabilities, we want to know that both
from folks within the company and outside the company.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Mr. Lobenstein.
Mr. Lobenstein. We at Toyota also welcome information from
so-called white hat hackers. We have regular communications
with them. We have relationships with them. We also attend some
of the same conferences that they do. And we also do employ
third-party cybersecurity testing on some of our systems to
ensure that we have got all the most up-to-date information and
we are patching any vulnerabilities that we might find.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Okay. Switching subjects to privacy. So the
privacy principles are exciting to look at. But given Ms.
Barnes' concerns, and I will say my concerns, in the California
legislature we had very spirited debates about providing for an
opt-out for any third-party data, and the industry lobbied
heavily against it. It didn't get out of its first Policy
Committee.
So in that context, I think with the language that you have
in the privacy agreements that you have come up with and the
value you place on consumer confidence and what you are using
and the concerns that have been expressed here today as well,
can you provide a comprehensive list of all the data currently
tracked and stored in your vehicles, Mr. Lightsey? Can you
provide that information and can you provide it to the
committee, borrowing on the chairman's earlier comments of
within a couple weeks?
Mr. Lightsey. Sure. Definitely.
Mr. Lightsey. Our customer relationship is certainly the
most valuable thing that we have in our company, and we respect
the privacy of our customers, and we want to protect their
information. I will say that before we disclose any information
to any third party we get a specific affirmative consent from
our customer to do so.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Mr. Lobenstein.
Mr. Lobenstein. We also follow a similar process. We want
to be very transparent with our consumers on the data that
we're collecting and how we are using it. In four instances
where location-based services are used, we ask for the
affirmative consent of our consumers because those services
sometimes provide lifesaving services like crash notification.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I appreciate that.
Mr. O'Connell.
Mr. O'Connell. Yeah. So several levels of protection
involved at Tesla. First of all is the opt out. I mean, people
have the option to not share any of their data with us. When we
do share, when there is bidirectional flow of data, we
anonymize that data and we aggregate it such that not only can
you not identify the user, but you can't even identify the
vehicle. So that's our philosophy.
But the intent of, as I'll remind, the intent of all of
this is to increase principally the safety of our vehicles, and
then secondarily, but of great concern, the utility of our
vehicle to our customers and drivers.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I appreciate that. And hopefully we will
hit all of them.
Mr. Garfield, maybe you could just comment on the
industry's privacy standards in your view that related to other
tech privacy protections.
Mr. Garfield. In general, the privacy norms in the United
States and actually globally are driven by the FIPS standards,
which also is at the heart of the FTC regulation in this area,
which over time has become more expansive, not just to deal
with expectations that are explicitly articulated but those
that are normative.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Garfield.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
And I'd like to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Beuse, can you take 30 seconds and tell me, just to
make sure I'm clear, what DSRC is?
Mr. Beuse. Dedicated short-range radio communications.
Mr. Hurd. And how is it going to be used?
Mr. Beuse. To send basic safety messages between devices.
Mr. Hurd. And this is being developed by the Department of
Transportation?
Mr. Beuse. In conjunction with a whole host of alphabet
soup.
Mr. Hurd. Agencies, Federal agencies.
Mr. Beuse. Federal agencies, suppliers, manufacturers,
companies.
Mr. Hurd. So here is my concern about that. DOD and VA
spent over half a billion dollars trying to get two electronic
health records to work together. And after 4 years, they said:
Uh, this is really hard, we are going to have to go separate
areas.
And now we are talking about being in an industry where you
have so much private sector investment that are figuring this
out, why are we even thinking about the Federal Government
getting involved in doing this when that standard hasn't
developed out of the private sector? The private sector is
going to be a little bit better equipped to develop this type
of technology and the thing is probably going to work a little
bit better.
I don't know. Mr. Garfield, do you have some opinions on
this?
Mr. Garfield. We do.
Mr. Hurd. I'd like to hear them.
Mr. Garfield. Our view is, and I shared it implicitly in my
testimony, is that there are complementary technologies that
are being developed, including advanced LTE and 5G, that we
can't tell which is going to prove most effective. And so we
think having the ability for all of those, including DSRC to
advance, but without a thumb on the scale, including the thumb
on the scale of the Department of Transportation.
Mr. Hurd. Yeah. And, Mr. Beuse, why do we think that the
Department of Transportation should be doing this and why this
is going to be helpful in the concept of interconnected cars?
And I also appreciate you talking about the safety concerns
related with interconnected cars.
Mr. Beuse. So maybe just to clarify, I think there's a
misconception about what we are doing at the proposal level,
right? So we are writing a proposal to ensure interoperability,
security, and everything else that is needed to support
communications between vehicles. If at some point in the future
or even in response to the proposal data comes in that shows
there is an alternative technology that can meet the safety
potential, then----
Mr. Hurd. Do we not think that that's already there? I
think Toyota is doing it. I think Tesla is doing it. I think GM
has even tinkered with this. I think it's--the cat's out of the
bag.
Mr. Beuse. In response to the ANPRM, none of those comments
came in. There was not one person that responded back saying
that this technology shouldn't be mandated, it's not the right
technology.
But again, I think we are writing that rulemaking with an
open mind, and it's just a proposal, and so the idea is we'll
get comments and we'll evaluate where we are. I think the whole
notion of going this step is really to take it out of the
research where it's been for so long and really shine a light
on it so we can----
Mr. Hurd. Absolutely, because I had dear friends in a
recent car accident and there was a fatality, and the car that
came and hit them, first eyewitnesses said that the car never--
there was no braking involved. And the technology, advanced
emergency braking, that Tesla is developing--I think other
manufacturers are--I want to see this as quickly as possible.
And, Mr. O'Connell, my question to you is, you know, is
there any barriers that are preventing you all from moving even
faster on deploying this technology?
Mr. O'Connell. No. I think it's human will and open
communications both, you know, between the parties here at the
table and with government bodies, so that, you know, confidence
is obtained all around. Use the convening power of our separate
agencies and share information. That's what's going to solve
this problem.
Mr. Hurd. Yeah, because if we can protect more citizens
from crashes, you know, this is going to be a great thing for
all of us.
Mr. Lobenstein, my question to you, and this is from you
having your hat as the new chair of the Auto-ISAC, have you
been given any information, any intelligence, been briefed on
anything of known attackers targeting specifically vehicles,
types of vehicles? Is Russian organized crime creating, you
know, focused on getting access into vehicles? Have you seen
that kind of information?
Mr. Lobenstein. I apologize, Mr. Chairman. I'm not actively
involved in the Auto-ISAC myself, so I don't have that
information. I can get that for you.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Barnes, are you familiar of anything like
that where there is briefing on known attackers, Russian
organized crime, Chinese state sponsors, that are looking at
getting access to vehicle information?
Ms. Barnes. At this moment, no. I'm sorry. I'm not aware.
Mr. Hurd. Because again, one of my concerns is that, you
know, I did this for a living. We did this on trains. We did
this on subways, and, you know, looking at how can you take
advantage of it. We've got to know what the threat is, and this
is why I think this creation of the Auto-ISAC is important.
And if you're not getting the kind of information sharing--
because the Federal Government should be sharing as much
information as it possibly can with the private sector, for the
private sector to protect themselves, and to protect
consumers--and if you're not getting that, let me know.
And my last point is, the Office of Personnel Management
had difficulty protecting the records of 23 million people. And
they had the audacity to not even say ``my bad'' when they sent
out the letters to the people that did receive the letter that
they were compromised. By the way, I was one of them. And at
least when some of these issues have been--arise within the
auto industry, that I got a letter pretty quickly talking about
how you fix it, how you do it. And there was a responsiveness
that I wish the Federal Government had.
And so I think it's--I'm always concerned when we put too
much faith in Federal agencies to protect our information. And
it's cooperation. It seems like it is, Mr. Beuse. I appreciate
that. But this is where we need to work together and we need to
make sure that innovation and entrepreneurship is allowed to
grow.
With that, I'd like to----
Mr. Garfield. Actually, if I can make a quick plug for data
breach----
Mr. Hurd. You got a couple seconds.
Mr. Garfield. --data breach legislation, which has been
pending for quite some time, almost a decade, is long overdue,
and could be helpful here as well.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to recognize my colleague from
Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the
panel.
Maybe, Mr. Garfield, I'll start with you. Can you tell us
the difference between autonomous and assisted vehicles?
Mr. Garfield. In common nomenclature the idea is that an
autonomous vehicle doesn't necessarily rely on vehicle-to-
vehicle or vehicle-to-infrastructure communication, so it is
truly not connected to another car or to communication from
infrastructure.
Mr. Connolly. Or to a driver?
Mr. Garfield. Or to a driver, correct.
Mr. Connolly. And assisted would be?
Mr. Garfield. It's assisted by some network communication,
either with the infrastructure or with another----
Mr. Connolly. But also might be driverless in that sense?
Mr. Garfield. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Maybe we can start with you, Mr. Lightsey. You know, I
represent northern Virginia here in the Nation's Capital. The
national capital region as measured by A&M's Urban Mobility
Scorecard now has the Nation's worst congestion as measured by
these metrics: 82 hours stuck in traffic every year on average;
35 gallons of gas wasted idling every year; and at least $1,800
in lost time every year.
How could these technologies assist a region like this with
arguably the worst congestion as measured by those metrics?
Mr. Lightsey. Yes, thank you.
So first of all, let me backtrack a little bit to Chairman
Hurd's questions about DSRC and just let me say on behalf of
the industry and on behalf of GM, private industry has also
invested a substantial amount of money, equal to or greater
than the amount of money that the government has invested in
this technology. And we very much view this as complementary to
the onboard sensor technologies that are also being used with
many of these safety systems.
So DSRC has the advantages, as Mr. Beuse referenced in his
introduction, it has the advantage today of being the only
technology we know of that meets all of the latency
requirements to actually be able to have these vehicles talk to
each other in time to prevent a collision or crash from
happening, and works in bad weather with obstructed vision,
without obstructed vision, and those are the advantages that we
see to DSRC.
But I think if you take together all of these collisions,
all of these technologies, you know, any time that we can
prevent a crash from happening, we get the attendant benefits
of all of the congestion that happens when you have a crash.
Mr. Connolly. I concede that, but that's really not my
question. I think we have covered safety and I completely
concede that. And for some people their intuitive reaction when
you talk about driverless cars, I'm going to put it that way,
is well, I'm not in control, what if something happens, what if
it goes awry? And I think, well, 94 percent of current
fatalities are due to human error. Surely we can do better than
that and we can reduce, I think, significantly.
Mr. Garfield. And you are seeing better already with
advanced driver-assisted systems.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Garfield. So it will only get better and better.
Mr. Connolly. But how can it work in helping to alleviate
and better manage congestion in areas like ours? I guess that
was kind of what I was getting at.
Mr. Lightsey. Right. So if you take the whole system,
certainly as we bring the infrastructure into play and traffic
signals become more aware of what cars are flowing in what
direction, they can time themselves to optimize the traffic
flow. Autonomous vehicles, as being better controlled than by a
human operator, will be able to follow each other a little bit
more closely in a safe manner and, therefore, make more
efficient use of the roadways that we already have instead of
us having to continually add new lanes to our highway system.
Those are the kinds of things that we are talking about.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I want to give Mr. Lobenstein and Mr.
O'Connell from the manufacturing point of view an opportunity
to comment as well. But I have got to observe, and this is the
Nation's Capital, we are not that good at deploying technology
currently. I mean, in terms of traffic management, not much.
And I have been involved in local government for a long time.
We tried to get it, you know, deployed. I think, Mr.
Lobenstein, you mentioned Japan. Japan is light years ahead of
us in the deployment of technology for managing traffic
control. But why don't you two comment.
Mr. Lobenstein. They do have V2V and V2I technology
deployed already for improving traffic flow. And I think if we
look at the technology, traffic information was provided one
way to vehicles years ago, and now the vehicles understand and
can communicate back their flow and we know real-time when
there is traffic and where there is traffic. And I think
expanding the communication, whether it is V2V or V2I, allows
us to then improve routing, which improves safety, it has
improvements in productivity for individuals as well as
business, when you think about delivering goods and services,
and it has the capability to improve emissions as well.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. O'Connell.
Mr. O'Connell. On topic but slightly tangentially, there is
a great YouTube video that shows 20 cars put on a racetrack
with individual drivers all given a green light to start moving
at a certain time at a certain speed, and something within like
two or three laps they are all congested. So human systems are
not great, as you note.
Infrastructure is also hard. My comments are most salient
within the context of Tesla. We are already fielding driver
assistance technology, what we refer to as autopilot, which
relieves the driver of certain control responsibilities at
certain times and within responsible contexts. So presumes that
the driver is there, presumes that their hands are on the
wheel, but in certain speed environments, low-speed
environments, such as congestion, a vehicle can modulate its
own position within traffic and keep traffic flowing.
I mean, it's tempting to think that this sort of technology
could be implemented rapidly across a fleet. It's too bad the
connectivity doesn't exist across the fleet so that we can't
rapidly uptake systems. But I think you are going to see it
implemented more and more quickly over time.
Mr. Connolly. And if I could just observe at the end here,
Mr. Chairman, I think what's hopeful is how rapidly we already
are adjusting to technologies that assist us in this effort.
So, you know, on our own, we are getting on this and finding
out what's a better route because of congestion. I can even
look at reports coming in for what's causing the congestion and
then I can make a judgment as to whether I want to go or not.
GPS has revolutionized. I have to explain to my young staff
what a map was. We've become hooked on this already, and it is
an efficiency. So I'm confident that actually as we really
advance technology, I think we are going to adjust.
Thank you so much for being here.
And thank you Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
I recognize the chairman of the full committee, the
gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
And thank you all for being here.
This is one of the most exciting parts of our economy. This
is somewhere we can lead the world. It's something that's going
to create real jobs and have a real impact, I think, on
people's lives as long as the Federal Government doesn't come
in and screw it up--which we have prone to do in the Federal
Government.
One of the raging discussions and topics that we are going
to have in this Nation, particularly in light of the horrific
terrorist acts in Europe and what we have experienced here in
our own homeland, is a further discussion about encryption.
Because I think one of the big questions before our Nation is
how much privacy, how much security are we going to give--how
much privacy are we going to give up in the name of security?
And it's a difficult question when you see friends and
loved ones and people on television being killed. It's a very
difficult thing. But on the other hand, I also want my wife, my
kids, myself, my friends, my neighbors to be as safe and
protected from would-be people who want to cause them harm and
tap into information.
So maybe if I could start with Mr. Garfield here. If you
could address the whole encryption issue, how does it really
work? Because you really can't create a key just for the good
guys, just for law enforcement, right? It's either encrypted
and secure or it's not. Give me your perspective on that,
particularly in light of what this country is dealing with
right now.
Mr. Garfield. Thanks for the question, Mr. Chairman. I
would start by saying that the people that I work with are
patriots and so are as sickened by what they saw in Paris as
everyone else in this room.
The context in which we are having this conversation
actually speaks to the issue, because when we're talking about
security and safety encryption is an important tool for
enabling that. And so the conversation is not either-or, it's
how do we advance security with encryption as a tool, while
also making sure that national security is protected?
And I think there are ways to do that. I think a folly is
to think that creating backdoors or making keys available to
just some people is that solution, because ultimately, if you
create vulnerabilities, they'll be widely exploited.
Mr. Chaffetz. Yeah, but can't you just give it to the guy
at the genius bar and your wife and just call it a day? Explain
to the person who is not as familiar with this how this works
or doesn't work.
Mr. Garfield. Well, the challenge with just giving it to
the person at the genius bar is the same challenge that we're
talking about with 90 percent of traffic accidents are caused
by human error. And so you're entrusting one person who may be
vulnerable to being compromised with the security for everyone.
And so that is the problem with empowering the guy or the gal
at the genius bar, is you're creating a vulnerability that
could then be widely exploited.
Mr. Chaffetz. Anybody else want to address this? Anyone
else on the panel here?
Mr. O'Connell. Probably not.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do you want to have it be encrypted?
Mr. O'Connell. I'll, at some risk to myself, maybe I'll do
that. You know, I think it's an issue of philosophy, right? I
mean, as Mr. Garfield said, none of us--implied--none of us has
a unique repository of knowledge or capability.
I think open systems are ultimately the best systems to
innovate and to protect. It's a dynamic process. But it's one
where, I guess, you vest hope either in the inherent goodness
of man or the inherent badness of man, and I prefer to vote for
the former. I think that it's the minority that are malignant,
and that in a truly open system, where innovation is encouraged
and rewarded, where there's sufficient penalties for malignant
behavior, you're going to see a net positive benefit over the
course of time.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, thank you.
And I think as members on this panel and in the Nation
grapple with this, I think that the 99 percent of our
population that does deal with things in a safe and secure way,
they are good, honest, decent people. I think the bigger
obligation is to protect them as best we can. And certainly
there can be carveouts for law enforcement needs. If you have a
probable cause, articulable suspicion, you have a terrorist
type of activity going on, of course there are things, whether
it be geolocation or other types of things, that they should be
able to tap into.
But if you're a suspicionless American, if you're somebody
who is leading a good, decent, honest life, I think you have an
expectation of privacy in this Nation. And that will certainly
come into play not only with cars, but the Internet of Things.
And everything that's going to be connected, I think this is
going to be one of our big questions we're all going to have to
grapple with.
Mr. Garfield. If I can add one more thing.
Mr. Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr. Garfield. I think how we approach these issues have to
be grounded in something, and I think what they need to be
grounded in is our values. And part of our values here in the
United States is that we act consistent with laws, right? There
are certainly legal frameworks for gaining access to that
information, and we will work with law enforcement to ensure
that our national security is protected while at the same time
there's a fundamental belief that people's rights will be
protected as well. And we figured out how to strike that
balance and we'll continue to do so, and that's partly why
we're viewed in the way that we are around the world.
Ms. Barnes. And if I may just briefly add onto that if I
could have a moment. Another way in which to ensure both the
privacy and security is we're hearing a lot about privacy in
design, which is building privacy into the cars. But more
privacy protective would actually be privacy-enhancing
techniques which would minimize or eliminate the need to
collect personally identifiable information, so that when there
is a report of a malicious hack, those who need information
regarding the hacker only getting the absolute necessary
information about the hack, removing the personally
identifiable information. It's not important where the driver
was going or what she was speaking out inside of the car, but
instead that a system has been compromised.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, thank you.
And as I yield back, I do hope members are able to look at
the geolocation legislation, the GPS Act that we have here,
that you would need a warrant, or articulable suspicion
certainly, but a warrant to actually track somebody's
geolocation, because I do think that is the content of their
life.
So I appreciate the time. I yield back.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Other members have questions?
Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I'd like to take up a little bit on where Chairman Chaffetz
left off.
Ms. Barnes, earlier the automakers testified that they are
very careful with the information they collect and they don't
share it. Reading your written testimony, I'm not sure that you
would agree with that.
And, you know, there's a lot of information that's tracked.
I haven't turned off geolocation on my phone. So this is my
Veterans Day map. On a map it shows everywhere I was. I can
slide over. It tells me I got into the Houston airport and were
there for 32 minutes at 4 in the morning. I had breakfast in
Refugio. I went home and took a shower. I went to Robstown,
Texas. I went to the USS Lexington. I went to Brewster Street
to welcome some bicycle riders. I then went to Applebee's to
greet some veterans. I went to the Veterans High School.
It knows everywhere I was, how long I was down there, and
has deduced where I live and where I work without me having
told it a thing. This is turned on by default in almost every
person's phone. I would imagine that cars collect the same
information. And unless I'm aggressive about turning it off or
telling them I don't want it shared with marketing partners,
I'm going to have something pop up, say, ``You're near a
Whataburger. Why don't you stop for a burger and fries?''
So, I mean, there's a lot of information that's out there.
Do you want to comment on that and maybe we need a better opt
out on this?
Ms. Barnes. So I always advocate for stopping at
Whataburger.
But opt out routinely fails consumers. This idea that
there's such an information asymmetry that the auto
manufacturers, as well as their third-party services who are
contracting with them, can gobble up all of the information and
the consumer is simply unaware.
And when we are looking at the privacy pledge, it also--the
consumer doesn't have any type of choice. But choice is simply
not enough for the consumer. That's why we need some type of
standard where a consumer will have guaranteed privacy
protections.
The onus should not be on the consumer to turn off her
location information at every single subset. And when you look
in the Car SPY Act, there's a provision that would allow an
individual to turn off data collection should she choose, but
still retain the functionality.
Mr. Farenthold. So how easy is it? Okay, we can talk about
hackers, but let's talk about the government. How easy, right
now under current law, is it for the government to contact
Google or contact Tesla, Toyota, GM, and say, ``I want the
information for XYZ person?'' And do they need a warrant, or is
it just, I mean, is it a letter? What do they need?
Ms. Barnes. So in certain contexts it would depend exactly
about what type of personal data it is. Some of the information
may be protected under ECPA and other statutory provisions. But
in the absence of full-on protection for all of the types of
information that is collected, not only by auto manufacturers,
but as well as their third-party services, that's why there
needs to be----
Mr. Farenthold. They could potentially be subpoenaed by
private parties as well.
Ms. Barnes. Easily, yes, sir. Insurance companies,
marketers, those are some of the provisions to prevent
marketers to get it as well.
Mr. Farenthold. So do any of the auto manufacturers have an
idea how many of these they get a year, requests for
information from the government, be it a subpoena or a Federal
agency?
Mr. Lobenstein, you look like you have an answer.
Mr. Lobenstein. So I'm not aware of the number of requests
we get, but we have had a longstanding policy that any time we
do get requests for that type of information we require either
a court order or a warrant before that information's released.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Lightsey?
Mr. Lightsey. We have that same policy. We will not give
away any of our customers' private information unless there's a
due process of law.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Thank you very much.
And let me ask, I've got another minute or so here, we talk
about encryption and all the technology that's in the cars, in
the computers, but we look at--we also have created a system
where we're now making it difficult for us to repair our own
cars, to modify our own cars. We've basically killed the
industry of being able to go out and buy another radio for our
car because it's all integrated in the GPS system and the auto
control systems.
There was recently a case with a John Deere tractor where
they wouldn't let him fix it, saying the copyright on the
security and the anticircumvision provisions of the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act made it illegal for them to fix it
without going to a John Deere dealer.
I'm afraid we're going to see this in the car and we see
the death of the corner garage or we see the death of your
ability to do any sort of modifications to your car, you know,
whether it's with bigger tires to jack up your pickup truck or
do things to enhance performance.
Mr. Garfield. Actually, the example you gave is a great
example of regulatory processes working. And so every 3 years
the copyright office has to evaluate the DMCA to ensure that
good faith research is able to be advanced. And recently the
copyright office said that as a part of doing good faith
research you can do so on a car, right, and get beyond the
encryption systems. And so it's a great example of an agile
system working effectively.
Mr. Farenthold. My concern, of course, is you never really
own your vehicle because there's so much software involved you
actually may just be licensing the software to, you know,
operate something that would become a brick if you tried to
modify it or transfer it or do something else. But that's
something----
Mr. Garfield. Not to be overly contentious, but we can't
have it all ways, right? So we can't say we want connected cars
moving down the highway and be secure and safe while at the
same time saying we want everyone to be able to get into that
and be able to stop it while it's moving.
Mr. Farenthold. I think Mr. O'Connell is saying we want
open source software where we can actually see what's being in
and have control over your own vehicle. I mean, where's the
line there?
Mr. O'Connell. To be clear, I didn't necessarily advocate
for open source software, but I do advocate for an open system
of improving software. So that's an important differentiator.
And I would add, though, that, to the point of your last
comment, there are models out there which posit that people
don't even want to own their car anymore. So this may be--the
specific problem you reference may no longer be a problem,
which opens up the possibility that there are others, but you
for reference.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Well, I appreciate you all's
comment on that, and yield back.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you.
Any other questions at this time?
Just I guess in closing, well, I'm sitting here thinking my
wife is a pretty smart lady, and she does all of the computer
work at the house and paying bills and everything. And on a
Sunday afternoon she's on the computer and she gets a call from
Microsoft service center, and they ask for some information and
she reluctantly kind of gave it to them. The next thing I know
is her computer is locked, and it's an extortion attempt.
And I got on the phone. I found out they were Pakistanis.
I'm a Member of Congress, so I contacted--we have a whole
communications network. We have the Capitol Police. We have
access to the FBI and folks you don't even want to know. And
they basically told me: You're screwed. And it was extortion. I
mean, I could see extortion to can't start your car, someone
has hacked it. So, I mean, this just happened with our little
home computer.
It was interesting, though, we bought some new software and
it was at a location not our principal residence, so we didn't
have a lot on there. But after we bought that, then she found
out from the software company that they keep another lock
behind--protection behind that and can--and actually can
release the system. But they get you to think we have
incredible capability.
I was in a General Motors car. I love the--you had it
displayed here--the teenager device. I just told the Gonzaga
High School, I spoke there just--I think it was yesterday. I
told all those teenagers what's coming. And they were aghast,
you know.
But the things you can do are unbelievable. And I told the
class, too, I said: Your biggest--you know, whoever was paying
attention to Paris and the terrorist threat--but those kids get
in a car and that is the biggest cause of death for our
teenagers. We've gotten deaths down from 43,000 to 33,000. But
a huge percentage of those are kids. And the device I saw in
the General Motors car was pretty astounding, how you can
control that.
But, again, I guess a question more than the comment is,
the private sector's come up with some incredible innovations.
You're setting standards and trying to protect the owner and
the consumer. You've got a good association coming together
trying to bring folks together. I'm anxious to see your report,
I guess you cited, Mr. Garfield, that was just turned over. The
role and scope of government in all this, like the chairman
said, we usually overlegislate and then the government usually
overregulates. So trying to get it right, you want to also
protect rights, which Ms. Barnes has said.
And I hammered on DOT because it's now 3 years ago I said
let's see where we're going with this and tried to set a
schedule, which hasn't been adhered to. So a bit of frustration
in that. It is complicated. They need to work with you. It
sounds like for the most part they are. We don't want them to
come out with standards or requirements or technology mandates
that are obsolete or by the time we enact them sometimes
they've an overreach. So that's a challenge we face.
Maybe in closing any quick guidance on how to proceed? Mr.
Lightsey, I want to hear from the private sector. I know we're
going down a certain path, but what do you think, again, the
proper role of government?
The standards, I've worked with NHTSA. And I just told Ms.
Duckworth I tried to get a biometric standard after 9/11. That
was three times I put in law a biometric standard for iris. And
I think we may be there, it's 12 years later. Hauled them in,
tried to get them, they're very difficult to nail down. And
with changing technology, you've got sort of it's like trying
to change the wheels on a vehicle that's moving down the
highway at 75 miles an hour.
But tell me how you would like to see this unfold, Mr.
Lightsey, Mr. Lobenstein, and Mr. O'Connell, the three guys who
are representing the companies that actually produce vehicles.
Go ahead.
Mr. Lightsey. Yes. So thank you, Mr. Chairman. And with all
due respect, our industry can't afford to wait for government
and we're not doing that. We're investing a substantial amount
of resources and energy into innovating with our products and
services to make our products safer and to make them more
enjoyable by our customers who are----
Mr. Mica. Now, once again I have to nail you down. What's
the proper role of government regulation, law? Where do we go?
Mr. Lightsey. Well, as I was saying, Mr. Chairman, I think
our industry has shown time and again that we can and do work
well together for our customers. And I think that the industry
needs the freedom to innovate and to do that work.
Mr. Mica. And who in government would you put? Should we
leave it with NHTSA or DOT or where? How should it be
structured, responsibility from the Federal level?
Mr. Lightsey. From the Federal level, we work well with
NHTSA, we have a good relationship with them, and we've proven
that we can do that. I think that in this space obviously the
Federal Trade Commission is active in this space, and we've
begun to work with them as well, and we will work with whatever
agencies that Congress in its wisdom decides are the ones that
need to be involved in this.
Mr. Garfield. If I could interject----
Mr. Mica. Well, after I hear from Lobenstein and O'Connell.
I didn't really get a real handle on--we haven't even talked
the FTC. God, no.
Let me hear your take, Mr. Lobenstein.
Mr. Lobenstein. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think, first of
all, we appreciate the work that has taken place between the
auto industry and NHTSA so far on DSRC. That's been a 15-year-
long road to get to where we are today, and we think we have a
good technology that's ready to go. And once we get this
spectrum issue closed, I think we can move forward with that
safety-of-life mission that DSRC promises us.
In terms of cybersecurity, you know, we've looked at the
NIST framework, and we think that NIST is a good agency for us
to partner with and as an industry to create the same types of
best practices and self-guiding principles that we've already
done in terms of privacy and security.
Mr. Mica. NHTSA at one level, NIST at another level?
Mr. Lobenstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mica. Okay. Mr. O'Connell.
Mr. O'Connell. Mr. Chairman, a couple issues of principle
and then a direct answer to your question.
You know, it's all about incentives. At Tesla no one could
be more interested in our own survival, especially as a small
young company, than we are. So putting the right incentives in
place is key.
I think that whatever we do and whatever agency it resides
in, we need to foster innovation, number one, and then sharing.
So putting the proper incentives in place to innovate and to
share.
I think an instructive case of how this proceeded was
advanced emergency braking, where rather than resisting an
impulse to regulate, NHTSA and other agencies fostered the sort
of development of the technology and then encouraged the
deployment of that technology and did so, as far as I know,
without the benefit of any sort of regulatory norms.
The hazard with standards is that of course in a long
process you move toward lowest-common-denominator behavior, and
so that's to be encouraged in some cases, but not--I mean, the
standard-setting process--but not wholly appropriate in
innovative arenas like this.
As to the agencies, I don't have any particular point of
view, I'm afraid to say.
Mr. Mica. Okay.
Mr. Garfield.
Mr. Garfield. The only thing I would add is that one of the
real challenges here is that these are cross-cutting issues
that impact and implicate multiple agencies. And one way that
Congress could certainly help is bringing order to that by
making sure that there is greater coordination among all the
agencies.
So it's not to suggest NHTSA be cut out and the Department
of Commerce be brought in. It's really Congress can play a
critical role in making sure the FTC, the FCC, NHTSA, and NIST
at the Department of Commerce are actually coordinating and
working with each other to achieve the things that we all have
in mind.
Mr. Mica. Well, again--you did a very good job, Ms. Barnes,
giving us your agenda recommendations. Thank you-- on the
privacy side--but thank you for participating.
I look forward hearing back, seeing some of your plans,
sir.
What I'd like to do is we'll leave the record open, without
objection, for 10 days. We may have additional questions, there
are quite a few here that we didn't even get to, to submit to
the witnesses. They'll be made part of the record.
So without objection, that's so ordered.
Mr. Mica. And, again, I'm looking forward to having a
report and the other items we requested today from NHTSA made
part of the record.
And, again, thank you, each of you. Very interesting.
Probably they'll look back in 10 years and we'll have made such
incredible progress. But we want to do the right thing at this
important juncture, and that's bringing out these issues, and
your progress and where we need to go is important.
So there being no further business before the subcommittee,
the dual subcommittees here, we will adjourn this hearing.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:12 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
