- CENSUS 2020: EXAMINING THE READINESS OF KEY ASPECTS OF THE CENSUS BUREAU'S 2020 CENSUS PREPARATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CENSUS 2020: EXAMINING THE READINESS OF KEY ASPECTS OF THE CENSUS
BUREAU'S 2020 CENSUS PREPARATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 9, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-114

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
23-483 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Patrick Hartobey, Counsel
Liam Mckenna, Senior Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 9, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. John H. Thompson, Director, U.S. Census Bureau, Accompanied
by Harry A. Lee, Acting Chief Information Officer, U.S. Census
Bureau
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. Steve I. Cooper, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16
Ms. Carol Cha Harris, Director, Information Technology
Acquisition, Management Issues, U.S. Government Accountability
Office
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    22
Ms. Carol N. Rice, Assistant Inspector General, Office of
Economic and Statistical Program Assessment, U.S. Department of
Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    57
Written Statement............................................    59

CENSUS 2020: EXAMINING THE READINESS OF KEY ASPECTS OF THE CENSUS
BUREAU'S 2020 CENSUS PREPARATION

----------

Thursday, June 9, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Duncan, Jordan,
Walberg, Amash, Gosar, Farenthold, Meadows, Mulvaney, Blum,
Walker, Buck, Hice, Carter, Grothman, Palmer, Maloney, Norton,
Clay, Cooper, Connolly, Kelly, Watson Coleman, Plaskett,
DeSaulnier, Welch, and Lujan Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order, and without objection,
the chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
I thank you all for being here as we examine the
preparations of the census of 2020. Hard to believe, but it is
coming up before us. And, in fact, it is less than 4 years
away, so now is the time to identify problems while they can
still be remedied.
Today's hearing is especially important, given the
modernization efforts undertaken by the census as it attempts
to control the rising costs of administering the decennial
census. The cost of counting individuals has gone up roughly
500 percent since 1970, and cost estimates for the 2020 census
have exceeded $17 billion. I appreciate the Bureau taking
proactive steps to save taxpayer dollars by adopting new
technologies to increase efficiency and lower costs. That is
the whole premise of technology. It is supposed to make life
easier, simpler, more efficient, and more effective, and we can
extrapolate the data more quickly.
But in the Bureau's effort to cut the price tag for the
2020 census, it may have bitten off a little bit more than it
can chew, and we are here to get on the record and talk about
and have candid discussions about the realities of moving
forward.
The Bureau is attempting to modernize through two separate
programs: the 2020 census and the Census Enterprise Data
Collection and Processing program, also known as CEDCaP. It is
the bureau-wide program to digitize and modernize not only the
decennial census but all of the surveys that are conducted by
the Bureau. And among the different systems being updated,
they're the mobile device platform, an Internet response
platform, and programs to manage enumerators.
But right now, as best we can tell, the Bureau is zero for
17, that is 0 for 17 in its efforts to execute final versions
of the IT necessary for these modernization efforts. With only
a year-and-a-half before the 2018 end-to-end test, the Bureau
cannot afford to dither on decisions and risk failing to test
aspects of the modernization program. Failure to be ready for
the 2018 test can mean that first-time systems were tested
actually in 2020, and that is what we are trying to avoid.
Allowing the 2020 census to proceed with untested programs
and risk another HealthCare.gov fiasco must not happen. By all
accounts, the Bureau does not have a clear backup plan in place
in its modernization efforts to be completed on time, and it is
a bit incomprehensible because for the 2010 census the Bureau
attempted a far less expansive modernization effort utilizing
custom-built mobile enumeration device that ultimately failed.
This is the widget if you will, the gadget. This is a $3
billion mistake that happened, $3 billion and it didn't work
and had to be trashed, and we don't want to have to go through
that again. It was a real problem.
The challenges facing the successful execution of the
Bureau's plan for the 2020 census extend beyond merely the
actual systems. Problems exist in both staffing and the cost
realm as well. The Bureau has had a number of long-term
vacancies in key positions. It was just monday of this week
that the Bureau announced the appointment of a permanent chief
information officer Kevin Smith roughly 11 months since the
departure of the previous CIO. We are glad that Mr. Smith is
joining us.
He is not here on the panel today. I thought it would be a
little unfair, on day 4 of his new employment, to call him
before Congress, but he has a massive task in front of him. I
look forward to working with Mr. Smith and make sure that our
committee is fully integrated with what is happening and not
happening.
Today, however, vacancies in key leadership positions
remain, including the chief information technology security
officer for CEDCaP. Obviously, the sensitivity of the data is
of most concern.
The Bureau is also experiencing problems related to the
cost of its modernization efforts. The GAO, who's represented
here today, and the Department of Commerce inspector general
feel that the Bureau is inaccurately estimating the cost for
the census. The Bureau has estimated that its modernization
efforts will cost around $548 million. However, GAO states that
an independent estimate is nearly twice that amount based on
the Bureau's efforts of being successful, it is estimated the
cost will actually be closer to $1.1 billion. That is not an
insignificant difference, and we are here to explore in part
today why the difference in such a vast--we are talking about
hundreds of millions of dollars in difference.
I would like to thank all of you in advance for your
participation and your testimony here today. I look forward to
working with you, and we will have regular hearings as the
Oversight and Government Reform Committee does have
jurisdiction in this matter.
Chairman Chaffetz. I will now recognize the gentlewoman
from New York, Mrs. Maloney, for her opening statement.
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
convening today's hearing to examine the Census Bureau's
readiness to conduct the 2020 decennial census. I want to thank
you and the panelists for being here on this important national
issue.
I am very pleased to hear that information technology is
playing such a key role in the upcoming census and that the
Bureau is taking advantage of the Internet, handheld devices
for enumerators, and other technologies that before now were
not widely available.
The well-planned use of technology is critical to the
success of the decennial census, the Nation's largest peacetime
activity, and a constitutionally mandated foundation of our
democracy. If we do not have good data, then this country does
not have a foundation on which to base good public policy for
both the public and private sector.
Census data is used to apportion seats in the United States
House of Representatives, defines State Legislature and city
legislature districts, determines school district assignments,
and helps the private sector and the government make sound
investments of where the people are and where the needs are.
Decisions on how to fund special education grants, adoption
assistance, the creation of small business development centers,
rural business enterprise grants, and other programs are all
dependent on an accurate census.
The Census Bureau and Department of Commerce have admitted
that there have been challenges in preparing for the largest
census to date, one that encompasses a population projected to
reach more than 324 million people by 2020. According to the
GAO, chief among those challenges is the fact that the Bureau
has gone without a permanent chief information officer for
nearly a year.
Since November, Joint Government Operations and Information
Technology Subcommittee hearing on the census, Harry Lee, the
Bureau's acting CIO; and Steven Cooper, the Department of
Commerce's CIO, have done an admirable job of filling the gap
and responding to GAO's IT-related recommendations. As of
today, only three out of the 114 IT-related recommendations
made by GAO remain unaddressed. I would like to congratulate
you on this achievement.
This week's announcement that Kevin Smith has been hired as
the Bureau's chief information officer is encouraging and will
provide additional leadership to help guide the decision-making
process.
However, there is still a great deal of work to be done if
the Bureau is going to meet the census modernization goals. For
example, while the decision to rely more heavily on technology
makes sense, we must incorporate solutions that recognize that
access to technology like broadband Internet is inconsistent
across the country. Now, that is a huge challenge. According to
a January 2016 Federal Communication Commission's report, 10
percent of Americans do not have broadband Internet access. In
rural areas, that number increases to nearly 40 percent.
For the first time on a nationwide scale, the Bureau will
individuals and households to respond to the 2020 census via
the Internet, so congratulations to catching up with the rest
of the country. We are going to the Internet. That makes good
sense. The Bureau is projecting that more than 50 percent of
the households will provide that information using the
Internet, and that this will be a huge, huge savings to the
Census Bureau. But I have to ask, without access to a broadband
Internet connection, is that number realistic?
In an election year, we are reminded of how fundamental the
census is to our democracy and the sustained well-being of all
of our communities. There is a lot of work to be done, and the
Bureau's plans are certainly ambitious. While I am encouraged
by the progress being made, I think it is important that
realistic contingency plans are also being considered. I am
looking forward to hearing the specifics today on what those
contingency plans--what is your fallback plan if you can't
reach these goals? And at what point and at what judgment call
would be made to adopt the fallback plans.
Again, I want to thank the majority and the chairman for
calling this hearing, and I want to thank the witnesses for
testifying. This is a fundamental part of our democracy, a
fundamental part of our planning, and fundamentally important
to the growth of our economy and the ability of our government
to respond to the needs of our people.
So I thank all that are part of making the census the best
ever in the history of our great country.
I thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement, and will
now recognize our panel of witnesses.
I am pleased to welcome the Honorable John Thompson,
director of the United States Census Bureau. Mr. Steve Cooper
is the chief information officer at the United States
Department of Commerce. Mr. Harry Lee has been the acting chief
information officer at the United States Census Bureau. Ms.
Carol Harris is the director of information technology
acquisition management issues at the United States Government
Accountability Office. And Ms. Carol Rice is the assistant
inspector general at the Office of Economic and Statistical
Program Assessment at the United States Department of Commerce.
We thank you all for being here.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify, so if you will please rise and raise your
right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Let the record reflect the
witnesses have all answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for some good discussion, we would
appreciate it if you would limit your oral presentation to no
more than 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be made
part of the record.
Director Thompson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOHN H. THOMPSON

Mr. Thompson. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Maloney, and other members of the committee. I really
appreciate the opportunity to update you on the 2020 census.
I'm proud to report today that we are on time and on schedule.
This is a joint statement with Harry Lee, acting associate
director for information technology and chief information
officer. I thank Mr. Lee for his service over the past year. On
Monday, he will be joined by our new CIO Kevin Smith, who comes
from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
In November, I testified that we're on track to execute a
decennial census that is innovative, efficient, and accurate.
The 2020 census operational plan includes 350 design decisions
of which 168 had been made in November. Since then, we've made
an additional 45 decisions on schedule and in some cases ahead
of schedule.
My written testimony provides a detailed description of our
progress, which I will summarize in the remainder of my oral
testimony.
The Census Bureau is pursuing four key innovation areas
that will make it easier for people to respond and save
taxpayers more than $5 billion: first, reengineering address
canvassing; second, optimizing self-response; third, using
administrative records and third-party data; fourth,
reengineering field operations.
We're testing these innovations in our 2016 census tests in
Los Angeles and in Harris County, Texas, which includes review
of our system's readiness and operations. I've visited both
sites and seen the operations, the innovations. Next week, our
visit our National Processing Center to observe our in-office
address canvassing progress.
Today, I will focus on the decisions we've made to support
these innovations since November. Use of mobile devices for
2020: A key aspect of reengineering our field operations is
replacing enumerators' paper and pencil with mobile devices.
These devices have software to securely collect household
information, transmit data, make daily assignments, updates,
and time sheets.
Based on the findings from our 2014 and 2015 tests, we
decided to employ device as a service, another decision made
ahead of schedule. In this arrangement, a contractor will
provide devices and service contracts to enumerators on our
behalf.
Cloud computing: One of our objectives for the 2016 test
was to test collection systems in the cloud. Mr. Cooper will
discuss this further in his testimony.
Census Enterprise Data Collection and Processing, or CEDCaP
systems, build/buy. Since December 2014, we've been assessing
whether to use commercial software products to collect and
process data or whether to build our own systems. In May, we
announced our decision to use a commercial platform with
specific solutions developed by census experts.
We made this decision with confidence due to rigorous
analysis. First, our in-house teams had created and tested
prototypes that refined our requirements and helped us better
understand how we could reengineer our business processes.
Then, we analyzed commercially available products against these
requirements identified by the prototypes. Finally, we
conducted our analysis with significant input from experts at
Carnegie Mellon University and the National Academy of
Sciences. Ultimately, we decided that this approach best meets
our data-collection and processing goals for the 2020 census.
Preparing for future decisions: Census tests are critical
to our preparation for 2020. This fall, we will test in-field
address canvassing procedures and systems in Buncombe County,
North Carolina; and St. Louis, Missouri. In 2017, we will
conduct a nationwide self-response test with an in-field
component tested on two American Indian reservations. We will
also test address canvassing integration of our data-collection
methods in Puerto Rico. We will announce sites for the 2018
end-to-end test very soon. Systems testing will begin this
November with the first field component beginning in 2017--the
fall of 2017.
Mitigating risk: As I discuss in detail in my written
testimony, mitigating risk is a high priority for the Census
Bureau. In particular, we've maintained an enterprise-level
risk management program which contains comprehensive risk
registers for individual programs, including the 2020 census
and CEDCaP.
An extremely critical risk is cybersecurity, and you will
hear more about that from Mr. Cooper as well.
Another significant risk we face is budget uncertainty. If
adequate funding is not received in fiscal year 2017, we will
have to reprioritize activities to ensure that the 2018 end-to-
end census test and the 2020 enumeration will take place on
time. If we have to defer activities, the cost of the census
will increase.
I thank the Congres for your continued support, interest in
our work. I am confident the Census Bureau will achieve its
objectives with congressional support.
I look forward to answering your questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Mr. Cooper, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVE I. COOPER

Mr. Cooper. Good morning. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning. It is my pleasure to
address the committee and update you on our work for a
successful 2020 census.
As you know, the Census Bureau faces an increasing set of
challenges, including declining survey participation rates,
increasing survey costs per household, funding constraints, and
evolving cybersecurity threats. The Census Bureau continues
working to ensure the necessary information technology is in
place to support the 2020 decennial census.
In November, I testified before many of you and spoke about
a major enterprise initiative providing support to the 2020
census, the Census Enterprise Data Collection and Processing,
known as CEDCaP. CEDCaP is an integrated and standardized suite
of systems that will provide shared data collection and
processing solutions across all Census Bureau operations.
Just weeks ago, the Census Bureau announced a major
decision on whether to use commercial software products or
develop our own systems to collect and process data in the 2020
census. After a comprehensive evaluation and extensive
analysis, we have determined that a hybrid approach--combining
a commercial off-the-shelf COTS system with specific solutions
developed by census experts--will best meet our needs. The full
CEDCaP COTS Capability Assessment and Analysis Report is now
available, as well as the related 2020 Decision Memo.
During this same period, our in-house innovation and
development teams have been hard at work developing test
prototypes for the 2020 census field tests. This testing has
been a critical part of the development process, allowing us to
better understand how to reengineer our business processes to
save money during the 2020 census. The work of the teams helped
us develop and refine our requirements and to conduct a well-
informed evaluation of the COTS products.
Based on our final requirements, an analysis of the
development and testing results, and with input from experts at
Carnegie Mellon University and the National Academy of
Sciences, we decided on an integrated COTS platform which can
supply functional solutions that also incorporate innovations
that we have developed in-house. This approach meets our data
collection and processing goals for the 2020 census and allows
us to build the infrastructure to support our censuses and
surveys in the future as well.
Refining the systems we use for data collection and
processing is a critical component of our proposal to save $5.2
billion in the 2020 census when compared to the 2010 census
design. Meeting the schedules and timelines are key to
preparing for the 2018 end-to-end test, which will test the
integration of all major operations, processes, and systems.
The Census Bureau continues to explore how best to employ
cloud-computing services to support the performance and scaling
needs of 2020 census systems, particularly for the Internet
self-response option that must support millions of users. As
part of this effort, we have developed several guidance
documents to include a cloud strategy, a cloud maturity model,
cloud concept of operations, a consolidated project dashboard
to measure that progress and success, and cloud readiness
checklist. We are ready to evaluate cloud candidates among
census systems and applications before beginning any migration
or transition activities.
The Census Bureau is currently engaging in robust technical
activities to innovate and fully transition to the cloud.
Proof-of-concept activities include performing integration,
load, and penetration testing to validate results. We have
collected lessons learned to incorporate high availability and
redundancy in the cloud.
We intend to engage and acquire private sector expertise to
partner with census to obtain cloud services and ensure overall
system readiness and security for the decennial census.
Obviously, securing confidential data is a major concern
for the Census Bureau. The Census Bureau uses an enterprise-
layered defense approach to protect its data and systems. This
includes the use of Department of Homeland Security-managed
EINSTEIN program, intrusion-detection systems, intrusion-
prevention systems. We have segmented Census Bureau's network
to isolate the internal network from systems that are Internet-
accessible, and we have adopted risk management framework
guidelines from our colleagues at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology.
Census works very closely with the Department of Commerce
in addressing the various cybersecurity goals set forth by the
Department, the Office of Management and Budget, and the
Department of Homeland Security. Moreover, Census also has an
active Computer Incident Response Team to identify and
investigate incidents that may be cybersecurity-related. The
CIRT has trained forensic specialists on staff who are involved
in incident investigation and response. In addition to DHS
EINSTEIN, we've employed a layered defense strategy with the
implementation of Census Intrusion Detection Systems,
firewalls, and antivirus scanning.
Consistent with my testimony in November and based upon my
ongoing observations, the Census Bureau and the 2020 census
program is well-positioned to leverage enterprise initiative to
realize significant efficiencies and mitigate risk. Innovations
in cloud computing, mobile technology, and cybersecurity
continue to show great promise, but to adequately implement
these strategies and meet the challenges will require the best
efforts of the Census Bureau and continued congressional
support.
I am deeply grateful for this opportunity to testify, and
I'm pleased to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Mr. Lee, my understanding is
you did a combined statement with Director Thompson, correct?
Mr. Lee. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. We will now go to Ms. Harris. You
are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CAROL CHA HARRIS

Ms. Harris. Chairman Chaffetz, acting Ranking Member
Maloney, and members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today.
Your continued oversight in hearings of the 2020 census are
vital to ensuring that this important effort is managed
effectively. The Bureau will rely on an enterprise-wide IT
initiative called CEDCaP to deliver systems and infrastructure
needed to carry out its redesign operations. For example,
CEDCaP is planning to enable an Internet response option,
implement a new system to track and manage enumerator
caseloads, and use mobile devices for field data collection. As
such, CEDCaP is integral to helping the 2020 census program
achieve its estimated $5.2 billion cost-savings goal.
Based on ongoing work, I'll highlight three key points
regarding the Bureau's IT plans for 2020. First, CEDCaP has
little time remaining to implement key production systems
needed for 2020. The CEDCaP program is expected to deliver 17
solutions for 2020, and implementation of the final production
systems for the 17 has not yet started. For about half, the
Bureau just recently made the decision to buy these solutions.
However, by August 2017 the Bureau intends to begin end-to-
end testing to validate that CEDCaP systems are ready to go
live on census day. This gives the Bureau less than a year-and-
a-half to reengineer business processes; configure, integrate,
and test planned systems.
Further, our in-depth analysis of three high-priority
CEDCaP projects show that key IT management best practices were
not fully implemented. For example, while each of the three
projects meet weekly to monitor costs and schedule variances,
their efforts to adequately assess progress have been hampered
because none have up-to-date cost performance baselines or
project plans with key details such as milestone dates for when
production systems are to be released.
Until the Bureau addresses the weaknesses we identified, it
will be at greater risk of cost and schedule increases and
failure to deliver capabilities that will meet the needs of
2020.
Second, more effective management of the interdependencies
between the CEDCaP and 2020 programs is needed. These two
programs are intended to be on parallel implementation tracks,
and while steps have been taken to coordinate schedules, risk,
and requirements, these programs lack effective processes for
managing their interdependencies. For example, the Bureau's
process for managing shared activities requires the programs to
maintain two separate dependency schedules rather than
establishing one integrated dependency schedule, as called for
by best practice. This has contributed to the misalignment of
major milestone events, including key build-or-buy decisions
that CEDCaP ultimately needed to accelerate to meet the needs
of 2020.
In addition, the Bureau has proceeded with CEDCaP work
without having a fully defined and institutionalized process
for collecting business requirements. The lack of fully defined
requirements has been a problem for the Bureau in the past and
contributed to a $3 billion overrun and failed IT program in
the 2010 census. Bureau officials have told us that they are
taking or plan to take steps to address the issues. However,
until these interdependencies are managed more effectively, the
Bureau will be limited in understanding the work needed by both
programs to deliver CEDCaP systems.
Third, there are critical information security challenges
that will need to be effectively addressed when implementing
the 2020 census. Among other things, the Bureau's introduction
of an Internet response option puts respondents at more risk
for phishing attacks--that is, requests for personal
information from authentic-looking but fake emails and Web
sites.
The Bureau must also make certain that key IT positions are
filled and have appropriate information security knowledge and
expertise. As of this week, the Bureau filled its most critical
and long-standing IT leadership vacancy: the chief information
officer position. More work will be needed to fill the
remaining gaps, including the CEDCaP chief security engineer,
to ensure that sensitive information collected during the
census is adequately secure.
In summary, the Bureau has a considerable amount of work
left with less than a year-and-a-half remaining until its
production systems must be ready for the 2020 end-to-end test.
The margin for error is slim, and it will be critical for the
Bureau to fully implement our recommendations. Doing so will
improve the Bureau's ability to deliver on its IT plans and
realize cost savings.
That concludes my statement, and I look forward to
addressing your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Harris follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Ms. Rice, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CAROL N. RICE

Ms. Rice. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz,
Congresswoman Maloney, and members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to speak today about where the
Census Bureau stands as it plans for a more modern, cost-
effective 2020 census.
The Office of Inspector General is continuing its oversight
of the Bureau's 2020 census planning efforts. The Bureau has
stated--has a stated goal to conduct a cost-effective decennial
while not compromising accuracy primary through automation and
eliminating pen-and-paper processes.
To meet its goals, the Bureau has focused on four areas:
first, address canvassing. Through continuous updating of
census maps and address lists, as well as conducting fewer in-
field verifications, the Bureau has a projected savings of $900
million.
Second, self-response. The Bureau is looking to maximize
the participation rate. The more people that reply via the
Internet or returning their paper questionnaire, the less need
in associated cost there is to send someone to a non-responding
household. It projects savings of $400 million through these
efforts.
Third, administrative records. The Bureau can leverage
government and third-party data to improve address lists,
verify respondent information, fill in blanks or invalid
answers, and assess the overall 2020 census accuracy. Using
these records, the Bureau projects savings of $1.4 billion.
And fourth, field operations. The Bureau is looking to
automate field data collection, establish an enterprise IT
system for data collection and processing, the CEDCaP that so
many of my colleagues here have discussed, streamlining field
staffing and reduce the number of field offices. By
reengineering field operations, the Bureau projects savings
$2.5 billion.
I should note that the summary above is not an exhaustive
list of all the 2020 census innovations. The 2020 census
operational plan identifies 34 operations, all in various
planning stages, and over 184 design decisions requiring
answers as of 7 months ago when the plan was released.
OIG and other stakeholders support these innovations. Our
concerns lie with the challenges that the Bureau faces in
preparing these innovations for 2020 execution. More
specifically, as we review and report on 2020 research and
testing, we're concerned with the evaluation criteria and
issues relating to the costs.
We're concerned that some of the research and testing the
Bureau is conducting lacks rigorous success criteria, meaning
established, quantifiable benchmarks to make informed,
empirical decisions. Without measurable success criteria, the
Bureau and stakeholders cannot determine whether the activities
tested will result in a better method or a better way to
conduct the census.
Over the past several years, we've also reported a number
of concerns about the Bureau's cost-accounting and cost-
estimating practices. Looking at the decennial program's method
of recording salary costs in May 2014, we reported how the
Bureau did not adequately track project costs. Instead,
salaries were recorded and paid on previously set budget
allocations. In other words, actual spending on projects wasn't
really tracked. As a result, the Bureau and stakeholders could
not calculate the return on investments.
Similarly, cost estimates must be documentable and
transparent. For fiscal years 2013 through 2015, the Bureau
lacked detail or support documenting its cost-savings estimates
in the 2020 census R&T budget justifications. Stakeholders must
understand how cost savings can and will be achieved.
In September 2015, we reported on how the Bureau's 2014
census test proved to be a missed opportunity to validate the
cost estimates and established benchmarks for the success of
the proposed design options. In order to accurately estimate
what the cost of a new innovation will be in the future, the
costs associated with the activity must be collected during the
field test.
And in the first half of 2016, we've issued two reports on
the address and map database, MtDB, that will inform the 2020
census. Again, we reported that the Bureau didn't collect cost
data or conduct a cost-benefit analysis for one of the--for the
2015 address validation test. Without clear, objective cost
data, without establishing criteria by which to measure the
outcomes of its tests, the Bureau jeopardizes meeting its cost
and quality goals. OIG supports the Bureau's spirit of
innovation as long as the Bureau properly tests, assesses, and
prepares for these innovations well in advance of census day
2020. The decennial is too important and too costly for any
unneeded risks.
Thank you, and I am happy to respond to any questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Rice follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
panel for being here. This is a challenge, the census, but
probably is the one benefit that comes that takes people's
attention and minds and calls to my office off of IRS and VA
for a while. And that is probably the only benefit, though. We
understand it has to be done, but we want it to be done right
and appreciate your efforts at that point.
Mr. Thompson, how reliant will the census 2020 be on
CEDCaP?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, CEDCaP is a key component for
the 2020 census. It has a number of important systems that will
be used in 2020. Those systems will also be reused for the
enterprise, but we do depend on CEDCaP very heavily, and that's
why we give it so much attention.
Mr. Walberg. It is apparent that you will be extremely
reliant on CEDCaP for important reasons, but is it safe to say
that CEDCaP and the reliance on it will not go as planned or
achieve the $5.2 billion in planned savings--2020 won't achieve
that without CEDCaP?
Mr. Thompson. As I said, it's a critical part of the 2020
census. It--we are delivering key systems to support 2020 that
are part of CEDCaP. And so yes, some of the systems that we
rely on in CEDCaP like our control systems and our mobile
technology systems are key to achieving parts of the--large
parts of the savings.
Mr. Walberg. Let me toss a similar question over to Ms.
Harris. Is it safe to stay--let me just restate it. Is it safe
to say that census 2020 is extremely reliant on CEDCaP and will
not go as planned or achieve the $5.2 billion in planned
savings without CEDCaP?
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walberg. So it is extremely important. What are, Mr.
Thompson, the top three risks facing the 2020 program and the
CEDCaP program?
Mr. Thompson. So the top risk we face is cybersecurity, and
we're doing a lot, as Mr. Cooper mentioned, on cybersecurity.
Another significant resource we face, which we admit today, is
maintaining the adequate resources and funding to build the
systems. And the third big risk is that--that we have to
mitigate is making sure that all the systems are integrated
together, which is why our 2018 end-to-end test is so critical.
Mr. Walberg. Could you give us more specifics on how you
are trying to mitigate those risks? And I appreciate those
three are, I think, what we are all looking at. What is the
mitigation?
Mr. Thompson. So I would let either Mr. Cooper or Mr. Lee
really talk about cybersecurity because they're the ones we
rely ----
Mr. Walberg. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--for that.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you. We are taking every known set of
steps and operations that we can take. They include working
with other Federal agencies and colleagues across the Federal
enterprise--the Department of Homeland Security, law
enforcement agencies, appropriate other agencies--to ensure
that we are implementing things like Department of Homeland
Security's EINSTEIN program, which scans the network for any
indicators of compromise, helps us identify threats and
vulnerabilities.
We are using a layered in depth set of defenses, so that
includes encryption of data at rest, in transit, and whenever
it's being moved from one environment to another environment.
That helps us significantly improve our cyber capabilities
against any possible breach that might actually access data.
However, we have taken steps to minimize the likelihood of
any data breach of census data because the repositories of
census data are not Internet-accessible. They're isolated from
the Internet. That significantly reduces the operational threat
from bad actors.
In addition, we have deployed censors both across the
perimeter of our public-facing sites. We have censors at our
application layer, at our data layer, and we continue to
identify working with external private-sector partners more
advanced methodologies and software capabilities to
continuously improve and enhance our cyber posture.
Mr. Walberg. I see my time is expired. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I guess, Director Thompson and Director
Harris, this decennial census is making the most use of
technological innovations that weren't possible 10 years ago. A
reliance on the Internet and solutions like the handheld
electronic collection devices could mean more accurate census
data and make collecting it faster and cheaper, but earlier,
the chairman mentioned that the handheld operable device did
not work in a prior test. Does the handheld device you are
using now work, and has it been tested? I'll ask Director
Harris.
Ms. Harris. Actually, I think that question would be
probably more appropriately directed to Mr. Lee.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Mr. Lee then. The handheld device that
you are currently using, has that been tested? Is it working?
Mr. Lee. Yes. We currently use those devices in the field
for our tests and I believe have actually brought examples.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Great.
Mr. Lee. We have a Samsung Android device, and we also have
an iPhone Apple device that the enumerators use in the field,
are highly secure. The data that's collected is encrypted. When
it's transmitted, it's encrypted. The enumerators can work
their case list, availability of work, schedule their work
availability times. They can call the service center for
support if they need it, and they can provide their expense and
travel reporting on this device.
Mrs. Maloney. Is that part of the $5 billion savings or is
that a separate category of savings?
Mr. Lee. The use of these devices in the field with the
reduced number of personnel should be part of the $5.2 billion
savings.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Director Thompson, you know, we have a
whole set of new technologies that you have mentioned. Would it
be feasible, since it is so important to meet the timelines
that we have to meet, as my colleagues have pointed out, would
it be feasible to work towards implementing only the IT
required for the 2020 census and leave the rest of the CEDCaP
implementation until after we know that the 2020 census
technology is in place and usable and functioning and working?
Director Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. We
have at the Bureau prioritized the CEDCaP work towards ensuring
success for those systems necessary for 2020, and those are --
--
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--the first systems we're delivering. After we
deliver those systems, then we're going to work on other
systems. But the 2020 census has priority for the CEDCaP
program.
Mrs. Maloney. And, Director Harris, you heard Mr. Cooper go
through the steps they are taking. What other steps can the
Bureau take to ensure that testing is completed and on time?
Ms. Harris. Well, Ranking Member Maloney, I appreciate the
question. The first and foremost thing that we have to keep in
mind is a time available that's remaining. We have less than a
year-and-a-half. And given the complexity and the scope of the
CEDCaP program--it is a systems-of-systems initiative--the best
thing that they can do to ensure that they will be in a
position to adequately test all these systems is to reduce the
complexity and scope of this initiative.
And so that would mean that, in addition to what Director
Thompson is saying of making the priority 2020 program versus
ACS or the economic survey and other programs, what they can
do, for example, is identify other areas of CEDCaP where it may
not potentially give them the most bang for their buck. One
example of that is non-ID processing where, at this time,
automating that particular piece of functionality is still
something that they are in the exploratory phase of. And given
that we are in year 6, that is something that I would strongly
consider that they drop off the table.
Mrs. Maloney. Your response?
Mr. Thompson. So I can start.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Mr. Thompson. We are constantly evaluating the CEDCaP
program against schedule and functionality and deliverability
with an eye towards making sure that we can deliver a
functional integrated system for the 2018 end-to-end test. And
to date we feel that we are on schedule to deliver that system.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, let's just talk about your fallback
plan. What if you test it and you are not able to produce it?
Can you fall back to a paper and pencil? We are moving into the
21st century, congratulations. I support that effort. But what
happens? What is the fallback plan? We always look for that.
So, Director Thompson, you had testified earlier that you
didn't think that we could fall back to a paper-and-pencil
approach. What is your response? What is the fallback plan, or
is there one?
Mr. Thompson. So our plan--well, let me first start by
saying that, right now, we estimate that we're going to do
about 20 percent of the households in the United States with
paper and pencil because ----
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--we don't believe that there's Internet
access, and we believe that people would prefer to respond by
paper and pencil. So right off the bat we're going to start
with 20 percent just because--that's as of today.
Secondly, what we are doing, as I said, we're constantly
evaluating the CEDCaP program and the other 2020 programs so
that what we put in place for the 2018 end-to-end test will be
the systems that we use for 2020. And the--so if we can't
develop certain capabilities by 2018, then those capabilities
will not be included in 2020, and of course, we'll make sure
that we update the committee and all other stakeholders on
this--these--this progress as it develops.
Mrs. Maloney. My time is expired. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Farenthold,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz.
Director Thompson, we visited about some of these issues
before, and I want to follow up and see where we are. Let's
talk about the cloud-based gathering system. How much of this
is in-house versus how much of it is contracted out to, you
know, a third-party cloud provider, say, Amazon or Rackspace,
some company like that? Mr. Cooper, if you want to jump in on
that.
Mr. Thompson. I think Mr. Cooper might ----
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Super.
Mr. Cooper. Yes, I think maybe Mr. Lee and myself ----
Mr. Farenthold. Okay.
Mr. Cooper.--may be better positioned to ----
Mr. Farenthold. That is fine.
Mr. Cooper. The--it really becomes what most of us in the
CIO community refer to as a hybrid cloud. That means that our
intent is to use a data environment with a cloud service
provider but that is isolated. It's private. It's considered a
private cloud ----
Mr. Farenthold. Right.
Mr. Cooper.--accessible only by authorized Census Bureau
officials.
Mr. Farenthold. My point is how much of it do you all own
and how much of it are you renting time from somebody else?
Mr. Cooper. Harry ----
Mr. Farenthold. Do you have rough percentages or anything?
Mr. Lee. I wish I could give you exact percentages right
now, but let me answer how we'll determine that. We've
identified what we think are the systems that need high
scalability where we do not want to have to provision ----
Mr. Farenthold. Right.
Mr. Lee.--resources within our own data center. We have--
currently have a cloud contract in place that we're testing
against. We've done some performance testing and scalability --
--
Mr. Farenthold. All right.
Mr. Lee.--so ----
Mr. Farenthold. Again, I think you are getting to my point.
If we run a massive data operation for several months every 10
years, so the more of that you outsource and don't have to buy
computers, the better off we are because the rest of those 9
years the computers sit mainly unused, and 10 years down the
road, you are not going to want to use a 10-year-old computer
again. So if you, you know ----
Mr. Lee. Exactly. And so one of the things we've done early
on is we've identified what are those inputs that might have
high performance and capacity requirements. We've built models.
Mr. Farenthold. Right.
Mr. Lee. And as we conduct our tests, we update those
models to predict what will the capacity and the workload be
during the census so we can have those resources in a cloud-
based ----
Mr. Farenthold. Right, and ----
Mr. Lee.--environment.
Mr. Farenthold.--these cloud companies understand this.
They scale very well. I noticed you held up an Android. It
looked like an S5. It may have been an S6; I couldn't tell from
here. Are we going to provide those to the enumerators are or
is it going to be a bring-your-own device system?
Mr. Cooper. Well, I can start. The Census Bureau made a
decision. Originally the thinking was to use a bring-your-own
device. But the evaluation, the field tests and everything
demonstrated that that was not going to be both operationally
effective, and it would not be cost-effective. So we have now
made ----
Mr. Farenthold. Why would it be more cost-effective to give
somebody a $400 to $500 mobile device as opposed to an app that
they could just download on a mobile device they already have?
Mr. Cooper. Because of the wide variety of operating
systems and potential differences in phones that might meet the
common set of thresholds. So the decision has now been made to
move to a device as a service approach. So in fact the vendor
selected through a competitive process will actually supply the
devices.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. And so ----
Mr. Cooper. That also is ----
Mr. Farenthold. So then in 2021 I might be able to get a
really cheap used cell phone ----
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir.
Mr. Farenthold.--that was actually used by a census
enumerator, right?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir. And it will be completely scrubbed of
any data.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. I guess the other question is
with respect to security. You talked a little bit about using
the best practices in the EINSTEIN system. Wasn't EINSTEIN in
place when the OPM was breached? It really doesn't stop the
breaches. It tells you hopefully a lot sooner than when the OPM
did it that you have got a problem.
Mr. Cooper. Yes, I would agree with that statement. I think
what we might say is that EINSTEIN is necessary but not
sufficient. EINSTEIN alone, as you've stated, won't protect us
against everything. That's the reason for the additional
measures we are taking in our cyber in-depth ----
Mr. Farenthold. And finally ----
Mr. Cooper.--approach.
Mr. Farenthold.--how important a target, I guess, do you
consider yourself? I mean, most of the data that you collect
will eventually be made publicly available? Obviously, not all
of it, but a vast majority of it you will just be able to
download without having to hack in.
Mr. Cooper. True, but with one very, very, very important
distinction, okay? Data that will be eventually released will
be anonymized. Data that we collect is personally identifiable
information, and it also includes business intelligence type of
information.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. I see my time ----
Mr. Cooper. Therefore, we have a responsibility ----
Mr. Farenthold. I am not questioning that. Again, I am just
curious as to how you all view that.
And I see my time is expired. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
all of you for very helpful testimony and commend you for how
far you have gotten thus far.
During the last census, we had hearings that brought out
what was apparently an issue that the census Director Thompson
had never even thought much about, and that is how inmates, how
prisoners are counted. This is an issue that has a lot of
complexity and affects millions more who are not in prison than
are in prison.
Apparently, the way in which the census handles this matter
is to simply--the easiest thing you could do is what you would
have done, I suppose, when the census first began, just count
them where they are in the State prisons, in the prisons where
they were, and individuals in State prisons may not be counted
as a part of the congressional district, for example, that they
come from. And in the Federal prisons, they may not count as
residents of their State at all.
Now, the District of Columbia is unique. I wouldn't want to
go off on that because all of our prisoners, because we were
the only city that carries the functions. All of ours are in
Federal prisons. But it really does pertain to every Member of
Congress because the Federal prison has people who are from
various States, and they are in various States while they are
in prison.
I don't need to tell you that people look to the census
with great interest because funds for everything from TANF to
the surface transportation bill to community and mental health
that affect their communities that rely on the census. And
therefore, many more people are affected who are not in
prisons.
Well, some States have recognized the undemocratic nature
and frankly the unprofessional nature of the way in which the
census has been doing it because the State Legislatures in some
states have required counting prisoners where they normally
reside rather than the prison where they are held, which
inflates obviously in the most unfair way what some communities
receive and deflate what others receive.
Now, only in May of this year--and this was a big problem
in the last census--do I understand that the census requested
comments. I don't even know whether this was an open-ended
question, whether it was a rule, but I would like to ask you,
Director Thompson, what kind of question was asked. I note
nothing has been published. And how will you count people who
are in prison in the 2020 census?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
So after every census we look at the rules we use to
determine where to count people, and we evaluate them against
the 1790 Census Act, which says essentially that we count
people where they usually live or sleep. So what we did for
this census was we put out the rules that we used for 2010, and
in 2010 we counted prisoners in the prisons.
We put those rules out for comment, for public comment
through the Federal Register process. We got a number of
comments. Most of the comments centered on where to count
prisoners and where to count the deployed military. We are in
the process of evaluating those comments and putting out in a
Federal Register notice again for comment the proposed rules we
will use for 2020 so we can receive public comment on our
proposal, and then we can proceed to making a final decision.
But that's where we are right now, and we anticipate that
the Federal Register notice will come out before the end of
June.
Ms. Norton. Before the end of June there will be a Federal
Register notice that says what? I'm sorry.
Mr. Thompson. There'll be a Federal Register notice that
gives our proposal for the rules that ----
Ms. Norton. There will be a rule, in other words?
Mr. Thompson. No, it'll be a proposal for comment. We will
say this is how we propose to count various people, including
prisoners, college students, the deployed military, and that
will be out for public comment.
Ms. Norton. You said June. That is this month.
Mr. Thompson. That's this month, yes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Director Thompson.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I am going to recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson, you say you are on time, on schedule,
correct?
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ms. Harris, from your perspective, I
believe there are 17 key items that needed to be purchased or
secured, contracts let. From your perspective, are they on
time, on schedule?
Ms. Harris. I think it's--the answer--the short answer is
no. I do believe that--the CEDCaP implementation schedules for
those 17 solutions that I mentioned have not yet been
determined, so I don't think the Bureau is in a position to say
that they are on schedule because that implementation schedule
is a critical component of the CEDCaP program, and until that
schedule is defined, it's--I don't--I think they're in a
difficult position to say that they're on time and on schedule.
Chairman Chaffetz. So the concern is that they don't have a
schedule and that they are not integrated--there is no
compatibility if you examine the two different schedules that
are out there, correct? Explain that a little bit more to me in
depth. You have looked at it.
Ms. Harris. Sure. So the first--so when I first said about
there's a lack of an implementation schedule, that's for the
most recent decision that they made to go with the cuts for
roughly half of the CEDCaP solutions. And so that schedule will
currently be defined by the vendor that they have selected, and
until that schedule comes out, I think it's hard for them to
say that they are on time and on schedule.
The second piece of that is the current process in which
the 2020 and CEDCaP programs are managing their
interdependencies is inefficient. So they currently have a
total of four schedules that they are managing. They're
managing their own program schedules, and then they have these
two interdependent schedules, which, you know, the 2020 program
is managing their interdependent schedule, which identifies the
dependencies with CEDCaP and then vice versa. So there are a
total of four schedules, as opposed to having a single
integrated interdependency schedule, which is what best
practices call for.
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. So we are meeting all of the CEDCaP
milestones. We go through a number of reviews with our
colleagues at the Department of Commerce.
Chairman Chaffetz. Are those published? I mean, Ms. Harris
is a pretty serious person. She doesn't think you met any of
them, and you think you are on schedule. Are they published or
is it in writing somewhere?
Mr. Thompson. So I think what Ms. Harris is referring to is
we've just made a decision in May about build or buy, which we
had planned to make. We've made that decision. We now have to--
now that we've made the decision to build--I mean buy, we have
to work at a new schedule and new costs based on that solution,
but we also have a schedule for doing that.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you have a schedule to develop the
schedule ----
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz.--but you say you are on schedule? Did I
get that right?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Congressman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So it doesn't engender a whole lot
of confidence. You say you are going to be $5 billion less than
last time? And last time, they were $3 billion over budget.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Congressman, so far the testing we've
done has been demonstrating that we are going to save--get--hit
the efficiencies that we need ----
Chairman Chaffetz. But you haven't even secured the
vendors. You have just last month developed a schedule to
develop a schedule ----
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz.--to secure a vendor, of which none of
those contracts have been let, correct?
Mr. Thompson. That's not correct. We have ----
Chairman Chaffetz. What did I get wrong there?
Mr. Thompson. We have a vendor right now that we identified
and will have a contract with.
Chairman Chaffetz. Who's that?
Mr. Thompson. It's Pegasystems.
Chairman Chaffetz. To do what?
Mr. Thompson. They're going to provide the platform that we
will use to build out, as Ms. Harris noted, 6 of the 12 CEDCaP
capabilities.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you are sure ----
Mr. Thompson. So let me go back a little bit. So, as you
know, I actually ran the 2000 census, decennial census, and
that census was delivered on time, on schedule, on budget. We
are ahead of the pace that we were for delivering the 2000
census. We released an operational plan which had a detailed
schedule for decisions, it had rationales for what we've
learned from our testing, what we're going to be testing, when
we're going to be delivering things. We released that 3 years
earlier than we did in 2010. And it did have a very detailed
schedule. We have very detailed schedules of what we have to do
to be ready for the 2020 census, including a clear critical
path to get to the 2018 end-to-end test.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Ms. Harris and Ms. Rice, can you
please offer perspective on that?
Ms. Harris. Mr. Chairman, I don't--I think the comparison
to 2010 is one that can't be made. I mean, I think it's
comparing apples to oranges ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, he was comparing 2000, correct?
Ms. Harris. Or even 2000 ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Right.
Ms. Harris.--because, quite frankly, the operations that
they are intending to deploy for 2020 will be completely
different from what it will look like in 2010 and 2000. So to
say that the operational plan is released 3 years in advance, I
think that my concern is that that puts us into--or lulls us
into a false sense of security--or, I'm sorry, a false sense of
confidence because, quite frankly, with a year-and-a-half
remaining before the 2018 end-to-end test, the fact that the 17
solutions have not yet started implementation is of great
concern to us based on the history of what occurred in 2010 but
also based on what we have seen across the Federal Government
in deploying these major IT modernization efforts, a system-of-
system efforts.
Chairman Chaffetz. And, Ms. Rice, did you care to comment?
Ms. Rice. With respect to the CEDCaP progress, we just
initiated an audit, so unfortunately ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
Ms. Rice.--I don't have any insight onto their schedule.
Chairman Chaffetz. Fair enough. My time is expired. I will
now recognize Mrs. Watson Coleman for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing. It is good to have this discussion so
that we can make sure that the information we are collecting is
accurate, that the processes that we are using are cost-
effective and are efficient. So I am glad to hear that, and I
am sure the rest of my colleagues will pursue that.
I want to talk to you, Mr. Thompson in particular, about
something very important to me. In April we sent you a letter,
about 80 of us, a bipartisan, bicameral letter to you urging
the addition of questions regarding sexual orientation and
identity, and we think that these are very important questions
to be added when we are collecting this information because it
helps us to understand demographics, the needs, where
discrimination is taking place, and helps to identify solutions
at some point.
And so with that in mind, I wanted to know if you had the
opportunity to look at this letter and if you all are indeed
thinking about adding questions to this collection of
information that addresses this community.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, I did receive the letter. I read it very
carefully. I thought it was a very well-written, well-thought-
out letter that--an aside. So--and we take it very seriously.
So right now, we are in the process of going through a final
review with all of the agencies that require information
collection on the American Community Survey and the decennial
census. And this is certainly a topic that we are discussing
with them about the needs for collection of this information
for various purposes.
I should also note that we do already collect this
information on several of the surveys that we do at the Census
Bureau, so we collect it on the National Health Interview
Survey, and we collect it on the National Crime Victimization
Survey.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. As our collective communities are
evolving on this understanding of this community and the
uniqueness of some of their issues, I would think that we need
to make sure that we have a comprehensive understanding of what
that community looks like, where it is located, what its needs
are, and what the impact of public policy and services are in
that community. So I am glad to see that we are looking at it
and that we can collect it in a way that everyone can use it
and we have an understanding of how this will also inform
public policy.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I will now recognize ----
Mr. Connolly. Would my colleague yield?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yes, I will. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
I have got to ask, Director Thompson, you are from
Philadelphia, Baltimore, or Canada?
Mr. Thompson. I'm from Washington, D.C.
Mr. Connolly. Oh, okay, Washington. As you know, when you
say o-u-t, you say it as a diphthong. There aren't many places
in the U.S. that do that, so okay. Washington does it, original
Washington.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, third generation Washington, D.C.
Mr. Connolly. Director Harris, you talked in your testimony
about phishing and the threat from that. Are you worried that
the 2020 census reliance on the Internet will create an
additional risk in that regard?
Ms. Harris. Certainly, it is a significant challenge and
risk that the Bureau will have to build in as they implement
the 2020 census. There's no doubt about that. I think one of
the key things that they should be focusing in on is phishing
education for the public. And in looking at the tests that they
are currently doing in 2016 and 2015, we are not aware of any
public campaigns to educate the population on phishing. So
certainly, moving forward, that's something that they should be
focusing on.
Mr. Connolly. Director Thompson, can you address that, as
well as how are you going to guarantee security of mobile
devices that you are deploying as part of the census?
Mr. Thompson. Sure. So we are going to have a very
substantial communications program for the 2020 census, and, in
fact, we're going to be awarding the contract for that
integrated campaign this year, by August. And as part of that,
we will certainly be notifying the public about the census,
about phishing, about other things, about security because a
message that has--it's clear one message that has to get out is
that the information provided to the Census Bureau will be
secure and safe. So that will be part of the work we do. We
have not mounted a large publicity campaign at this point, but
we do have that in our plans and in our future budgeting.
I'll let--I mean, essentially for the security, we encrypt
the data at rest and transit, and we ----
Mr. Connolly. And real quickly, Mr. Cooper, you are shaking
your head yes. You are confident that it is secure?
Mr. Cooper. I'm confident that we're taking every step we
can possibly take to make it as secure as we can make it.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you to my colleague. I yield
back, and I thank the chair, and I thank diphthong John
Thompson for ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I will now recognize the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Thompson, I want to thank you. I want to thank
your team. I mean, these are not pleasant hearings. They are
meant to highlight our problems, and so I don't want any of my
questioning to be viewed as anything other than trying to work
with you.
I do have some significant concerns, and I guess what
percentage of the technology, the IT technology, has been
procured at this particular point?
Mr. Thompson. Well, Congressman, what we have----
Mr. Meadows. Do we know?
Mr. Thompson. So we have procured the technology that we
have needed to conduct our census tests.
Mr. Meadows. And that is a great answer to ----
Mr. Thompson. And then what ----
Mr. Meadows.--a question I didn't ask ----
Mr. Thompson. No, no, no, no, no ----
Mr. Meadows.--but what percentage ----
Mr. Thompson. What ----
Mr. Meadows. I mean, I am trying to figure out how much of
the decisions have we already made? Because let me tell you
what I am hearing from stakeholders and they are real concerned
that we are buying parts of it and they are not interfacing. We
are not doing--and that we are really making decisions but they
are not systemic decisions that will ultimately produce a
result. So how much of the technology, IT technology decisions
have we made? Mr. Lee, do you know?
Mr. Lee. The number of decisions or the percentage of
infrastructure that--you had two questions.
Mr. Meadows. Give me both.
Mr. Lee. All right. I don't have the exact percentage of
the decisions that have been ----
Mr. Meadows. Because when I ask the question, I hear
crickets on the other end ----
Mr. Lee. So ----
Mr. Meadows.--and that concerns me.
Mr. Lee. What we are doing as we deliver the 2016--'14,
'15, '16, and '17 tests is we're actually testing on the
infrastructure that'll be used to deliver the decennial census.
As we test in the cloud, we identify the cloud requirements for
scalability ----
Mr. Meadows. All of that is great. I just ask one simple
question. What percentage, 25 percent?
Mr. Thompson. So ----
Mr. Meadows. Is that high or low?
Mr. Thompson. So, Congressman, I can--I began my testimony
with the decisions that we've made and the decisions that
remain to be made.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So ----
Mr. Thompson. I did ----
Mr. Meadows.--if we have the universe ----
Mr. Thompson. I did not ----
Mr. Meadows.--of the ones that are yet ----
Mr. Thompson. I did not break those out by IT, non-IT. I
can certainly break out those decisions and provide that to
you, but I just wouldn't want to do it on the fly.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. Okay. I'm going to go out on a limb here. From
an--from my oversight role and responsibility, I look at it
this way. I would say that probably we have made about 50
percent of the decisions that we need to make, and in doing so,
we're actually on schedule because there are decisions, as
Director Harris has pointed out, that we've not yet reached. I
also agree with Director Harris. Here's the dilemma. If we run
out of time in making some of those decisions, we're then
beginning to narrow the time frame that we have to execute
after we've made the decision.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So I thank you for stepping out on
that limb. I will not hold you to 50 if it is 45 and will not
suggest that--but that is what--but let me tell you my concern.
Here we are about to do end-to-end testing in a year-and-a-
half, and we have made 50 percent of the decisions. Let me tell
you, that is a disaster waiting to happen. And I guess the
other part of it is, is we have had a chief security engineer--
how long did it take to replace him for CEDCaP? How long did
that go vacant, Director Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. The CIO?
Mr. Meadows. Well, both the chief ----
Mr. Thompson. So we ----
Mr. Meadows. Have you hired somebody for the chief security
engineer yet?
Mr. Lee. The--actually, the offer is in process for that
position.
Mr. Meadows. So how long has it been vacant?
Mr. Lee. I don't have the exact ----
Mr. Meadows. Eleven months?
Mr. Lee. I'll get back to you.
Mr. Meadows. Eleven months? My notes say 11 months. Is that
plus or minus a month?
Mr. Lee. I'm not sure on the security engineer ----
Mr. Meadows. Do you not see a problem ----
Mr. Lee. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--that if we are talking about CIOs that have
not been hired and chief security engineers that have not been
hired, and I have 11 months, and that may or may not be
accurate, if we can't make a decision on key personnel in 11
months, do you not think that we are going to have a problem
with end-to-end testing in a year-and-a-half?
Mr. Thompson. So we have a chief security officer for the
Census Bureau. We have a chief of our security branch. We embed
members of that team in every project that we do, and we don't
start a project live until we get an authority to operate and
that gets signed off on by the CIO based on review of security.
But we build security into every single operation that we do.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. I am out of time, so let me--the last
promise, Mr. Cooper, you had for the last hearing was that we
would get a much more detailed timeline in terms of benchmarks.
That has not been done, and that was 6 months ago, and it needs
to be done immediately. The other part is I said if Ms. Harris
is not happy, I am not going to be happy. Ms. Harris is not
happy, Director Thompson, and I need you all to work closer
together with a great team. And I believe you have a great
team. Let's get it done so we don't get egg on our face. I'll
yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to thank the
witnesses for their testimony, and I would like to discuss the
Bureau's plan to collect 2020 census responses over the
Internet.
When feasible, increasing the use of available technology
makes a lot of sense. It saves both time and money. However,
according to its operational plan, the Bureau has set a goal of
having 55 percent of households respond to the census via the
Internet. This number seems fairly high, especially given that
not everyone has Internet access at home.
According to a January 2016 Federal Communication
Commission report, 1 in 10 Americans does not have broadband
Internet access. The number jumps to 39 percent of Americans
when we look at those living in rural areas. And I have rural
areas in my district like Pembroke Township, which is in my
district. Director Thompson, how does the Bureau intend to
collect information from households without Internet access?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Congresswoman. We have a multi-
approach to do that. So where people would prefer to respond by
the Internet, we make that option available initially. Where
our data shows--and we have a lot of data on this from
different sources--that the American people don't want to
respond by the Internet or don't have access to the Internet,
we plan to mail them a paper form, and we also plan to offer
them the option to respond directly over the telephone, which
we did not offer in previous censuses. So we're trying to make
it easier for people to respond. Where they have the Internet,
they can use the Internet. Where they don't have the Internet,
they can use paper, or they can call up and be counted over the
phone.
Ms. Kelly. What about the use of the canvassers? Will you
have that also?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, ma'am. We're anticipating that we'll get
a little over 60 percent self-response and then for the rest
we're going to use canvassers to collect that information.
Ms. Kelly. And do you know how many you plan to have?
Mr. Thompson. We plan--we're planning right now to have
about 300,000 canvassers.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
Also, my concern comes from in 2010 it seems like the
number of minorities was undercounted, so I want to make sure,
particularly representing the type of district I do, that that
does not happen again. Because the Internet is such a necessity
in the 21st century, many low-income individuals do not have a
computer at home, but they do have the use of cell phones. So
how will you deal with individuals and their cell phones?
Mr. Thompson. So Congresswoman, we have optimized our
response engine so that it will work on a cell phone, it will
work on a tablet, or it'll work on a computer. But a cell phone
works just fine.
Ms. Kelly. I just want to make sure every person that can
be counted is counted.
Regardless of the ``digital divide,'' a 55 percent Internet
response rate seems like a stretch given that tests conducted
by the Census Bureau have resulted in lower rates. The 2015
self-response test resulted in an Internet response rate of
33.4 percent. What is the plan if the Bureau does not reach its
goal of 55 percent of responses from the Internet? How will you
adjust?
Mr. Thompson. Congresswoman, we essentially believe that
our test results still indicate that we will get about 55
percent nationally with an advertising campaign, with a
partnership campaign in 2020. But, of course, if we need to use
more paper, we'll use more paper. If we need to have more
telephone, we'll have more telephone. And ultimately, if we
need to knock on more doors, we'll knock on more doors. But
what we--what--our goal is to count everyone.
Ms. Kelly. How will you benchmark that like by a certain
time? If you don't have a certain percentage of responses, will
you adjust? Or how do you set that goal?
Mr. Thompson. We're constantly doing testing and evaluation
against that. For example, we have the American Community
Survey that we run every month. We're looking at the use of
Internet on that. We're running various queries of the
population to understand their preferences for response.
Mrs. Maloney. Will the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Kelly. Yes, I will.
Mrs. Maloney. You raised a very important point, the
digital divide, and I think you said we have 20 percent of
Americans that do not have broadband. What can we do to get it
to everybody? Everybody should have access. Mr. Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. So I was actually--what I said is we plan to
mail to 20 percent, which includes those that don't have access
but also we found that there are areas of the country in
certain population groups where the population would prefer to
respond via mail. So ----
Mrs. Maloney. I guess the point I am trying to make is
everyone should have access to the Internet, and we should
probably work as a nation to have your constituents have access
and everybody else's constituents have access to it.
Ms. Kelly. Yes.
Mrs. Maloney. That would help with the census, it would
help with the education of the children, and everything else so
----
Mr. Cooper. Yes ----
Ms. Kelly. I will yield back.
Mr. Cooper. Ranking ----
Ms. Kelly. I am out of time.
Mr. Cooper. Ranking Member Maloney ----
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the ----
Mr. Cooper.--if I may just very quick, one of the things
that I know the Census Bureau and the other agencies have done
is to use community organizations like libraries, things like
that, where cable can bring in Internet as opposed to wireless
broadband, not a perfect solution, but it's an example of what
can be leveraged.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentlewoman's time is expired.
I will now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Mulvaney for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman, and I thank the panel.
I am going to do something I don't usually like to do,
which is change gears but just a little bit. I know we have
this conversation to talk a little about the 2020 census, but
honestly, I don't get that many questions in my office about
the 2020 census, at least yet. Every now and then we get folks
calling to complain about, you know, the questions they have to
answer and all that, but for the most part, I think folks at
least in my district recognize that this is one of those rare
constitutional duties. We actually have to do this, and they
are happy to do it and to cooperate.
I was happy to hear, by the way, that we will be reaching
out to people beyond just the Internet, Mr. Thompson, because,
as I was discussing with Mr. Meadows, when you represent a
relatively rural area, I don't know what the national
percentage is of folks who don't have Internet access or at
least broadband access, but in my district my guess it is above
average. So I am glad to see as much as we are transitioning to
the new technology, not forgetting the folks who may just
either choose or not have the opportunity to do that, not what
I want to ask about.
I want to talk real briefly about what they do call me
about, which is the American Community Survey because that they
don't get. And I assume, Mr. Thompson, I can ask you these
questions about the survey a little bit. So, you know, why is
what I can't get--I know why we count and I know that
traditionally in the census we have asked a little bit more
than just how many people live there and how many people are
you. I get that, but I don't understand why we are asking about
number of flushed toilets and the interracial mix of people in
the buildings, and I don't understand the fines. So tell me a
little bit why are we doing this? Do we need to do this in
order to fulfill the constitutional obligations?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Congressman. So the American
Community Survey replaced what used to be the census long form,
which was a sample of longer forms as part of the decennial
census ----
Mr. Mulvaney. I remember it. And some people used to--every
----
Mr. Thompson. Every sixth house about.
Mr. Mulvaney. Got you.
Mr. Thompson. And that was used to allocate Federal dollars
based on requests from different agencies. So we moved the long
form to the American Community Survey so we can produce more
accurate, more timely information than every 10 years. And we
work with the Federal agencies to make sure that--we've done--
we just did a big review of every question on the American
Community Survey to make sure that there is a definitive need
to collect that information to support a Federal program. Over
$400 billion are allocated based on the American Community
Survey data.
However, we've also heard and very strongly that there are
concerns with the length of the American Community Survey.
There are concerns with the mandatory message on the American
Community Survey. And we have undertaken--and it's--and I could
get you this. It's on our Web site. We've undertaken a program,
a four-point program, to look at how we can make the American
Community Survey less intrusive, how we can use other Federal
records to reduce the burden on respondents.
And I also need to say that our goal is not to threaten the
American people with fines or jail but to convince them of the
importance to respond because what the information will do for
their community.
Mr. Mulvaney. And I get that. And if I get it, I will
probably fill it out because I would look at it as a civic duty
and it doesn't offend me, provided that the questions are not
too intrusive. I get that. I then when I was a younger man, my
family actually got the long form, so I am a little bit
familiar with it. But if I am a family who just doesn't want to
do that, I want to meet my constitutional obligations, I want
to fill out the new shorter form of the census, but I get the
American Community Survey as well. Do you fine people for not
turning this stuff in?
Mr. Thompson. No, Congressman.
Mr. Mulvaney. Have you ever put anybody in jail for not
turning this stuff in?
Mr. Thompson. No, Congressman.
Mr. Mulvaney. All right. In that case ----
Mr. Thompson. In fact, Congressman, I need to say we--the
Census Bureau is not an enforcement agency. We're a statistical
agency. We'd have to get the Department of Justice to do that,
but we have never asked.
Mr. Mulvaney. And you are not aware of the Department of
Justice fining anybody for this? Okay. Mr. Chairman, we may
want to just change the law because we are actually doing that
it is not enforcing the law because a previous Congress in its
infinite wisdom, which is one of those things that makes me
giggle when I say it, decided that there should be up to a
$5,000 fine and jail time for not filling this thing out. So
maybe it is something we should look at, making your life a
little bit easier. You spoke to the importance of sort of
toning down the mandatory language of that, and I think that is
encouraging.
Folks want to be good citizens, they want to participate,
they want to get you good information, but there is also stuff
they might not want to tell you and to tell them that they
might go to jail, have to pay a fine if they don't might be not
the best kind of relationship we want to have with the
taxpayers. So I appreciate your input on that, Mr. Thompson.
Chairman Chaffetz. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chair.
Chairman Chaffetz. It does say ----
Mr. Mulvaney. I yield.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does it say that on the envelope or ----
Mr. Mulvaney. It used to at least last time it went out.
Mr. Thompson. Right now, it says on the envelope ``your
response is mandatory and required by law.'' We are looking
at--we are doing research--as we speak, we've done research on
looking at changing that message because we've heard of the
concerns that have been expressed. So we're actively
researching that.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And we probably do want to change that language, but on the
other hand, I would just counsel you, Mr. Thompson, you know,
what some people find intrusive others find a rich trove of
necessary data in preparing updated profiles of the country. It
may seem silly to ask about, you know, indoor plumbing, but
that is actually an important index in terms of progress made
or not made in the United States, especially as perhaps one
index of poverty.
So there is a lot of data we don't want to lose because
some people may find it objectionable. On the other hand, I
agree with my friend Mr. Mulvaney. We have got to be careful
about being overly intrusive, and there is a fine line there.
But I remain concerned that we are not losing rich data that
helps put together a fuller profile of the United States at any
given period of time.
My friend Mr. Meadows said that if Ms. Harris is unhappy,
he is unhappy, you know, sort of like if momma ain't happy,
nobody is happy. Mr. Thompson, one of the things I guess that
made Ms. Harris unhappy if she was unhappy--she doesn't look
like an unhappy person to me but--was she said that it was
apples and oranges to compare where you are in preparation to
where you were in 2000 or even 2010.
I would like you to comment on that because that suggests
that it is misleading to say, well, we are actually ahead of
where we were and in 2000, you know, we were on budget, we were
on time, everything was fine. So we are at least that good
right now. She is saying false comparison.
Mr. Thompson. So I really wasn't--let me first say that my
staff ----
Mr. Connolly. I should say to you I think diphthongs are
good things ----
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly.--so it is not a pejorative thing to call you
Diphthong John.
Mr. Thompson. So let me first say that we respect and value
our working relationship with the GAO and with the Office of
the Inspector General.
Mr. Connolly. Make you happy, Ms. Harris? He values the
relationship?
Ms. Harris. Yes, and I ----
Mr. Connolly. See, there is a smile. Mark, it is getting
better.
Mr. Thompson. No, no, no. I mean, you need--we value input
into what we're doing. We value review. We're trying to do this
census as open ----
Mr. Connolly. Yes, but I am trying to get at the question
----
Mr. Thompson. Okay. So--okay.
Mr. Connolly.--is it apples and oranges ----
Mr. Thompson. So ----
Mr. Connolly.--in your point of view?
Mr. Thompson. So what I was saying was that--I was saying
that is I do have experience in putting together schedules and
delivering on schedules. And there are different censuses, but
the point is, is that we do have what I believe is a schedule
that will lead us to a successful 2020 census.
And I value discussing this with the GAO on a continued
basis. I value discussing it with the Office of Inspector
General, and ultimately, I would like to agree with Mr. Meadows
that everybody is happy about this, including the GAO,
including us, and including the Congress. But we're going to
continue to do this census in a really open way. We don't--
we're not doing it behind closed doors. Every quarter we go out
with a detailed project management review that's open to the
public to say where we are, what our challenges are, what we've
learned, what we still have to do. So we're trying to be very,
very open about it, and we're going to continue to do that.
Mr. Connolly. But I think Mr. Meadows was making the point
with the best of intentions and conceding we have got a good
team and we are all happy and we think we are making benchmarks
that are successful, what if we are wrong? What if we got that
wrong and with the best of intentions and efforts we have egg
on our face is I think what he said? That is what we are trying
to avoid, too, I mean, because we have had bad experiences as
well as good ones.
Mr. Thompson. That is our major goal is to do the census
accurately, on time, without having some of the issues that
arose in the previous census. And again, that's why we're being
so open about what we're doing. And as we make ----
Mr. Connolly. Well ----
Mr. Thompson.--decisions going towards the 2018 end-to-end
test, they will be out there and people can evaluate ----
Mr. Connolly. Well, speaking of being open, Mr. Cooper,
again, my friend from North Carolina pointed out that 6 months
ago the committee was promised a document that laid out
milestones so we could monitor progress. If we are going to be
open and transparent, why don't we have that document? Why has
it taken 6 months? When can we expect it?
Mr. Cooper. Unfortunately, it's always embarrassing when
one has to admit to a committee like Congress that I missed the
date or the deadline that I committed to. Unfortunately, this
is actually the second time that that's happened, and both of
you gentlemen were there on the first one around, some of the
FITARA stuff. I'm not happy about that, so you can put me in
the unhappy category.
However, here's what actually is going on. It turned out
that even when I made that commitment, there was more detail
that I was not fully exposed to yet. My role is an oversight
role. I'm not working these programs day-to-day. I wish I were.
It's unfortunately just not the way that we're set up, and I'm
not sure I'd have the full capacity and bandwidth to do that.
So I will reemphasize my commitment, and I will now ensure
that I get the detailed timeline that I committed to. If you'll
allow me to maybe say I'll get that as soon as I can, you have
my commitment.
What also is going on, we're working to integrate--you've
heard Director Harris talk about the fact that we have multiple
master schedules. We don't have one integrated master schedule.
Harry and I have been talking about how can we work together to
actually produce a single automated master schedule. We're not
fully there. That's an accurate statement, right?
Mr. Lee. Correct. But we're real close.
Mr. Cooper. But we're working on that. What I had hoped --
--
Mr. Lee. Real close.
Mr. Cooper.--to be able to do was to be able to bring back
in an automated way to actually see and reveal the
significantly large number of decisions, milestones, major
events, that type of thing, in a way that people could actually
see it and somewhat understand all the complexity. I believe we
will absolutely succeed in doing that, and as Harry said, we
really are very close. But I missed the timing on it. I
apologize for that.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I would just say, Mr. Chairman, on
behalf of myself and my friend Mr. Meadows, I think we are
going to need a specific event to a deadline.
Mr. Cooper. What's the--if I'm going to commit, can I
confer real quick?
Mr. Connolly. Of course.
Mr. Cooper. End of July. Okay.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to piggy-back on Mr. Mulvaney's comments because
I share largely the same type of concerns that he brought up.
So, Mr. Thompson, let me begin with you. If you would, please,
just be as brief initially on some of these answers as
possible. Let's just go to the basis. What's the purpose of the
census?
Mr. Thompson. There are three primary purposes. The first
is to reapportion the Congress. The second is to support
redistricting efforts at the State level. And the third is to
allocate Federal program funds. Then there are other non-
Federal uses ----
Mr. Hice. But that last one is really not part of the
Constitution. We want to know how many people live here, the
bottom line. Is that true?
Mr. Thompson. So I am--I am not a constitutional lawyer,
and I'm probably not the right person ----
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, article 1, section 2 just says
basically we need to know how many people are in the country.
How many questions are on the census?
Mr. Thompson. There are 10 questions on the decennial
census.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And the census is required for citizens to
respond?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, it's mandatory under title 13.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Then shifting over to the American
Community Survey, its purpose is totally different from the
census, correct?
Mr. Thompson. We consider the American Community Survey to
be part of the decennial census program.
Mr. Hice. But it is asking totally different questions, so
it has a totally different purpose.
Mr. Thompson. It's asking primarily questions for Federal
funds allocation.
Mr. Hice. And how many questions are on there?
Mr. Thompson. Approximately 70, between 70 and 75. I ----
Mr. Hice. And is it required?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, it's mandatory.
Mr. Hice. Okay. But you said a while ago that it is
mandatory but fines and jail time don't happen.
Mr. Thompson. We have never administered--required that.
Mr. Hice. So are those bogus threats?
Mr. Thompson. Excuse me, Congressman?
Mr. Hice. If you have never produced a fine or put anyone
in jail and yet you say it is mandatory with the threat of
going to jail or being fined, but that has never happened, are
they bogus threats? I mean you basically have admitted they are
bogus threats.
Mr. Thompson. We believe that the best way to get the
American public to respond is to explain to them the value of
responding to their community ----
Mr. Hice. That is not value of explaining it when you said
you are going to go to jail or you are going to have a $5,000
fine. That says nothing about the value of the information. And
it is bogus threats. It is putting fear in the American people
to fill these things out.
Are both of those, the census and the survey, sent to all
American citizens?
Mr. Thompson. The decennial census is sent to every
American citizen. The American Community Survey is mailed to
about 3.5 million households a year.
Mr. Hice. So 1 in 6? Is that approximate?
Mr. Thompson. I think it is about 1 in 6 over a 5-year
period.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And so we are trying to save money, but we
are sending at least to 1 in 5, 1 in 6 two different forms,
correct?
Mr. Thompson. Exactly, Congressman.
Mr. Hice. And they have two different purposes, and several
have discussed, I mean, it is of no concern for census purpose
what kind of bathroom people use or how much their salary is or
where they work or do they have good hearing or poor hearing or
sight. I mean there is just a lot of questions for census
purposes that are unnecessary.
And part of my concern is not only the massive intrusion
to--in my opinion of government in asking some of these
questions, but then it comes to the cybersecurity issues. And
particularly now that we are going to more digital, there is a
lot of personal information that has nothing to do with the
census that could potentially be made insecure. And this
becomes a major concern.
Mr. Lee, do you have confidence in the cybersecurity going
into the 2020 census?
Mr. Lee. Yes, I do.
Mr. Hice. How in the world can you say that when the
systems aren't even in place yet?
Mr. Lee. The cybersecurity controls that we do have across
the enterprise--and let me say that I'm confident but we're
never too confident. We're always looking to improve our
security controls going forward so ----
Mr. Hice. You are confident in something that doesn't even
exist yet.
Ms. Harris, what is your assessment, the GAO's assessment
of cybersecurity?
Ms. Harris. Well, I think it's difficult to effectively
identify security measures that need to be in place for 2020
until that final IT solutions architecture is in place. So at
this time I can't tell you definitively the IT posture because,
again, as you mention, the systems are not in place at this
time.
Mr. Hice. So is your confidence--in a scale of 1 to 10,
where is your confidence?
Ms. Harris. It's probably at a--it's probably at a 5 at
this time, and I say that because the Bureau and--with the
leadership of Mr. Lee, as well as Mr. Cooper, have been
actively addressing the 115 information security
recommendations that we have made relative to access controls,
for example, configuration management, and other things.
And it was also because of the oversight of this committee
where at the time of our November hearing, 66 recommendations
were implemented. As of today, about 104 have been implemented,
but there is still additional--a significant amount of work
that needs to be done to get to that remaining 50 percent,
which is because the IT solutions architecture has not yet been
fully finalized, and that needs to be done in order to identify
the most effective IT security measures to be put in place for
2020.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have got a long ways
to go to plug the hole, but I appreciate you holding this
hearing. Thank you. I yield.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from the Virgin
Islands, Ms. Plaskett, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, everyone.
I just wanted to walk through some additional cost
estimates that have been discussed here this morning. Mr.
Thompson, I know that in November Congress appropriated $1.37
billion for the Census Bureau, and that includes $599 million
for the 2020 census. Do you think these funds are an adequate
amount to prepare for the 2020 census and conduct its
statutorily mandated duties?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Congresswoman.
Ms. Plaskett. You do at this point. And in 2013 the Census
Bureau estimated that the Census Enterprise Data Collection and
Processing program, or CEDCaP, would cost $548 million, but in
2015, the Bureau increased the projection to $1.14 billion. Why
did that estimate double?
Mr. Thompson. So there's actually two estimates. There is
the estimate we made for the CEDCaP program. The Census Bureau
also established--and this is based on a recommendation that we
received from the GAO--an office of--an independent cost-
estimation office. And they prepared an independent cost
estimate of the CEDCaP program.
Ms. Plaskett. And what is the name of that group again?
Mr. Thompson. Cost estimation group.
Ms. Plaskett. And where are they--are they part of the ----
Mr. Thompson. They're part of the Census Bureau, but they
----
Ms. Plaskett. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--report to the deputy director of the Census
Bureau, so they don't sit in any program areas. So they
maintain independence over the programs.
So where we are now is we have made a major decision on the
CEDCaP program, and that is we've made our build-versus-buy
decision, so now we're going to prepare a new cost estimate for
the price of CEDCaP going forward, and we're also going to do a
new independent cost estimate that we will of course provide to
the committee and all of our other stakeholders regarding the
CEDCaP program and the 2020 census program.
Ms. Plaskett. So is the $1.14 billion build or buy?
Mr. Thompson. That was basically made when we were
determining we would build the whole thing.
Ms. Plaskett. And is that still what the determination is?
Don't turn it off because we are going to talk for a little bit
it seems like.
Mr. Thompson. So as I said, we have just in May reached a
major milestone in the CEDCaP program. We were analyzing should
we build the whole system or should we buy some COTS services.
After a very rigorous analysis, we decided that we would buy a
significant amount of COTS services to support the CEDCaP.
The next step now is to determine exactly what that will
cost on a go-forward basis, and we're working on that as fast
as we can and then we will provide that information to the
Congress but ----
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. And you used the term ``independent.''
That's a very subjective term because when I think of
independent, I think of something that you have contracted to
come and work. But you are saying independent and it is still
part of the Census Bureau, right? How do they then become
independent if they are still part of the Census Bureau?
Mr. Thompson. So they report to the deputy director. Part
of what we want to do at the Census Bureau is we do want to do
independent cost estimates, which we do on all of our programs.
We're also doing one on the 2020 census that will be available
very soon, which we'll be happy to provide. But it's really
based on what we want to do. We want to do independent reviews
ourselves. We want to understand our costs and we want to have
them looked at using best practices and validated.
Ms. Plaskett. So it is independent of what?
Mr. Thompson. It's independent of the people that are
responsible for delivering ----
Ms. Plaskett. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--the program.
Ms. Plaskett. Got you. Okay. And, Ms. Harris, the cost
estimate, the cuts of the cost of the 2020 census by $5.2
billion, you have questioned the validity of those savings.
What do you believe is a more realistic number or figure for
that?
Ms. Harris. I'm sorry, Ms. Plaskett. We've not done work to
identify what the most accurate number would be in terms of a
cost-savings goal. We do have work underway to evaluate the
current 2020 cost estimate itself, but in terms of the benefits
and quantifying those benefits, we haven't yet validated that
$5.2 billion number.
Ms. Plaskett. And that is what you are trying to do right
now is a validation of it?
Ms. Harris. That is something that we will be looking into
moving forward. However, at this time what I can say
definitively is that based on the operational plans for 2020,
CEDCaP plays a major role in that $5.2 billion savings based on
the assumptions that the Bureau is making.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Duncan, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this very important hearing.
And, Director Thompson, a few years ago someone told me
that one of the departments had two thick books with
biographical sketches of all the Members of Congress, and one
of the things it had at the bottom was questions typically
asked at hearings. And I was told that on my section that they
said I commonly ask how much will it cost. And I got a kick out
of that. I was surprised that they had picked that up. But I
think sometimes we haven't asked that question enough.
And so I was very interested in the questions of the
gentlelady from the Virgin Islands because I was going to ask
very similar questions. And I have taken with a big grain of
salt all these cost estimates when we get into the billions,
but the staff told me just a few minutes ago that the total
cost of the 2010 census was $17.8 billion. Is that any place
close to being correct?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman--sorry. Congressman, the number
I've been working with for the cost of the 2010 census was
$12.3 billion.
Mr. Duncan. Twelve point three billion?
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Duncan. Well, then, they told me they said $17.8
billion, and then they took the $5.2 billion off and hit me
with a $12 billion figure for the 2020 census. But I would
assume that--let's just say if the total cost of the 2010
census was a little over $12 billion, then I am assuming that
you were estimating that the costs were going to go up in 2020.
So what are your guesses or estimates of what the total cost of
the 2020 census is going to be right now and then where does
the $5.2 billion come in?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, I think I see what's happening.
So we estimated that if we repeated the 2010 census process in
2020 that it would cost over $17 billion.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. So that is where they are getting the --
--
Mr. Thompson. But if we reengineer the process using
technology and other modern geospatial techniques that it would
come in about $12.5. So that's where the $5.2 is coming from.
Mr. Duncan. And I was going to ask about this $548 million
to upgrade the system, your estimate, and the $1.14 billion
estimate, but you have gotten into that. You know, I will tell
you, over the years it seems to me that we have turned the top
people in these technology companies not only into
multimillionaires but many of them into multibillionaires. And
all these estimates on technology, the history for many years
now has been that we have always low-balled all these estimates
and all these costs.
And you talk about saving $5.2 billion, and my guess is or
my bet is that, you know, we are sitting here now in 2016, and
by the time we get to 2020, which is what we are talking about
that these cost estimates on all this technology is going to go
way up. Then they tell us that all the computers and all these
things, they are obsolete almost as soon as they are taken out
of the box.
So how confident or how good do you feel, how certain are
you about this--I am just curious. I am going to be real
interested in looking at the costs in 2020 and thinking back to
your 12 point whatever billion--what was it, 12 point what,
$12.5 billion for the total cost of the 2020 census. Well, I
tell you this. I hope that comes about. I mean, I hope that you
reach these $5.2 billion in savings, but I tell you, I am very,
very skeptical that that is going to happen. But I wish you the
best.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman yields back.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Buck,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Buck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Thompson, just hit that speak button. You and I
are going to have a conversation if that is all right. I am
really interested in this whole process. And you mentioned to
Congressman Hice that there are three purposes for the census.
And many of the constituents I talk to there is really two
reasons we have a census. One is determine how many people are
in America, and then two, where they live. And is that a fair
summary of the primary purpose of the census?
Mr. Thompson. So as I said before, the first purpose of the
census--well, first off, our goal is to count everybody in the
United States once and only once and in the right place. Then,
the first major use of the census is by December 31 of the
census year, which would be 2020 in this case, we provide 50
numbers that are used to reapportion the Congress of the United
States. The next major deliverable for the census is between
January and the end of March. We work with the States to
provide them the data that they need to do redistricting. And
then the next purpose is we conduct the American Community
Survey, which is part of the decennial census. And that is used
to allocate Federal program dollars.
Mr. Buck. Okay. And that last purpose is not in the
Constitution? That is a statutory purpose? I told you just
leave that button on. We are going to have a nice conversation.
But that is a statutory purpose?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, it's statutory in our title 13, which
directs the Census Bureau how to collect information ----
Mr. Buck. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--for the census.
Mr. Buck. And that survey asks a lot of questions that most
of us would consider personal questions. You try to determine
wealth, you try to determine ethnicity and race and many things
about us as individuals.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Congressman, we do. We believe that the
American Community Survey is one very necessary to the Federal
Government to allocate over $400 billion of funds on an annual
basis, and it's also used by businesses, it's used by community
planners to make more ----
Mr. Buck. That has nothing to do with my question.
Mr. Thompson.--informed decisions.
Mr. Buck. My question was real simple. It asks personal
questions?
Mr. Thompson. It asks questions to support Federal
programs, yes. Yes.
Mr. Buck. Okay. I am not going to get--I was trying to be
civil about this but--okay. It asks questions--I didn't ask you
what the purpose of them was. It asks questions about
individuals and their personal characteristics. And many of my
constituents find that offensive. And I am wondering is that
the first time you have ever heard that?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, we heard--I've got to--let me
back up. So over a year ago we had heard great concerns from
the Congress, so I tried to visit with every Member House and
Senate Appropriations and Oversight to understand the concerns
about the survey. And as a result of that, we are doing a lot
of work to try to address those concerns.
Mr. Buck. So you have also heard that people find those
invasive and some people find those to be offensive?
Mr. Thompson. I've ----
Mr. Buck. And I am not going to ----
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Buck. I heard your answer.
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Buck. And, you know, for example, I have a good friend
who did a DNA check for some reason and found out that he is
not who he thought he was. In fact, I have seen commercials on
TV for Ancestry.com. I am not doing a commercial for them, but
they talk about people that have done ancestry checks. You are
not suggesting that someone is giving a false statement to the
government because they didn't do a DNA check and they don't
really know who they are; they just know what their parents
told them? That would not be something that the Census Bureau
is interested in doing?
Mr. Thompson. No, we believe in self-response.
Mr. Buck. Right. And that ----
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Buck.--is a perception. I mean, we have perceptions now
about gender identity. We have perceptions about all sorts of
issues that are personal on the census. And my question, I
guess, and my point is, is it not counterproductive to ask
people questions that they consider offensive, that they
consider invasive and at the same time try to gather the data
that is constitutionally required, and that is how many people
live in this country and where do they live?
Mr. Thompson. So we work very hard to explain to the people
that respond to both the census, the American Community Survey,
and all of our surveys that we do the importance of responding,
why--how the data are used, why it's so vital to our country.
Mr. Buck. And it is vital to our country because the
Federal Government has decided that it is going to get into
education and transportation and all sorts of issues through
the allocation of money and control those issues. And many
people find that offensive that the Federal Government does
that. And what I am suggesting to you is that the breadth of
this survey that you are giving undermines the constitutional
requirement that we know how many people live in this country
and where they live so that we can have a political system that
fairly reflects the one man, one vote, or one person, one vote
standard that we all consider so important.
You and I haven't had this conversation or I haven't had a
conversation with your staff, but I have great concerns about
the intrusiveness of the census that is taken in this country,
and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Palmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You can keep your microphone on, Director Thompson.
The Census Bureau 2020 report on program management
planning states that the Bureau will offer and encourage people
to respond via the Internet and will not require, will not
require people to enter a unique census identification with
their response. Instead, they can provide their address.
Forgive me if I come across as a bit skeptical, but how would
the Census Bureau verify that an individual respond and isn't
providing incorrect addresses that would skew the findings of
the survey?
Mr. Thompson. So, Congressman, this is the 2020 census
version of a program that we have had for a number of censuses,
which ----
Mr. Palmer. I am not asking you about ----
Mr. Thompson. So ----
Mr. Palmer.--describe the program. I just want to know ----
Mr. Thompson. Okay. So what the--what I'm trying--what I'm
getting at is that the Census Bureau has a lot of experience in
accepting information that comes in but just an address. We
used to call that our Be Counted program where we put forms out
so people could fill them out if they thought they might not
have been counted. What this is doing is allowing people to use
the Internet and respond if they haven't been counted.
We've done a number of--we--as a result of this process
that we've built up a number of checks and balances on how to
deal with responses that come in without an ID, and we're going
to continue to do that for 2020.
Mr. Palmer. Ms. Harris, given the previous testimony about
the potential risk with reliance on the Census Enterprise Data
Collection and Processing, what are some specific steps that
could be taken to de-scope CEDCaP and make it more manageable
to achieve and time for the census 2018 ----
Ms. Harris. I think, Mr. Palmer, one such step that can be
taken is the removal of the known ID processing in the
automated environment. I do agree with Director Thompson in
that they have had significant amount of experience over
multiple decennials in how to process non-ID in paper format,
but in an electronic environment, I would question the Bureau's
level of experience to prevent fraudulent responses.
In addition to that, the current ability to validate the
volume of responses that they would get from these--from
respondents using just an address is something that I would
also question. And given the fact that the requirements
associated was--with this particular component is still in the
exploratory phase. Given that we are in year 6 with only a
year-and-a-half remaining before this end-to-end test, I think
it would behoove them to take this off the table. I think in
this case the juice isn't worth the squeeze. And so that would
be one of the key things that I would suggest that the Bureau
take off the table to reduce the complexity and scope of
CEDCaP.
Mr. Palmer. I think you just answered my next question, but
I want to make sure that we have this for the record. Should
the Bureau reconsider using administrative records to replace
the unique ID code, and if so, why?
Ms. Harris. Well, that, Mr. Palmer, is something that is
out of the scope of the review of the work that we've done.
With regards to administrative records, the key point there is
to ensure that those records that they do use are adequately
secure. And so in terms of whether or not they should be
replacing or using administrative records to either supplement
or replace a non-response follow-up work, that's something that
is an operational decision that is something out of the scope
of what I can tell you from an IT professional's perspective.
But from a cybersecurity perspective, that is absolutely
something that they need to be mindful of. As they develop and
define and finalize this IT solutions architecture, they have
to be looking at the IT measures that--or, I'm sorry, the IT
security measures that need to be in place to adequately
protect this information.
Mr. Palmer. My concern about it is--and I think it has been
discussed in this hearing to a certain extent is that the
census is so important in the context of redrawing
congressional districts and determining the number of eligible
voters. And there are some who, I think, would like to add
people who are not eligible to be counted in a congressional
district or eligible to be counted as eligible voters. And I
think it is important that we are able to identify people who
are legitimate citizens. And that is part of what concerns me
about this is that you are not able to accurately identify who
is responding online.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize Mr. Clay ----
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz.--for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. One of the major themes of GAO's work on the
Census Bureau is that the Bureau has many important decisions
that need to be made in a timely manner in order to meet the IT
modernization goals for the 2020 census. One example of such a
decision is how to equip census enumerators with handheld
devices for the 2020 census. The final decision was made this
January significantly ahead of schedule. I would like to walk
through this particular decision in order to get a better sense
of the decision-making process at the Bureau.
Director Thompson, when did the Bureau first start
considering the possibility of wide-scale usage of handheld
devices for 2020?
Mr. Thompson. That's a good question. I think--I know--so I
came to the Bureau in August of 2013.
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Thompson. At that time, the Bureau was planning to use
handheld devices, smartphones, to collect the information--in
2012. So in 2012.
Mr. Clay. Okay. Okay. And then can you describe one of the
benefits of having enumerators or canvassers with handheld
devices?
Mr. Thompson. Yes. So the most important thing is, is that
we have in most parts of the country a mobile connection with
our enumerators, which means that we can, one, make sure that
we get the information off their machines in a timely basis, in
a secure way. We can also do things like give them optimal root
assignments on a daily basis, which tells them what time to go
visit housing units and the path they should follow. More
importantly, it gives us information that we can feed to their
supervisors that allows for very efficient management of these
enumerators. And it's allowed us to increase the ratio of
supervisor to enumerator. This is what's resulting in
significant inefficiencies ----
Mr. Clay. Correct.
Mr. Thompson.--in the operation we use to collect, you
know, the data from those households that don't respond.
Mr. Clay. And there will be a test as far as the equipment
is concerned?
Mr. Thompson. So, Congressman, we have been testing
handhelds, smartphones in 2014, 2015, and now we're in the
field in 2016 testing these devices.
Mr. Clay. Yes. And having made a decision to use handheld
devices for the census, the Bureau then had to decide how to
source those devices and provision them to enumerators. Can you
describe for us the different options that you considered for
providing handheld devices to enumerators?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Congressman. Essentially, we considered
two themes. One theme was bring your own device ----
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--and the other theme was the government
provides equipment, and under this the government provides
equipment by allowing a contract ----
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Thompson.--to a vendor who can provide the devices and
the IT service contracts. So we made the decision in January,
which was earlier, to go with a device as a service in part
because the GAO at a hearing and, in fact, in recommendations
said we ought to look at--can we expedite our decision-making.
And so we did, and it turned out that was one decision that we
thought that we could expedite based on the information we had
received. And so we expedited that decision based on, you know,
our testing.
Mr. Clay. Okay. And will the information--do you feel
pretty good that it will be protected if it is sensitive
information?
Mr. Thompson. I do, but I'll let Harry talk about the
methods we'll use.
Mr. Clay. Go right ahead.
Mr. Lee. Congressman Clay, thank you for the question. Yes,
we feel comfortable and confident with the security of the
device, and it's not just the device itself. We do have
controls and ways to monitor the device. We also encrypt the
data that the device collects and it transmits.
We also have ways to authenticate the user when they're
using the device. There are a number of ways. First is a PIN to
get access to the device itself, and then user name and
password to actually access the applications. So again, we have
multiple levels of security on that device.
Mr. Clay. And beyond simply providing the devices, what
other services do you anticipate the contractors will provide?
Mr. Lee. The service that the device will use to
communicate with the Census Bureau, also we will be working
with them to provide the software that they will load on the
device ----
Mr. Clay. All right.
Mr. Lee.--to control and monitor the device. And they will
also wipe the device when it's returned, and we will actually
provide oversight for the wiping of that device to make sure
it's been wiped.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for your responses. Mr. Chairman, my
time is up.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I will now recognize myself.
Mr. Cooper, on October 22 of 2015, Congress enacted what is
called the Quarterly Financial Report Reauthorization Act,
which requires the Secretary of Commerce to submit a report to
Congress on data security procedures at the Census Bureau by
January 20 of 2016. The Bureau has yet to provide Congress this
report. What is the status, and why is it so late?
Mr. Cooper. I have to admit that I can't speak to exactly
why it's late other than I will take responsibility for that.
And ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Is it done?
Mr. Cooper. It is being completed as we speak. It came to
my attention more recently that we had missed the deadline. My
staff is now working to complete that report. I've seen a
draft. It should be moving forward probably no later than the
end of this month.
Chairman Chaffetz. It is Federal law that you are supposed
to report--you were supposed to give this to us on January 20,
so when did you become aware that it was late? No, I ----
Mr. Cooper. I became aware last month.
Chairman Chaffetz. So it is due in January and you didn't
know until May that it was late?
Mr. Cooper. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you think we are going to have this
by the end of June?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. It is terribly frustrating. You know,
constituents get frustrated with us because--anyway it is
Federal law. I don't know how you miss things like that. It
gives me no confidence when you come and testify and say, oh,
but we are going to get the census on time, on budget.
Mr. Cooper. I understand, Congressman. I apologize. I
missed this one. I'll take ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, you missed the other two ----
Mr. Cooper.--full responsibility.
Chairman Chaffetz.--reports as well to Congress. The other
promises you made, you came and testified before Congress, you
missed those as well.
Mr. Cooper. I did. I can absolutely understand how it
doesn't instill confidence.
Chairman Chaffetz. All right.
Mr. Cooper. I'm working to correct that as best I can.
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Thompson, help me understand. Will
every American or every household--I don't know how to qualify
it--get a census in the mail? Will you be mailing to every
household, every ----
Mr. Thompson. So we will mail an invitation to every
household to respond by the Internet except for about 20
percent, which will get a questionnaire.
Chairman Chaffetz. How do you determine which 20 percent?
Mr. Thompson. So there's a number of data sources we look
at. One of them is the American Community Survey. Some of them
are some data that the Department of Commerce has on broadband
proliferation, and we put that together and determine areas in
the country where we don't anticipate either high Internet
response--where there's no Internet or where there's a
proclivity not to respond by the Internet.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you said earlier it was going to be
55 percent on the Internet. What are the other--you think 20
percent by mail. Am I getting those numbers right?
Mr. Thompson. Well, we're going to mail out 20 percent. We
expect we'll get about 10 or 11 percent back from the mail.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So you are getting 10 to 11
percent by mail, 55 percent on the Internet. How are you
getting the rest of them? Your microphone ----
Mr. Thompson. Sorry. So we also are going to allow people
to call in and be counted.
Chairman Chaffetz. You are going to dial it in?
Mr. Thompson. No, no, no, they can call in. In previous
censuses, some ----
Chairman Chaffetz. They are going to talk to a live person?
Mr. Thompson. Yes. Yes. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. Have you done that in the past?
Mr. Thompson. In the past what we've done is we've provided
what's called questionnaire assistance, so individuals could
call in and we give them advice over how to fill out their form
or we would mail them a form. This time, what we've found is
that we might as well--because there was great frustration in
the past when people would call in, they'd say, well, I want to
give my interview, and we'd say no. So this time we're going to
let them give their interview.
Chairman Chaffetz. How do you verify that? Like how do you
know where they are?
Mr. Thompson. Well, for starters, we ask them for the ID
number that they have on their material that they get, and we
also ask them what their address is.
Chairman Chaffetz. What percentage of the response do you
think is going to happen via calls?
Mr. Thompson. About 5.5 percent.
Chairman Chaffetz. What about the rest? How are the rest of
them going to be done?
Mr. Thompson. So there's a strategy to collect the
information from those that don't self-respond, which involves
the usage of administrative records and third-party data. So we
estimate that we will start our non-response follow-up with,
say, about 52 million. Don't quote me on these because I'm
getting old and the numbers are close but won't be exact and my
----
Chairman Chaffetz. When you leave the Census Bureau and you
don't want us to quote you on the numbers, that scares me so --
--
Mr. Thompson. All right. All right.
Chairman Chaffetz.--I know ----
Mr. Thompson. All right. All right. All right. All right.
So we're going to start the non-response follow-up with 56
million households, okay? We expect that we'll get about 1.3
million of those back after--as a late mail return. People tend
to mail in as the operation goes on.
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry. I am trying to get a breakdown on
the percentages. I don't know exactly how many people we are
going to end up counting. As I recall, it is 330 million or so.
Mr. Thompson. So we expect that there's going to be about
143 million housing units total in 2020 for the United States
and Puerto Rico. We estimate that the self-response rate will
be about 63.5 percent after 6 weeks. We estimate that the
Internet response rate will be 47 percent after 6 weeks. We
estimate that the telephone response rate will be 5.3 percent
after 6 weeks. And we estimate that the paper response rate
will be 11.2 percent after 6 weeks. And then for the remaining
we're going to have to go out and collect the information
either in person or by using administrative records.
Chairman Chaffetz. Explain administrative records to me.
Mr. Thompson. So there are two ways we plan to use
administrative records to save money in this operation. The
first way is that we intend to identify units that are vacant--
vacant units don't mail back obviously--and count them using
administrative records. So we're going to take them out of the
non-response follow-up workload, and we estimate that'll be
about 6 million. We then are going to ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, if it is vacant, isn't that number
zero?
Mr. Thompson. Well, yes, we have to visit--that's ----
Chairman Chaffetz. You have to visit it ----
Mr. Thompson. That's ----
Chairman Chaffetz.--but the number ultimately is ----
Mr. Thompson. Well, the number of vacant we'll take out
will be 6 million vacant housing units.
Chairman Chaffetz. Right.
Mr. Thompson. Okay. We have to go visit them ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Right.
Mr. Thompson.--but these will reduce our workload by 6
million that we don't have to visit. Then, we're going to visit
every household once, and we estimate that we'll get about 11
million of those households enumerated. That's households and
they'll have people in them which we ----
Chairman Chaffetz. As I try to break down the percentage,
when you do 11 million of a universe of roughly ----
Mr. Thompson. Of 56 million.
Chairman Chaffetz.--how many people?
Mr. Thompson. So 11 million will be about 22 percent of the
workload for non-response follow-up.
Chairman Chaffetz. All right. This is going to take a
while, these percentages as they skew over the course of time.
Can you help me break that down in terms of mail, phone,
Internet ----
Mr. Thompson. So I'd be happy to send you the whole--a
really nice chart.
Chairman Chaffetz. That is what I mean.
Mr. Thompson. But let me get to one important point that I
want to make sure you understand we're going to do so if you
have problems with it, you can voice those problems. The next
thing we're going to do after we visit every household once is
we want to enumerate--we believe we can enumerate about 6
million housing units using administrative records. And these
would be tax data, Social Security data, data from Medicare and
Medicaid, Indian Health Service, but we estimate we can
enumerate about 6 million. Where we'll be really confident the
administrative records represent the housing unit, and then we
will go back out and enumerate the rest in person, you know,
doing door-to-door techniques. But I want to make sure you
understand that our current plan includes a provision to
estimate some occupied housing units using administrative
records.
Chairman Chaffetz. I guess what scares me--and I will come
back to this--is, you know, using the Internet, oh, you know,
what could go wrong? Allowing people to just call it in, I
worry about that as well. I get, you know, solicitations on my
phone all the time. I have no idea where these yahoos are. They
could be overseas for goodness sake. But we will have to
explore that further.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I wasn't here for
most of the rest. I had another hearing. But I suppose I will
ask Mr. Thompson a couple questions.
In something a little unrelated to maybe some of the past
questions, there has been a lot of discussion as far as the
number of illegal immigrants in the country and people throw
around the 11 million figure all the time. A lot of people feel
that number was generated by the census. Do you collect data on
people who are here illegally?
Mr. Thompson. No, Congressman, we don't. I mean, we include
them in the decennial census. We--our mandate is to count every
inhabitant of the United States. I mean, we include them. We do
not break it out by legal, illegal, or ----
Mr. Grothman. Is it possible going through the census data
people can make an estimate on the number of people who are
here illegally?
Mr. Thompson. I'm not a really good expert on how estimates
of the illegal population are made. I know there's a number of
estimates and they use--certain uses of the American Community
Survey come into that, but they--it's a very--it's a much more
sophisticated process. So, I mean, it's not--it's just not
apparent from the census data.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Hypothetically, if there are people
living in a house and some people are illegal and some people
are legal or even if a house is filled with people who are here
illegally, do you believe you are accurately counting those
people?
Mr. Thompson. We believe we're counting them as accurately
as we possibly can. Now--and the reason I say that is we've
done studies before that shows that there are some issues with
counting certain populations, and we do have some undercounts,
and we're working to rectify those and count everyone, but our
goal is to count everyone.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I realize it is, but let's say we have
a family of six people who are here illegally and they live in
a house. How do we know that they are being counted? I mean,
first of all, I would suppose--and this is a controversial
issue, obviously, or an issue of some debate. I would suppose
that if I was here illegally, I might not advertise that I was
here. So if there is a house here and six people are living in
that house and they are here illegally, how do you know that
you are counting them?
Mr. Thompson. So we do everything we can to count that
household. In particular, we have programs that we run that are
local partnership programs where we work with community leaders
to get the word out that, one, the Census Bureau--it's very
important to answer the census; and two, your data are
protected and confidential. And so by working at a community
level, we hope and believe that we encourage a high level of
participation in the census.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Well, let's deal with some common sense
here. If I was here illegally, even if a nice social work-type
person showed up at my door and said I should answer the census
legally, I might not want people to know that I am here or want
to know what my name is even if the government person says your
name is confidential and it is only being kept with the census
or what have you. What are you doing to make sure--and to be
honest I believe maybe there is nothing you can do, but could
you comment on your ability to include the names of all those
six people on the census?
Mr. Thompson. So you're hitting at something that's really
important ----
Mr. Grothman. Right. Right.
Mr. Thompson.--in taking the census. And it's really
important that we hire locally. So we hire members of the
community to work for the census because we really have found--
and I just saw this in Los Angeles--that when you have members
of the community working for you and collecting the
information, there's much more of a rapport and there's much
more of a trust that's built up between the respondent and our
workers.
Mr. Grothman. I am sure all that is true. The point is if I
was somewhere where I shouldn't be, I might not want to tell
the government that. It doesn't matter how nice the person is.
Could you comment on your ability, again, if there was a family
of six people or maybe two families of a total of six people
living in a house or an apartment do you feel that your numbers
would be accurate with regard to those six people given the
overwhelmingly human predisposition, I suppose, not to want to
admit that you are breaking the law?
Mr. Thompson. I'm reasonably confident that we would count
that household.
Mr. Grothman. Why? Why wouldn't somebody not say you are
here? Why would you fill out a form?
Mr. Thompson. Well, because what we've found--and this
started in the 2000 census--was that when we started working
and putting our people out and working with local community
leaders, we saw that we got, one, higher response; and two, we
started seeing dramatic reductions in the differential
undercount between a minority/non-minority populations. And so
by continuing to--and we expanded that program in the 2010
census, and we saw the undercounts further reduced. And so we
believe that we've found that by working at community levels we
can encourage people to participate.
Mr. Grothman. Can I have one more question ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure, go ahead. Go ahead.
Mr. Grothman.--just for waiting around?
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I am living in a house, maybe a house with more than one
family or three families together and I do not respond to the
survey because, of course, I don't want to admit I am breaking
the law, how do you know you are undercounting?
Mr. Thompson. So the Census Bureau believes that evaluating
the work we do is very important. So we use a number of methods
to evaluate the accuracy of the census. We use one method
called demographic analysis, which uses birth records, death
records, immigration, and measurements of what the undocumented
population would be as one vehicle. We also do a survey that we
use to measure the accuracy of the census. And we--and based on
those things, we have information that we made available that
shows how accurate we believe the census is.
Mr. Grothman. Just because your question just begs another.
You say you use immigration records. If people come here
illegally, what sort of immigration records do you use to know
that they are there?
Mr. Thompson. We don't. We use estimates of what the
population might be. But we don't use--obviously, we don't use
immigration records.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you for the extra time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I don't understand that either so--I
will now recognize--what are you knocking about?
Mrs. Maloney. I thought he was waiting but he is not.
Chairman Chaffetz. Oh. I will now recognize Mrs. Maloney --
--
Mrs. Maloney. Okay.
Chairman Chaffetz.--for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. This has been a
very informative session. I just would like to briefly speak in
support of the American Community Survey and really the census
in general. It is the only source of consistent, timely, and
high-quality demographic and socioeconomic data for all of our
communities in America. And we allocate, as was mentioned, well
over $400 billion annually to States and local governments
based on this American Community Survey data. And there is
absolutely no other source for that data. So without the
American Community Survey, the government would not know how to
allocate literally billions of Federal dollars to State and
local governments in a fair process.
The American Community Survey also gives businesses--it is
valued very much by private business. It gives them critical
tools to help guide capital investment, location of facilities,
hiring, service decisions. And then also State and local
officials also use the data for prudent allocations of their
own funds such as where to build roads, hospitals, schools,
senior centers, and other basic services.
So without this, we would be really flying blind on
allocating well over $400 billion, which then goes to a
question I have about the Consolidated Federal Funds report,
which was in existence between 1995 and 2010, which presented
data on Federal Government and State and local governments. And
this showed where the Federal money was being spent. You know,
where is the money going? That is the first step for oversight
and whether it was competitively bid or what was the process
that made this decision.
But due to budget cuts, the Census Bureau no longer
publishes this report. So I would like to know how much did
this report cost and what is the damage that has been done
because we no longer have the report? It seems that the
government does not have enough Federal money to find out where
its $400 billion is being spent. That seems like a gross
oversight, and I would like to request a GAO report on what
this means, that we are spending $400 billion and not even
knowing where it is going without the oversight on it.
So, Mr. Thompson, can you respond on the Federal Funds
report and why it was stopped and the uses of it? And how can
we track these Federal dollars without it?
Mr. Thompson. So, Congresswoman, I know that we stopped
issuing the report, as you said, due to budget issues.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, how much did it cost?
Mr. Thompson. I--I'm not prepared to answer that. I'd be
happy to find out what it cost and send that to you, and I'll
be happy to say what it was used for and provide the rationale
for--more details on how we reached the decision to drop that
and not something else. But I just didn't come prepared to talk
about that.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, we allocate, according to your
testimony, $415 billion a year in Federal funds. And where is
that money going? Where is the oversight on where that money is
going? Maybe you could send me or somebody else a couple of
billion and no one even knows about it. So where is the
oversight on where those dollars are going? If you don't have
an oversight system--this was the system that tracked where the
Federal dollars went and if it was honest and fairly done.
You know, you could give a contract to build a recycling
plant--this actually is a true story; it happened in New York.
They built a recycling plant, and then they opened it, and then
they closed it down. And I called for an investigation and they
said it was appropriately spent because they opened it for one
day. Well, I would like that recycling plant to be helping the
people of America, not wasting taxpayer money.
So if we don't have oversight of where our Federal dollars
are going, I mean, I just have to say how dumb can we be? We
are blind. We don't know where anything is going. And
seriously, I think we should have a joint Federal GAO report on
where is all this money going. Where is the oversight on $415
billion? I am shocked to find out that this is now--we are not
even looking at it. We are totally blind on where this money is
going. This is incredible. No response?
Mr. Thompson. Congresswoman, just--it's--the question is
sort of out of the realm of the Census Bureau, and the reason
it's out of the realm is the Census Bureau is a statistical
agency, which means our mission is to provide objective,
nonpartisan ----
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I would say ----
Mr. Thompson.--high-quality data ----
Mrs. Maloney.--it is not out of the realm ----
Mr. Thompson.--but we don't ----
Mrs. Maloney. May I speak?
Mr. Thompson. We don't ----
Mrs. Maloney. I would say it may officially be out of your
realm, but it is not out of the realm of common sense and
government oversight and accountability. We need to know where
these dollars are going.
Now, you very appropriately--and I noticed how in many of
your testimonies many of you said and we are spending X, Y, Z,
and we are competitively bidding that. And I was thinking,
good, they are being good managers. But how do we know that if
we don't know where this money is going? Maybe $100 billion is
competitive bid and the rest of it is a private contract. We
don't know that.
So I would like an accounting of where this money is going.
I think that is a reasonable thing not only of the Census
Bureau's $17 billion, which is an astronomical amount of money;
I am glad you are going to save $5.2 billion with this new
automation that shows great progress and I hope you stay on
record and meet your guidelines. But it is beyond the pale that
we have $415 billion in Federal funds going down to the States
and cities and every place else and the accountability report
was terminated. So I would like you to get back to the chairman
as quickly as possible how much that report cost, can we
implement it in this current census, and how is this oversight
taking place now?
I would like to ask Mrs. Harris, who has a lot of oversight
answers, do you know where the $415 billion is being spent in
the Federal Government? Is there an oversight of where those
dollars are going and if it is competitively bid or not?
Ms. Harris. Ma'am, that would be out of the scope of the
work that I do at GAO, but I can certainly take that back to my
colleagues.
Mrs. Maloney. Can you find out who is looking at where this
is going? I mean, I find this astonishing, quite frankly, and
it is out of the realm of everybody's oversight. But, I mean,
where do you think it is going? Who has the oversight on it? Do
any of you have an idea where all this information could be
compiled? Ms. Harris, can you get back to us, to the chairman?
I think the chairman is always talking about saving money. This
is certainly the best way to save money is to know whether it
is spent or not, and if it is spent fairly. I would like to
know if it was spent on the contract that it was contracted for
and to a reliable contractor and not a crony. I think this is
astonishing and deplorable and terrible.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentlewoman yields back.
I have a few more questions as we wrap up here.
Mr. Thompson, I would encourage you as much as I can
possibly encourage you on these enumerators to pay special
attention to this. I believe you said there would be about
300,000 people that will be hired. We have hundreds of
thousands of people that have been vetted that do know these
communities, and they are the United States postal workers. And
I don't know if we have to push it through in legislation, but
I know there are good, broad bipartisan support for the idea
that rather than having to start from scratch, find somebody,
vet somebody, teach somebody, your postal worker has been
vetted. They are one of the most trusted people in all of
government.
And I know the unions and the postal workers themselves--
not every single one of them obviously--but would love this
opportunity. They already do know these neighborhoods. They
have walked, they do generally understand. And I think it would
be a great deal of money that could be saved by using the
Postal Service as widely as possible to be these enumerators.
It makes a great deal of sense to me, and I just--between the
vetting and the execution, the understanding of these
neighborhoods, every address already has somebody that goes
there.
And as you look towards other systems and mapping and
everything else, the Postal Service deals with this right now.
And anything that you could do, we will work with you between
the committee and your staff, but this is a passion of mine
personally. And I know I have talked to Mr. Cummings and
others. This is a great resource that is probably underused
every time we go into these censuses.
So that was more of a speech than a comment, but if you
want to care to comment, feel free.
Mr. Thompson. No, we agree that the Postal Service has
potential and--not has potential--is a very valuable partner
right now in how we prepare to take the census. We work with
them very closely to build our address list. We would certainly
be more than happy to hire postal workers to go collect the
information for us. We meet with the post office on a very
regular basis to look for opportunities to work together. So
like, for example, in 2015 we used their facilities as places
in our testing where we could, you know, vet that employee and
things like that. So we view the post office as a very valuable
resource.
Chairman Chaffetz. And again, we are going to work closely
with you, but you don't need to go vet people if they are
already hired as a postal worker. So we don't need extra space
and time and money and resources. And my guess is that would be
substantial savings and a much more secure way to do it than
before.
I still have deep concerns about the use of the Internet.
Our staff will work with you in just understanding the security
and complexity of that, what that budget looks like.
Mr. Lee, you have been either the acting CIO or the deputy
CIO for the last 2 years. How many people work for you in that
department?
Mr. Lee. Right now, there's about 1,250 employees in the IT
directorate, about half contractors, half Federal staff.
Chairman Chaffetz. And if I were to walk over there and you
were to walk me around and look at all these employees and what
they are doing, that is just in the IT sector, right?
Mr. Lee. That's the IT directorate, yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. And like what kind of operating systems
are you using right now? At their desktop, what is the average
person going to have?
Mr. Lee. Windows operating system at their desktop.
Chairman Chaffetz. Like what version?
Mr. Lee. Right now, we're at 7 and we're looking at testing
out Windows 10.
Chairman Chaffetz. It has been pretty tested. It works. I
can tell you that.
Mr. Lee. Yes, well, internally ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Two thousand seven, is that even
supported by Microsoft anymore?
Mr. Lee. No, actually 2007--we're retiring 2008 and we're
testing 2010. I apologize, Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. All right. We will deal more with
that. During your time there the last 2 years have there been
any data breaches?
Mr. Lee. Yes, sir. We have had two breaches, July of 2015
and February of 2016. But they were all on our external-facing
sites and with--segmented off from our production environment.
Chairman Chaffetz. Was there any data that was exfiltrated?
Mr. Lee. There was some data that was exfiltrated that was
considered as being low sensitivity, publicly available data,
but it was queried, and we have since corrected any
vulnerabilities ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Is there any ----
Mr. Lee.--in those things.
Chairman Chaffetz.--personally identifiable information
that was extracted?
Mr. Lee. There was some email addresses and some names.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you know how many?
Mr. Lee. We have the details. I do not have them with me
right now.
Chairman Chaffetz. But off the top ----
Mr. Lee. We did report them up through the DOC cyber
incident response team process.
Chairman Chaffetz. You don't know off the top of your head
how many that was?
Mr. Lee. There was a handful of notices that went to the
individuals whose information was made available.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ms. Rice, are you familiar with these
data breaches?
Ms. Rice. I personally am not aware of them, but somebody
in my office likely was.
Chairman Chaffetz. Would you get back to us and let us know
----
Ms. Rice. Sure.
Chairman Chaffetz.--if you got that notification?
Ms. Rice. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. I would appreciate that. Help me
understand the role of the CIO for census and the role that Mr.
Cooper plays as the CIO for the Department of Commerce. Who
does what? Who is responsible?
Mr. Cooper. Okay. The--my role as the Department of
Commerce CIO related to the Census Bureau, and a lot of what
we've been talking about today is a governance and oversight
role. I am responsible for ensuring the accuracy, the
integrity, and the security of predominantly all of the systems
that support the 2020 decennial and support the operations that
then either feed or carry out what will become the final
integrated environment for conducting the 2020 census.
The Census Bureau CIO has day-to-day operational
responsibility for all things IT resources and to advise
Director Thompson and Deputy Director Potok in all matters
related too much of what our discussion has been today.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Anything else, Mr. Thompson, that
you would add to that? It seems like a good explanation to me,
but I didn't know if you wanted to add anything to that?
Mr. Thompson. No, I think Mr. Cooper did a great job of
describing ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. As we wrap up here, Ms. Rice and
Ms. Harris, go back for us--now we have had a good discussion
for a couple hours--what are your biggest concerns? Go ahead,
Ms. Harris, you can start first, yes.
Ms. Harris. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question. The
greatest concern that we have at this time is the risk and
complexity--or, I'm sorry, the scope and complexity of CEDCaP
and the risk that it presents given the fact that there is only
one-and-a-half years remaining until the 2018 end-to-end test.
So the top priority that I would suggest the new CIO that's
coming into the Census Bureau really consider is identifying
ways to reduce that complexity and scope because, again, when
you look across the Federal Government and you look at these
similar types of major IT investments, the complexity is
something that consistently is something that gets agencies
every time and will lead to cost overruns, schedule delays, and
given the fact that the Bureau has an immutable deadline, in
order to set themselves up for success, they should be reducing
that scope and simplifying the design itself.
Chairman Chaffetz. Care to add anything, Ms. Rice?
Ms. Rice. No. I will piggyback on what Ms. Harris said. But
I guess one of the things to consider is that all of the
testing is being done in--you know, with a sample of 40,000
households, and when you think of the scalability, I think
that's what's frightening. It'll be 140 million households, so
it's just the massive size of the ----
Chairman Chaffetz. The enormity of it all.
I now recognize Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Just in conclusion, I want to thank all of
you for your important work. Many people find it boring, but I
think it is incredibly important. It may be boring, but it is
incredibly important. And quite frankly, I find it exciting
because it tells us who we are as a nation, and that is why it
is so important to get an accurate census so that we can then
use that data to make accurate decisions of where we should be
investing in education, in job growth, in so many ways.
And I will tell you, it is such an important tool not only
for scientists and program people and businesses that helps
them plan and plot and move forward. And just like the Federal
Government really does most of the research, the initial
research funding because private sector really will not put the
money into it that has led us to be the innovators and really
the business leaders of the world.
And a lot of this data that you provide is really the basis
that every planner, every scientist, everyone uses it. And it
is so important to continue. So I was concerned at so many
questions about people questioning whether or not we need the
American Community Survey. Of course we need it. That survey
tells us who we are. And you have the responsibility to get it
as accurate as possible, and I am counting on you. You have got
a big challenge ahead.
Mrs. Harris pointed out a lot of obstacles that you are not
really on track completely, and so I really want to thank
everybody for their role in doing this.
But I must tell you I am astonished to find out that the
very critical part of knowing where our money is going is no
longer being tracked. Now, I will say that I have really
respected--and I mean this sincerely in a bipartisan American
spirit--the chairman's focus on taxpayer money. Practically
every hearing he says we are the stewards of the taxpayers'
money. Well, we are not the stewards when we cut out the survey
that tells us where the money is going.
So I hope you will join with me in not only calling on a
GAO report on where is this money going but in getting this
very important survey back into the budget. If we are spending
zillions of dollars all over the place, including over $400
billion in private contracts, we should certainly know where
that money is going and to make sure that it is spent for the
purposes that it is directed for and that the American people
are getting the support and the money that is supposed to be
directed to them. That is their money. That is money going into
their communities, into their lives, their health care, the
defense of our country and everything else. It is important to
know where these dollars are.
So I look forward to hearing from you, Mrs. Harris, just as
soon as possible on that and also Mr. Thompson because I am
really, really disturbed that we don't have that particular
aspect of it.
But I do want to compliment you. I know that it has been a
real trial to get a handheld that worked. Congratulations on
getting one that is now working in the field. I think that is a
tremendous step forward, and I think it is a tremendous step
forward to be going to the Internet. I know my daughters don't
even communicate any way except for on the Internet. There is
whole new type of people. You know, I used to only need a
pencil. Now, you need the Internet and the computers and
everything else, but that is how they communicate. So I think
is a great stride forward. It is going to be cost-effective,
too. But I also think we need to work on getting the Internet
out to everybody in America so that they can be part of this
system that was pointed out by Mrs. Kelly that many of her
constituents don't have it.
But in any event, I think this was a very important effort
that we all have. It is the biggest peacetime endeavor that we
do as a nation. And I just want to thank you for doing
critically important work for our nation.
And thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman. I have got to
tell you, I am as big a proponent of technology as you can be,
but it scares the living daylights out of me, too. The ability
to manipulate, to change, alter, scam, I really do worry about
it. And the overreliance on technology to do the census is
something that is of deep concern, and we will be watching,
working with you closely, but in many ways I don't like it. And
I think it has the potential to be ripe with fraud and that is
of deep, deep concern. And so the safety, the protocol, it
really does scare me.
And you need to have a backup. You better have a backup
because it is going to take Mr. Cooper, according to his
estimate, another 2 months just to get a schedule for the
schedule. So we talked about 18 months; now, we are down to 16
months and that is just to get a schedule. So we are raising
the red flag. We are, you know, sending up every warning flare
we can have, and I know you feel the pressure, but, you know,
we are 6 years into the planning and we still don't have this
basic information.
So I thank you all for the work you do. You represent a lot
of people who are doing a lot of good, hard, patriotic work.
Ms. Harris and Ms. Rice and your organizations, between the OIG
and the GAO, we rely heavily on your expertise and your day-to-
day watching of this. We look forward to having very regular
hearings on this. I think we will try to have quarterly
hearings as we turn the corner in the next year, and you ought
to be prepared for that. As the primary jurisdiction here, we
need to keep a watchful eye on it.
And we thank you. It has been a long hearing. And the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:47 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
