- FEDERAL AGENCIES' RELIANCE ON OUTDATED AND UNSUPPORTED INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: A TICKING TIME BOMB

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL AGENCIES' RELIANCE ON OUTDATED AND UNSUPPORTED INFORMATION

TECHNOLOGY: A TICKING TIME BOMB

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-120

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-644 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Troy Stock, Staff Director, Subcommittee on Transportation and Public
Assets
Julie Dunne, Counsel
Willie Marx, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 25, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Dave Powner, Director, IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     8
Mr. Terry Milholland, Chief Technology Officer, Internal Revenue
Service
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37
Mr. Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information Officer, Department of
Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45
Ms. Beth Killoran, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Information Technology and Chief Information Officer,
Department of Health and Human Services
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Written Statement............................................    51
Hon. Tony Scott, Federal Chief Information Officer, Office of
Management and Budget
Oral Statement...............................................    57
Written Statement............................................    59

APPENDIX

GAO summary of Major Information Technology Acquisition
Failures, Entered by Chairman Chaffetz.........................    90
GAO Report titled, ``Federal Agencies Need to Address Aging
Legacy Systems,'' Entered by Representative Stephen Lynch......    91
Verizon Report titled, ``2016 Data Breach Investigations
Report'', Entered by Representative Stephen Lynch..............   178
May 16, 2016 letter from IRS Commissioner John Koskinen to
Chairman Chaffetz and Ranking Member Cummings, Entered by
Chairman Chaffetz..............................................   263

FEDERAL AGENCIES' RELIANCE ON OUTDATED AND UNSUPPORTED INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY: A TICKING TIME BOMB

----------

Wednesday, May 25, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Farenthold,
Meadows, Mulvaney, Hurd, Cummings, Lynch, Connolly, Kelly, and
Lieu.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order. I appreciate those in
attendance today. We are having a hearing about Federal
agencies' reliance on outdated and unsupported information
technology, a ticking time bomb.
The Federal Government is spending more than $80 billion--
$80 billion--annually on IT, and it largely doesn't work. With
the majority of the spending focused on maintaining and
operating legacy systems, this is obviously a major concern for
the United States Congress and the operation of the Federal
Government.
Such spending on legacy IT results in higher costs and
security vulnerabilities where old software and operating
systems are no longer supported by vendors. The Federal
Government is years and, in some cases, decades behind the
private sector. We cannot have Federal agencies buying spare
parts on eBay for IT systems, such as the case at the
Department of Labor.
The Federal Government also cannot rely on 930 million
lines of code using more than 70 legacy programming languages.
This is the best estimate that we have on the numbers, based on
the surveys that we did with the various agencies.
That includes over 155 million lines of COBOL and 135
million lines of Fortran, coding language that was first used
in the 1960s. In fact, 50 years ago--50 years ago--Dartmouth
described Fortran as ``old-fashioned.'' So 50 years ago, they
thought it was old-fashioned, and it is still in use today.
This does not even include the Departments of Defense or
Labor, because they could not tell us how many lines of code,
so you can imagine at DOD how many millions upon millions of
lines of code that are still out there in those agencies.
Some agencies still use Windows 3.1, which came on the
market in the early 1990s, or Windows XP, which came on the
market in the early 2000s.
I read a document recently from the Department of Justice,
and it was a WordPerfect document. I love WordPerfect. They are
from Utah, and they still sell that product and update it. They
had an update in the last 60 days. But my guess is if they
tried to send you a WordPerfect document, you might have a
difficult time opening it.
The Federal CIO Tony Scott is one of our witnesses today.
He has stated the need to update IT legacy systems is a crisis
bigger than Y2K.
I will note, personally, I am so pleased that Mr. Scott has
joined the Federal Government. He has quite a background and
reputation. He is the kind of talent that I think our Federal
Government needs. To have somebody of his caliber helping to
tackle these issues, answering the call to service for our
Nation, is really an important step forward, and I applaud the
Obama administration for encouraging him and getting him to
participate here. I think he is part of the solution and not
part of the problem.
Let me give you some examples of our deep concern here.
The Department of Defense Strategic Automated Command and
Control System is 50 years old and runs on a 1970s IBM Series 1
computer that uses an 8-inch floppy disk.
This is an 8-inch floppy disk. It takes 3.2 million of
these to equal one flash drive. So you can go get a flash drive
down at Best Buy or you can get 3.2 million of these to get the
same amount of data stored. And this is still what the
Department of Defense is using.
I want to show a couple pictures here. These are from the
brochure. This is what the Department of Defense in many ways
is still using, nice 1970s, first-class brochures there. Those
styles, that is styling. That is literally the kind of
technology that we are using and up against.
DOD is only now, by the end of fiscal year 2017, finally
scheduled to update parts of this system. It is good, but it is
decades overdue.
The system reminds me, do you remember the movie WarGames,
the WOPR, the War Operations Plan Response, from the 1983
movie? It is still like that, unfortunately.
The IRS Individual Master Files, sometimes called the IMF,
which is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer
information, is also more than 50 years old. It is written in
low-level computer code that is difficult to write and
maintain.
The IRS has general plans to modernize and has made some
progress, but provided no specific date on which the IMF will
be turned off and the new system turned on. I hope that changes
here today. Goals must have deadlines. Otherwise, they are just
dreams, and we need specifics.
The really scary part about all this is that DOD and the
IRS are not alone among the Federal agencies relying on legacy
IT systems and unsupported software and operating systems.
So how do we fix this situation? How do we protect the
Nation against the vulnerabilities that are inevitably there
with such outdated technology?
We are going to hear a lot today about a proposal to
establish a $3 billion IT modernization fund to help agencies
move off of these legacy systems. There are three issues that I
would like to mention proactively about this proposal. I think
it is a serious proposal based on a lot of good work done in
the private sector.
First, the GAO reported last week, at a joint IT-Government
Operations Subcommittees hearing, there are millions of
dollars' worth of savings still on the table from data center
consolidation. To date, agencies have closed more than 3,000 of
10,500 data centers and achieved $2.8 billion in cost savings.
Most of these savings are attributed to just four agencies, the
Department of Commerce, the Department of Defense, the
Department of Homeland Security, and Treasury. So there is much
available in terms of savings still on the table.
I think I am much more inclined to allow CIOs who are
achieving savings and have the foresight and plan to move
forward to use those savings to upgrade legacy systems rather
than simply writing a blank check for all CIOs, regardless of
how well they are currently managing their resources.
Second, the committee wants to see progress on its FITARA
implementation scorecard before giving CIOs additional
resources. Under FITARA, CIOs now have a proper seat at the
table.
To the men and women in the CIO positions, they must be
qualified, motivated, and empowered to make decisions within
their agencies, and they must be held accountable. The pattern
of Fs moving to Ds, and Ds moving to Cs, and so forth, will go
a long way to convincing the committee that CIOs will
appropriately utilize additional resources allocated to
modernizing legacy systems.
Third, I note that Mr. Milholland appears today under a
subpoena. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen declined to allow Mr.
Milholland to testify voluntarily and stated to the committee,
and I quote, this comes from the letter, ``Spending time
preparing for a hearing would take Mr. Milholland away from his
important role in leading IT development and operation, and
would be disruptive to the IRS.''
That is wholly and totally unacceptable. This is part of
the solution, not part of the problem, and the accountability
before Congress is part of this issue.
Preparing for, testifying at a hearing on IT issues in
front of this committee does not take away from the important
role. It is a key part of your important role.
The committee hopes IRS attitude and position is not
widespread across the Federal Government. It is a change in
attitude from the IRS Commissioner.
The IRS Commissioner insisted that he personally be here to
testify, but we want to have the people who are actually
responsible day-to-day and spend 100 percent of their day
working on this issue. It is very frustrating.
Taxpayers deserve a government that leverages technology to
serve them, rather than one that deploys unsecured, decades-old
technology that places their sensitive and personal information
at risk. We have a long way to go to get from COBOL to the
cloud, but I am committed to helping us get there.
I know other members of the committee are working on this
as well. I want to duly note Ranking Member Cummings, Chairman
Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, Chairman Meadows, and Ranking
Member Connolly among those who are spending a significant
amount of time trying to help tackle and solve the problem. I
appreciate their insight and their participation.
This is not a partisan issue. We all need to come together
on this, on both sides of the aisle. It is the right thing to
do, and it is a vital part of the infrastructure that we need
in order to have a fully functional government.
So we will have a good hearing today. I appreciate the
witnesses being here.
I will now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for
his comments.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
There has been an increasing number of sophisticated
cyberattacks against Federal agencies like the Office of
Personnel Management as well as private sector companies like
Anthem, Primera, and Sony Pictures. These devastating
cyberattacks highlight the challenges faced by public agencies
and the private sector in keeping their systems secure from
determined, sophisticated cyber spies.
They also highlight the need for strong congressional
action to help agencies strengthen their security and modernize
their information technology systems.
The problem, however, is that Republicans in Congress have
spent the last several years making massive cuts to Federal
agency budgets, making it harder for these agencies to upgrade
their information systems, let alone maintain the systems they
have.
The Internal Revenue Service is a prime example.
Republicans slashed the IRS budget by almost 17 percent over
the past 5 years, cutting it from $12.2 billion in 2010 to
$11.2 billion in 2016. They cannot pretend that budget cuts of
this magnitude have no effect.
Obviously, these massive cuts reduce the amount of funding
the IRS could devote to system upgrades. These cuts also impair
the ability of the IRS to hire and retain staff needed to
modernize and replace outdated information systems.
As a result of these massive cuts, the IRS IT staff has
dropped from 7,385 employees in 2011 to 6,730 employees today.
I completely agree that Federal agencies desperately need
to upgrade their information technology systems. But if we want
to talk about a ticking time bomb, let's talk about it. The
ticking time bomb here is that Republicans keep slashing agency
budgets year after year, and pretending that these actions have
no negative repercussions.
Just yesterday, Republicans on the House Appropriations
Committee released their fiscal year 2017 budget. It would
slash another $236 million from the IRS budget.
We cannot expect Federal agencies to modernize, replace,
and strengthen their information systems against determined,
sophisticated cyber attackers without giving them the resources
and tools they need to do so.
This is why I am proud to cosponsor the Information
Technology Modernization Act that was recently proposed by the
Obama administration and introduced in the House by my
colleague from the State of Maryland, Congressman Steny Hoyer.
Our fellow committee members Representatives Connolly, Lieu,
Kelly, and Duckworth are also cosponsoring this bill.
The bill would improve cybersecurity by establishing a
dedicated $3.1 billion information technology modernization
fund to help agencies replace their outdated information
systems with more modern, adaptive, and secure systems. The
bill would take some of the best practices from the private
sector by establishing a revolving loan fund that would be
dedicated for the purpose of funding wholesale upgrades and
replacing outdated information technology infrastructure. The
fund would be self-sustaining because agencies that receive
money for modernization projects would be required to repay it
over time.
By doing this, the bill would ensure that the fund can
continue to support modernization projects into the future.
The bill also would create an independent review board with
experts in acquisition and cybersecurity to oversee the fund
and review proposals from agencies to upgrade their systems.
The board would provide technical support to agencies in
implementing modernization plans, and it would provide regular
monitoring to ensure that every project that receives funding
would be subject to centralized oversight and expertise.
As the Government Accountability Office's newly released
report on Federal agency IT systems found, Federal agencies
spend almost 75 percent of their budgets on maintaining current
computer systems--75 percent--which leaves little for funding
the development of more modern but costly technologies that are
more secure.
We hope to have the support of our chairman for this
landmark legislation. And the chairman is absolutely right,
this is not something that should be done on a partisan basis.
This is, indeed, a bipartisan problem that must have bipartisan
solutions.
So I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
important hearing, and I look forward to the testimony of our
witnesses today. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record two documents. The first is a spreadsheet demonstrating
that, since President Obama took office until now, there is $6
billion in annual funding increases since the President took
office. Despite the comments earlier, there are billions of
dollars on an annual basis more being spent on IT.
I would also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
the GAO summary of major information technology acquisition
failures. The total about $8 billion, things that have been
started and scuttled, everything from NOAA to the Department of
Defense to Veterans Affairs to Homeland Security. I ask
unanimous consent to enter that into the record as well.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Chaffetz. I want to hold the record open for 5
legislative days for any members who would like to submit a
written statement.
It is now time to recognize our witnesses.
I am pleased to welcome Mr. Dave Powner, director of IT
management issues at the Government Accountability Office. I
appreciate your expertise. You have testified before, and we
are glad to have you here.
Mr. Terry Milholland, chief technology officer at the
Internal Revenue Service at the Department of the Treasury,
thanks for being with us again.
Mr. Terry Halvorsen, chief information officer at the
Department of Defense. Again, we welcome you, Mr. Halvorsen,
and your presence again before this committee.
Ms. Beth Killoran--did I pronounce it properly?
Ms. Killoran. Killoran.
Chairman Chaffetz. Killoran. I believe this is your first
time testifying in front of Congress, and we welcome you here
today.
She is the acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for
information technology and chief information officer at the
Department of Health and Human Services.
Thank you for being here.
And the Honorable Tony Scott, the Federal chief information
officer at the Office of Management and Budget.
Welcome and thank you all for being here.
Pursuant to committee rules, witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify.
If you will please rise and raise your right hand?
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
We would appreciate you limiting your verbal comments to 5
minutes. Your entire written statement will be entered into the
record. We will give you a little latitude, but if it gets to
be too long, we will cut you off, so we can ask some pertinent
questions.
But, again, we appreciate you being here.
Mr. Powner, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF DAVE POWNER

Mr. Powner. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings,
members of the committee, thank you for holding this hearing
that highlights a significant issue for our Nation. We have too
many old legacy systems that are not serving citizens well,
cost too much to maintain, are at risk of failing, and pose
significant security vulnerabilities.
This morning, I will summarize some of these systems and
why we got into the situation, the dire security situation
these systems pose, and what needs to occur to fix this issue.
I would like to start by highlighting the fact that the
Federal Government spends roughly 75 percent of its IT dollars
on operations and maintenance and only 25 percent on
modernizing or new development. So last year, roughly $60
billion was spent on legacy, and $20 billion went to new
development. Some of this legacy goes toward duplicative
systems and inefficient data centers. In your committee hearing
last week, you administered FITARA implementation grades that
directly address this, could move savings from the legacy
bucket to development, and greatly help the situation.
At that hearing, Commerce CIO Steve Cooper illustrated this
best when he discussed significant savings resulting from
consolidating data centers and how these funds can be moved
toward new modernization efforts.
Within that $60 billion spent are many old legacy systems,
some of which have components over 50 years old. Our report
being released today highlights numerous systems that are still
being run with outdated languages, like Assembly, COBOL, and
Fortran; have old parts that are obsolete and difficult to
find; and contain hardware and software that is no longer
supported by vendors.
A key point here is that many of these systems are tied to
mission-critical functions, not just administrative or
financial management systems, not to downplay the importance of
those systems. But our report highlights these aging systems
that process our tax returns, coordinate operational functions
for nuclear forces, determine Social Security eligibility and
amounts. In addition, these aging systems maintain information
on hazardous materials important to the Department of
Transportation. They also serve as a key communications hub for
our Nation's weather warnings.
A couple key reasons why we have this situation is CIO
tenure and poor governance over IT spending. The average CIO
tenure is roughly only 2 years, and most CIOs are not tackling
these large modernization efforts that typically involve
massive application and data conversions.
Also, agency IT governance over legacy spending is
typically either lacking or poor at best. Not only are these
old systems difficult and expensive to maintain because
agencies have to rehire retired programmers or pay a premium to
vendors for such services, but they also pose significant
security risks.
Having all this unsupported hardware and software is a
recipe for security breaches. In fact, during our review, we
asked for and took pictures of these older systems, and four
agencies told us that they could not provide us with these
pictures because that alone created significant security
concerns.
This is a difficult yet fixable problem. To address this
situation, agencies need to first identify and prioritize their
old legacy systems in need of replacement. Tony Scott's draft
guidance does just this, and this committee's inquiries also
help agencies to complete this first step.
Next, agencies need to develop replacement plans with clear
milestones for their replacement efforts. Our report highlights
far too many instances where these plans are not in place.
Finally, these plans need to be implemented effectively by
tackling these efforts incrementally and having aggressive
governance that monitors progress that should include clear
transparency on the IT dashboard.
Again, your FITARA implementation grades that stress
incremental development and accurate CIO ratings could be
extremely helpful in fixing the government's aging legacy
system problem.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership on this
important issue, and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Milholland, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY MILHOLLAND

Mr. Milholland. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings,
and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today.
The IRS recognizes the need to continue work to modernize
our information technology. We make every effort to stay
current and efficient in our data centers and our processing
platforms while remaining vigilant about the security of our
systems and the taxpayer data entrusted to us.
We operate a number of legacy systems vital to our tax
administration mission. Our goal is to retire all of these
legacy systems as quickly as possible. We consider them to be
legacy because their programming languages and data structures
were generally designed and built decades ago when computer
infrastructure was extremely expensive and technology
capabilities were limited.
Over time, the underlying hardware and operating
infrastructures of the legacy systems have been modernized.
Together with the movement to electronic filing technology, and
despite the restrictions of the programming language and data
structures, this modernization has made it possible for the IRS
to deliver smooth filing seasons year after year.
To give the committee an idea of what our submission
systems can handle, over this last filing season, we received
4.4 million tax returns on our peak day. At that peak, our
systems accepted more than 800,000 filings in a single hour,
which equates to more than 225 filings per second.
But the main challenge posed by our legacy systems is that
their data structures stored on computer tapes make it very
difficult to use that data in our downstream service and
compliance systems to better serve taxpayers.
So we have been working for many years within the
constraints of our budget to transition our legacy systems'
programming languages and data structures so that we can make
that data more available for more modern, Web-based
applications and data analytics that we use in other key
mission functions, like enforcement and compliance.
Our most visible effort in this regard has been the
development of a centralized relational database for all
individual taxpayer accounts called the Customer Account Data
Engine, CADE2. When fully implemented, it will replace the
legacy Individual Master File, or IMF, which historically has
been the primary data source for individual taxpayer accounts.
We think that will happen in three major steps, or what we
call transition states. The first step of this transition state
in implementing CADE2 was the launch in January 2002 of that
relational database. Up to this point, we had been performing
core account processing on a weekly basis. Launching this phase
of CADE2 meant that the IRS can now process updates to accounts
on a daily basis. This has fundamentally changed the way the
IRS provides information and services to taxpayers, and has
delivered significant and lasting benefits to our tax system.
For example, taxpayers can now receive their refunds
faster, and IRS customer service representatives have much more
up-to-date customer account information.
This, however, is a complex, multistep process, not a
single switch to be thrown. It is not an easily accomplished
action because connections for these legacy systems are
intertwined throughout the IRS for both system and data
repositories.
There is a lot more work to be done on CADE2, but the steps
we have taken so far have improved our ability to interact with
taxpayers efficiently and effectively.
I also want to mention that GAO has acknowledged the
importance of the IRS work in this area. In 2013, GAO removed
our business system modernization program from its high-risk
list, singling out delivery of the initial phase of CADE2 as
the main reason for determining that business system
modernization was no longer high risk.
I also should point out that all new development work over
the past 7 years has been using state-of-the-art programming
languages and database technologies so that the problems of
older legacy systems will not be repeated.
In working to transition our legacy systems to more modern
ones, we have a number of challenges. None is more critical
than the budget situation. IRS funding was cut each year for 5
years from 2011 to 2015, and our budget is currently about $900
million below what it was in 2010. Making progress at a faster
pace on transitioning our legacy systems will require
significant, sustained, additional resources in the IT area.
Another way Congress can help is by reauthorizing
streamlined critical pay authority. The loss of this authority
has made it very difficult and time-consuming to recruit and
retain employees with expertise in highly technical areas in
IT, such as legacy system modernization, cybersecurity,
architecture, engineering, and operations.
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and members of
the committee, this concludes my statement, and I am happy to
take your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Milholland follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Halvorsen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY HALVORSEN

Mr. Halvorsen. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify before you on the Department of Defense
legacy information technology spending plans for modernization
and the implications of IT acquisition reform and security.
As the department CIO, I am the principal adviser to the
Secretary of Defense for information management, IT,
cybersecurity, communications, positioning, navigation and
timing, spectrum management, and senior leadership and Nuclear
Command and Control and Communications matters. My written
testimony provides more detailed information on these matters,
but I want to highlight some of the department's activities in
this area.
All of the services have modernization plans that align
with DOD and service priorities. The DOD and the services have
recognized some critical areas to which funds have been added
for modernization. NC3, PNT, the Joint Regional Security Stacks
are some examples. All of the services are committed to moving
to Windows 10, and we are working on moving toward a common
private cloud supported by various hybrid and public clouds.
The department and services are committed to modernization
as it relates to improved cybersecurity. For example, within
the services, the Army is moving forward with upgrading its
camp, post, station, and base communications IT infrastructure.
The Air Force is implementing Communications Squadron Next. The
Navy is moving forward with shipboard modernization with
programs such as CANES. And the USMC has focused its efforts to
modernize IT at the edge by creating a seamless Marine Corps
enterprise network.
I believe we are correctly balancing between mission
priorities, legacy systems, and modernization within current
budget constraints. Today, about 25 percent of our budget goes
to modernization. That doesn't mean that we don't have
challenges or that there are enough resources.
OPTEMPO also has a major impact on IT equipment and
modernization. DOD has been busy, and we continue to have high
demand for our services.
Our priority for investments are C2 systems and direct
combat support systems. We aren't modernizing business systems
as fast as we would like, but we have prioritized DOD resources
to ensure overall mission success.
The DOD is ``Fortune Zero.'' It is the largest IT operation
in the world.
I think it is important to note that DOD is not out of
balance with large enterprise IT in the private sector. We are
not out of balance in investment, use of cloud, percentage
using older languages. I think we should note that COBOL runs
70 percent to 80 percent of all business transactions in the
world.
IT modernization competes for dollars with other DOD
modernization efforts, like aviation platforms, ship weapons,
combat vehicles, et cetera. Again, I think we've got the
priorities right, given the budget constraints. The budget,
however, is constrained, and that affects all modernization
efforts, to include IT.
While I am the CIO, DOD must look at the entirety of the
department's modernization efforts, not just IT, and prioritize
accordingly.
Thank you for the time. I look forward to your questions
today.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Halvorsen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Killoran? Did I get it better that time?
Ms. Killoran. Yes, thank you. Good morning.
Chairman Chaffetz. You are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF BETH KILLORAN

Ms. Killoran. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz, and Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you for
giving me the opportunity to discuss our legacy Federal IT
technology at HHS.
As the chief information officer acting for the Department
of Health and Human Services, my testimony today will describe
how we have been able to decrease some of our end-of-life
systems through both a risk mitigation approach as well as our
plans moving forward.
HHS is the U.S. Government's principal agency for
protecting the health of all Americans and providing essential
human services, especially for those who are least able to help
themselves. Information technology is critical to enabling HHS
to achieve its mission by fostering advances in medicine,
public health, and social services. HHS currently spends
approximately $5 billion annually on our internal IT and over
$7 billion in IT grants that are primarily given to States and
local agencies to facilitate our programs.
In managing our IT programs, one of the key risks
associated with operational systems is our ability to secure
them. Last year, HHS did make measurable progress in our
increase of Federal Information Security Modernization Act
score, or FISMA. But our work there isn't done.
HHS is currently working to implement the next phase of
Einstein, and we are working to improve our trusted Internet
connection and deploy different tools under DHS's continuous
diagnostics and mitigation program.
All of this work will not only strengthen our systems, but
will build on HHS Cyber Sprint success that we had and
strengthen our overall cyber infrastructure resiliency.
When our agency decides to replace a legacy system, cloud
offerings can help our agency reduce time to develop those
products and services. Cloud solutions have helped already HHS
reduce program risk and development time.
Our most successful cloud implementation to date is our HHS
financial systems upgrade of our core backbone, which occurred
last year. This ambitious program modernized our IT
infrastructure by using cloud capabilities to improve our
systems over all. and through a shared technology, we were able
to add cutting-edge technology in a shorter period of time.
Given the importance of our IT mission, I worked diligently
over the last year to also improve our IT portfolio review
process. Through this, I have launched a number of initiatives
in collaboration with our operating divisions to address the
most common systematic issues, improve transparency, and
enhance governance. Our HHS Federal information technology
reform act implementation plan helps support that path moving
forward.
One initiative that I have done is to enhance our program
evaluation model to make sure that we are looking at enterprise
risk overall, and implemented changes to how we look at and
score our programs for the IT Federal dashboard last October.
This new model incorporates new risks, operational performance
objectives, and factors both from scoring and risk factors that
OMB has established in GAO.
This data is used to closely monitor our IT programs and
risks, and identify those that are at risk. And if something is
at high risk for a certain period of time, we do conduct
TechStats, of which we actually conducted 10 within the last
year, including both the programs cited in the recent GAO
report.
We will continue to work on mitigating risks as we look at
our legacy systems and work to improve.
By working one-on-one with our program managers, we can
increase the probability of success. We have found that
investing in those individuals is critical to our success. We
have trained 300 people over the last year, and we have an HHS
human capital pilot to increase our cybersecurity work force
and competencies over the next year.
HHS does spend significantly more on operations, 71
percent, than on our development at 29 percent. HHS recognizes
the need for greater development spending, but challenges
exist.
Some of our challenges include lack of authority, uncertain
grantee systems, the ability to make sure that we are
accomplishing Federal mandates, the interdependencies of our
systems, and funding by smaller organizations.
As we move forward with some of these capabilities, we will
make sure that we look at our inventory and make sure that our
FITARA plan establishes how we will evaluate those and look at
our modernization moving forward.
One way that we know that we can address a funding
challenge is by Congress passing the IT modernization fund.
This model can help agencies with upgrading their systems, and
the business case we have is our nonrecurring expense fund.
This is provided to use unobligated balances to allow us to
make changes to our critical systems, and we have succeeded in
enhancing our DME significantly from 2012 and 2013 to current
standards.
Simply put, doing nothing is not doing nothing. As systems
age, the risk to security, reliability, and availability have
to be addressed. To reduce exploitation and system
vulnerabilities' associated risk, we need to look at those
systems and make sure that we are looking at business and
security risks to make our priorities.
Thank you for your time, and I will yield to any questions
you might have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Killoran follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Scott, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TONY SCOTT

Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, members of the committee. I appreciate the invitation
to appear before you today.
As has been noted, Federal agencies spend nearly three-
quarters of their IT budgets maintaining legacy systems. They
are particularly vulnerable to malicious cyber activity, and
they are often unable to utilize current cybersecurity best
practices, such as data encryption, multifactor authentication,
and other techniques.
But in addition to posing security vulnerabilities, these
systems are often very inefficient and subject to rising costs
over time, and the inability to meet mission requirements. To
address these challenges, the administration has proposed the
creation of an information technology modernization fund to
facilitate the transition of Federal systems to more secure,
cost-effective, and more modern infrastructure, such as cloud
platforms.
The ITMF would address these challenges associated with
legacy IT by better aligning with the following private sector
best practices.
First, a board of experts acting independently of any one
agency will review agency proposals and select the highest
priority projects across the government, ensuring that the
Federal Government's most pressing and highest risk systems are
targeted for replacement.
Second, the ITMF will require agencies to pay back the
funds as projects complete. Doing so will ensure that projects
receive significant buy-in and attention from agency
leadership, and that, over time, the ITMF is self-sustaining
and continues to support future modernization projects. We
estimate that the $3.1 billion in one-time seed funding could
address at least $12 billion in modernization projects over the
first 10 years and would continue to remain available in the
future.
Third, experts in IT acquisition and development will
provide expertise to agencies in implementing their
modernization plans. To increase the probability of success,
every project that receives funding will have access to
centralized expertise, including a public-facing dashboard that
tracks key milestones and financial expenditure data.
Fourth, the ITMF will have the ability to provide funding
in smaller increments tied to real-world delivery of working
products. This agile approach ensures that agencies employ
modern development techniques and that these funds support
successful projects.
Finally, by requiring agencies to apply and compete for
incremental funding, the ITMF will provide strong incentives
for agency leadership to develop and implement comprehensive,
high-quality, and cost-effective modernization plans.
Retiring or modernizing vulnerable and inefficient legacy
IT systems will not only make the government more secure, it
will also save us money. As a means of acting on this necessary
next step, we look forward to working with Congress on enacting
the ITMF, which will enhance agencies' ability to protect
sensitive data, reduce costs, and deliver world-class digital
services to the American people.
I thank the committee for holding this hearing, and I would
be pleased to answer any questions that you might have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you all.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes, but I will yield
my time to the chairman of the Subcommittee on IT, Mr. Hurd of
Texas.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and the
ranking member for the leadership on this issue.
I always say that nobody is going to hold a rally for IT
procurement, but when I am back home, everybody asks about this
question because they recognize that $80 billion is being spent
on IT procurement and 80 percent of it is on legacy systems. It
is about using American taxpayer dollars wisely. It is about
making sure we have an efficient government that is providing
services to our citizens. And it is making sure that we are
using technology that is keeping us safe and protecting our
digital infrastructure.
My first question is to Mr. Halvorsen. When did you come
into the position as CIO?
Mr. Halvorsen. I have been in this position about 2.5
years.
Mr. Hurd. Are you familiar with the Expeditionary Combat
Support System?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am.
Mr. Hurd. And that is a system that was canceled in 2012,
after spending more than $1 billion and failing to deploy
within 5 years of initially obligating funds. Is that accurate?
Mr. Halvorsen. It is.
Mr. Hurd. One of the things that we are looking at in the
FITARA scorecard is incremental development. It's major
development investments and are they achieving measurable goals
every 6 months? DOD is listed as an F when it comes to
delivering this. As of May 2016, only 41 percent of those
projects are being delivered.
In asking for a modernization fund and additional funds,
what is going to be done differently in the Department of
Defense to ensure that, if you do have more money for
investments on updating legacy IT systems, that you are going
to actually hit the mark on time?
Mr. Halvorsen. I would say a couple things.
One, we are a little out of sync with the grading criteria
in that we have a 6- to 12-month, not a zero- to 6-month grade
within DOD. We are moving that more forward, so we leveled that
time to 6 to 12. It was higher before.
I think if you look at the things we have done recently,
you will see that we are doing things in modernization. The
move to Windows 10 is the single biggest move to a single
operating system ever undertaken by any organization. We are
getting that done. We have a 1-year time frame. We are on track
to do that. We will hit 80 percent of DOD in a year.
We have done more modernization with the commercial sector.
I think that is the important piece that we need to recognize
here. Our modernization needs to be done much more in
conjunction and partnership with the commercial sector.
Mr. Hurd. So, Mr. Halvorsen, are you saying buy, not build?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am saying buy mostly, not build.
Mr. Hurd. Excellent.
My next question is for Mr. Milholland. What is Treasury's
strategy to manage unsupported technologies, such as the
mainframe capabilities where it states the Treasury will assume
the risk of the expired support technology? We sent a letter
out to every agency asking for old programming language that is
being used, systems that are no longer supported by vendors. In
some of these systems that are no longer supported by vendors,
Treasury is saying that they are assuming the risk for that
expired technology.
What is the strategy to manage these unsupported
technologies?
Mr. Milholland. I am not the Treasury CIO, so I cannot
answer that completely, but we are a large part of that
organization.
Mr. Hurd. In some of these, the response was saying that
the IRS will be assuming the responsibility for managing that.
Mr. Milholland. Yes. We believe that all of the
technologies we have today are, in fact, supported. For
example, when we were completing the drive to get to Windows 7,
we worked out a special support deed with Microsoft to cover
the Windows XP environments while we were completing the job,
for example.
The rest of the environments, like what you call the
mainframes, which is a Systems z, is, in fact, fully supported
by the supplier, IBM. It is a very modern operating system. We
are running Linux on the z. In fact, our main migration path
for all new development is to build these applications with
Java and run it on the z, or wherever best. It could be on an
Intel processor.
We are also using the dollars to stay current whether it is
the BIOS, whether it is operating systems, whether it is the
middleware, whether the tools you are using, or the cross
product, be more no more than n or n-1 versions behind.
Mr. Hurd. I copy, Mr. Milholland, and I only have 10
seconds left.
Do you have a modernization roadmap that creates a common
modern platform for mission delivery?
Mr. Milholland. Absolutely. In fact, we have shared it with
this committee. We call it the technology roadmap, part of
delivering of what we call the future state for the IRS.
Mr. Hurd. Where are you in implementation?
Mr. Milholland. We are just at the very beginning for that,
for the migration to be the digital enterprise. But part of
that is the modernization of all the legacy systems, which
includes replacing that assembly language code with Java. That
is in part driven by the CADE2 project that is underway.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
ranking member for his ongoing support that has allowed us to
elevate this issue in this committee and actually created
enormous common ground.
Thank you, Mr. Cummings, especially.
Welcome to the panel.
Mr. Scott, we are talking about legacy systems, but has
there been a comprehensive audit of Federal agencies, so we
actually know the full universe we are talking about?
Mr. Scott. There is a data collection effort underway
currently where we hope to gain better insight into actually
what it is. I would say that some of this is problematic in the
sense that much of the data isn't automated in the sense that
you can just push a button and get a digital report in the as-
is environment. So we don't have a comprehensive ----
Mr. Connolly. But the fact of the matter is --anecdotally,
right?--we've had, maybe we still have, Federal agencies with
multiple email systems ----
Mr. Scott. Correct.
Mr. Connolly.--not all of which are compatible; multiple HR
systems, not all of which are compatible; huge numbers of data
centers that proliferated, and God only knows what coordination
exists among the thousands of data centers we are trying to
consolidate; and legacy systems. And on top of legacy systems,
isn't it also true we have widely distributed software products
that also need updating or patching?
Mr. Scott. This is correct. One of the techniques we have
used to estimate the level of legacy systems is I recently went
to some of our key suppliers of network storage computer
equipment and asked them to provide us data in terms of what
they know about the Federal Government.
One of the interesting things coming back was, in many
cases, we pay for support contracts for hardware, software that
they have sold the Federal Government.
I asked them to look at what is either expired or will
expire in the next 3 years, to try to get some handle on what
that might look like, just from their own records.
These are systems that we are paying today for support
contracts on.
In just the next 3 years, we will have over $3 billion
worth of hardware, software, and services that will go out of
support, meaning no spare parts, no patches, no upgrades, no
security.
Mr. Connolly. Isn't it also true--I am running out of time,
so forgive me for interrupting--that we have had to hire 3,427
IT professionals just to maintain legacy systems?
Mr. Scott. That sounds about right, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Wow. Any idea what the estimated cost is to
replace all the legacy systems in the Federal Government?
Mr. Scott. We don't have an accurate estimate of that.
We've tried to triangulate it in a number of different ways.
That's why we ended up with the $3 billion proposal. We think
that is at the low end of what would be required to make a
meaningful start to this.
But I think the more important concept we should all
embrace is, given the rapid advance of technology, we really
need to get into a continuous upgrade mode, not a ``wait until
it breaks'' mode.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And I want to deal with something,
because the chairman has on several occasions cited the fact
that you have $82 billion a year you spend on procurement. He
cited in his opening statement the fact that this
administration, over its lifespan, has increased that. That
total amount represents an increase of about $6 billion.
Why isn't that sufficient? Why do you need more money? Why
do you need this modernization fund, when you have such a
substantial amount of money we are spending every year, and
even that amount might be understated, in terms of not
capturing other expenses within the Federal family?
Mr. Scott. I agree with the wide observation that there is
an opportunity to save money. The challenge is, as was already
said, a lot of that money is spent on just keeping the lights
on the current old stuff.
Unfortunately, we cannot shut that off until we have a
replacement in place, so you cannot actually capture the
savings until after you have done something to replace it. That
is why this concept is important.
Mr. Connolly. Sort of dovetailing with, I think, one the
chairman's points, I do think the burden is going to be on the
Federal Government, the executive branch.
Okay, let's say, we authorize the modernization fund,
buying the argument that we are going to have to make an
initial outlay to achieve savings. There is going to have to be
a codified savings and efficiency plan that shows we can make
IRS, DOD, and HHS, and every other Federal agency, this much
more efficient, and either keep a budget stable or, in fact,
effectuate net savings because we have replaced those legacy
systems.
I think the chairman has expressed that it is
counterintuitive that we would actually need to add more money.
I think you can sell that, the argument you just made, Mr.
Scott, if you can demonstrate, ``And here will be the payoff.
Here is the return on that investment.''
I think we have to spend some real time with Congress in
making that case.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman, because those
last comments, I do agree with. I think that is the seminal
question we have to get out and agree that is the question that
we need to analyze on that particular piece of legislation.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mica, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this, it's kind of a meat-and-potato hearing. It is not
flashy like some we do.
I had the privilege to serve with a very capable ranking
member, Mr. Connolly, with Government Operations. He is very
knowledgeable, in fact, more knowledgeable than I was when I
assumed that position and learned a lot from him.
Our objective was to look at the total amount of money we
were spending at the time, which at that time was $80 billion.
Now I see with your report that was released today, they are
spending $89 billion.
The estimate when Mr. Connolly and I were doing our review
was that about 50 percent of this money is wasted either on
outdated technology, on duplicate data centers.
Would GAO or OMB, would you say that about 50 percent is
not properly spent, is wasted? Is that still about where we
are?
Mr. Scott. Yes, I think it would make sense to say, if you
missed multiple generations of the opportunity to improve your
computing environment, you are wasting money. It is very clear.
Mr. Mica. What do you think, GAO?
Mr. Powner. I do not know if it is 50. I will say this, I
don't know that I have a precise number, but there is a lot of
money spent on inefficient operations, data centers, and there
are a lot of failed acquisitions. So clearly, there are
billions wasted.
Mr. Mica. Your report says Federal legacy IT investments
are becoming increasingly obsolete. Many use outdated software
languages and hardware parts that are unsupported. Agencies
reported using systems that have components that are in some
cases at least 50 years old.
This is your finding.
Mr. Powner. Correct.
Mr. Mica. Well, we won't even go half, if we just go $40
billion in waste.
When Mr. Connolly and I started this exercise, we asked you
all how many data centers there were. I think, first, we got
800 or something. Then we got 1,200. Then we got, oh my God, we
were in the thousands.
I was interested to see in your report here how many
thousand data centers we have.
What is that current number?
Mr. Powner. It is about 10,500.
Mr. Mica. Ten thousand five hundred. What would you
guesstimate we could reduce that to?
Mr. Powner. Well, we have closed 3,100 to date and saved
$2.8 billion. We can close another 2,000 and save $5.4 billion.
I think that $5.4 billion is greatly understated because many
agencies ----
Mr. Mica. So we can actually spend less and get better
technology, better results, and improved systems. Is that
correct?
Mr. Powner. Yes, we need to definitely get more modern.
Mr. Mica. So the opening salvo from the other side was that
Republicans are slashing the money. But actually, we have
actually saved money by going to the cloud. Is that correct,
sir?
Mr. Powner. Yes, there have been savings.
Mr. Mica. And there are certain concerns about security. We
do have the cyberthreat.
A great deal of the data in the Federal Government is not
classified or necessarily high-security risk, is it, Mr.
Powner?
Mr. Powner. It varies. It clearly varies.
Mr. Mica. But again, your report points out there can be
very substantial savings consolidating these data centers,
10,000--we have done some--and then moving to the cloud and
other--now the question came from Mr. Hurd a little bit about
buy or build, and the answer was build. What about buy or
lease? Can somebody say we should be leasing?
The problem is that the Federal Government buys equipment,
and the equipment, I will take you back here, we have it even
in our offices, is outdated. Maybe Mr. Davis bought some of it,
but now Mr. Chaffetz has inherited it. That is the way agencies
work, the same way.
So buy or lease, anyone want to respond? Mr. Scott? Mr.
Powner?
Mr. Scott. Well, I think our guidance as proposed would
rate projects that use cloud, use these more modern techniques,
the buy-by-the-drink kind of thing, versus build it yourself.
That is a high-scoring criteria for those projects.
Mr. Mica. But where are you going to get equipment in an
office, buy or lease?
Mr. Scott. You have to have a replacement strategy and
often that means leasing.
Mr. Powner. Yes, so I think, clearly, we want to build less
in the Federal Government. There is less risk with that.
Mr. Mica. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We will now recognize the ranking member of the
Subcommittee in IT, Ms. Kelly of Illinois, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As ranking member of the IT Subcommittee, I have been
working with Chairman Hurd on the very issue of legacy systems.
One of the topics consistently discussed is moving to the
cloud.
The CIO.gov Web site says the government's current
information technology environment is characterized by, and I
quote, ``low-asset utilization, a fragmented demand for
resources, duplicative systems, environments that are difficult
to manage, and long procurement times.'' It goes on to say, and
I quote, ``Cloud computing has a potential to play a major part
in addressing these inefficiencies.''
Mr. Scott, can you briefly explain what is cloud computing?
Mr. Scott. Generally, it is an environment that leverages
the power of virtualization, of compute, of storage, of
networking, as though it were one operating system that allows
individual programs to scale up or scale down and get better
asset utilization in aggregate than would be the case in the
alternative, which is to have a bunch of individual servers.
It is often surrounded by sets of utilities and other
mechanisms that allow for the provisioning and de-provisioning
of computer environments very quickly, which also saves time
and makes IT more efficient.
Ms. Kelly. So you started explaining what an important role
it can play in helping agencies modernize their IT systems. Can
you expand on that?
Mr. Scott. One of the benefits of the cloud is the agility
factor, and then just the scale that most cloud environments
exist in.
So I used to talk about the double-double rule as the
primary way by which system engineers create and compute. If
you are in the old days an engineer and you are configuring a
server, you would figure out what it was going to take to
support that application. You would double it, and then you
would double it again. That was just an unwritten rule about
how engineers would configure systems.
So it was no wonder that when you went into the data
center, you would find things running at 15 percent or 20
percent of their capacity.
What cloud does is aggregate all of that together. Then you
can run the whole plant at 70 percent, 80 percent, or 90
percent efficiency instead of 15 percent. That saves money.
Ms. Kelly. Can you tell us what, if anything, the Office of
Management and Budget has been doing to encourage agencies to
move toward cloud computing solutions?
Mr. Scott. As we have talked with agencies about their
plans, we have highlighted the opportunity to do that and ask
questions. We are requiring them to show us what their
modernization plans are and highly favoring both cloud but also
virtualization and other modern development techniques. We are
encouraging the buying of services rather than developing them
themselves. We are also encouraging the use of shared services.
So one of the challenges is, in the old world, every agency
thought it had to do everything top to bottom by itself. As was
mentioned in the case of email or shared networks or payroll
systems or financial systems, there is a great opportunity to
use more shared services and not have every agency do
everything top to bottom on its own.
Ms. Kelly. I'm glad to hear that, because I wondered in
another hearing, but didn't get a chance to ask the question,
about how often do we share.
Back in July 2010, David McClure, then associate
administrator of the General Services Administration, testified
before this committee that cloud computing would, and I quote,
``increase the overall IT security posture of the government.''
Can you explain how cloud computing can improve the Federal
Government's overall IT security?
Mr. Scott. We have a FedRAMP standard that takes all of the
best practices of security and puts together a template and a
process that providers can certify against that includes
background checks and other things like that on the people that
are actually operating the systems, and, taken altogether, is
much more comprehensive than what we would typically find in a
sampling of individual agencies or individual environments.
These are businesses that depend on high security for their
reputation and future business models, so they often take it
far more seriously and can put the resources toward it that
maybe a small organization might not be able to.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Mulvaney. [Presiding] I thank the lady.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Farenthold, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Milholland, you and I think several other members of
the panel testified that one of the things holding you back
from getting rid of these legacy systems and upgrading was
budget concerns. I have to tell you, one of the things I
consistently hear from everybody who comes into my office,
whether they are advocating for education or increased medical
research is, ``Give me more money today, and I will give you
savings tomorrow.''
Now, this is, I think, part of our Federal Government
budgeting mentality, that we do not think enough like the
private sector. You look at what is happening in the private
sector right now, when I started practicing law, we were on IBM
Selectrics. We moved to a mini-computer and moved to a PC
network. And we went from one assistant for every lawyer now to
one assistant for every four or five lawyers through the
technology.
You look at what the IRS has done. You have millions of
people e-filing your taxes. You now don't need people in data
centers keying that into the computer.
So the savings are coming naturally. So I have a kind of
two-part question here. One, can you quantify, ``If you give me
X billion dollars today, I will save you Y billion dollars over
the next,'' and we will take a lifespan of the computer, 5 to 7
years? Can that be quantified?
Second of all, isn't there a way within your budget to pay
for this incrementally with the savings you are going to get?
Mr. Milholland. I will try to answer that two-part
question.
With respect to the IRS and investment in IRS, people have
said returns for about every dollar are $4 in revenue to the
U.S. Often, a lot of that occurs because of the investment in
the underlying IT infrastructure.
Where we have suffered is that the budget has been
reducing, not staying flat. I have been told that we are ----
Mr. Farenthold. Isn't that what we are trying to do? I am
going to give you a dollar and then, over the next 10 years,
I'm going to reduce your budget by $4, and we are going to be
in the same place by your figures.
Mr. Milholland. But, sir, you also increased the tasks that
we have. For example, far more people now are, in fact, filing
income taxes.
Mr. Farenthold. I would be much happier if you guys weren't
having to fool with Obamacare, I will tell you that.
Mr. Milholland. Well, there are a number of unfunded
mandates like that that we have had to absorb, whether it has
been Obamacare, FATCA, there is HCTC, the ABLE Act ----
Mr. Farenthold. I do not have much time, so let me go to
Mr. Scott.
Can you talk about that on a broader scale?
Mr. Scott. Yes, in fact, if we can show the chart that I
brought, I don't know if they can put that up.
What we did is we studied--we took a sample out of our
database of projects across the Federal Government, this is
across hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of investments, where
there was an injection of modernization money prior to 2013.
Then we looked and we compared that against projects where
there was no injection, and what happened to the maintenance
costs of those investments over time.
What you see is a very clear trend. Where there was no
injection of money to go fix things, costs continued to rise at
a rate of around 6 percent.
Mr. Farenthold. This number doesn't even take in reduced
personnel costs. I'm assuming that as we modernize technology,
as we see in law firms or banks with ATMs instead of tellers,
we ought to see an even bigger cost decrease as people are able
to work more efficiently. So we ought to be able to save money
and deliver better service to the hardworking American
taxpayers who are our customers.
Mr. Scott. I think we would see, if we factored all those
factors in, an even sharper drop. In cases, as shown in the
chart there, where there was an investment, costs would
continue to go down at a much faster rate. So they went down at
least 5 percent a year on average, where there was an ----
Mr. Farenthold. I would love to see an agency come in here
and say, ``All right, give me this much money to modernize my
IT, and you can cut my budget by this much.''
Mr. Scott. Well, this is actual data over an at least 4-
year period, based on actual experience in the government, so I
think it proves the case.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, if I am able to get back for a
second round of questions, I do want to address the DOD
hackathon and the success that had.
But my time has expired, and I will yield back.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from California for 5
minutes, Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me first say I've read the biographies of the witnesses
today, and all of you could be making a lot more money in the
private sector, so thank you for your public service.
I do have a question for Mr. Halvorsen. The GAO identified
a 53-year-old legacy system in the Department of Defense known
as the Strategic Automated Command and Control System. This
system coordinates operational functions of the United States
of nuclear forces, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles
and nuclear bombers. Is that correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. Not exactly.
Mr. Lieu. All right, what does the system do?
Mr. Halvorsen. It is a tertiary--I can only go into the
system a little bit. It is a tertiary system that is
responsible for delivering two small, very important messages
as a third backup. That is what that system does today. It is a
tertiary system.
And we are actually investing in the NC3 system to change
the way we deliver that whole product.
Mr. Lieu. The reason you cannot talk more is because the
rest is classified?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. This system is still running on IBM Series
1 computer, which is in 1970s computing system, according to
the GAO, and written in Assembly language code. The GAO also
reports that the system currently uses 8-inch floppy disks,
which are a 1970s-era storage device. Is that accurate, sir?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. So this system also, as I think you noted,
sends and receives emergency action messages to nuclear forces.
Is that correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. A tertiary system for doing that, yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. I got that, but it does send and receive
emergency action messages to nuclear forces.
You would agree that our nuclear forces are pretty darn
important?
Mr. Halvorsen. I would.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. You had in your testimony earlier today
said that the Department of Defense is not of balance with
other private sector companies, and that your priorities are
right. Are you aware of any other successful private sector
company that uses 8-inch floppy disks?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am not, but I am aware of other private
companies that use similar technology. No one is saying that we
should continue to use the 8-inch discs much longer, but I
would point out a couple things. The reliability factor on that
system is where I need it to be, which is five 9s, 99.999
percent. It is completely secure because it is a closed system.
So while I want to fix it, all I am saying is that in the
priority of things that I need to fix, that will be in probably
year 3 of my next 5-year plan. It is not in the top priority of
things I think either I want to fix or you would want me to
fix, in terms of priority.
Mr. Lieu. Why are you fixing it at all, if it is not as
important as you say it is, if it is just this classified
system you cannot even really talk about for nuclear forces?
Mr. Halvorsen. I didn't say it wasn't important. I said it
was a tertiary system. And what I am fixing is the entire way
that we are going to deliver that whole process.
I won't actually replace this system. The system is going
to go away and be replaced by a different method of delivery.
Mr. Lieu. And it'll be done by year 3?
Mr. Halvorsen. It will.
Mr. Lieu. Okay, thank you, sir.
So, Ms. Killoran, I have a question for you about another
system the GAO identified. It is the Health and Human Services
Medicare appeals system. Can you explain what that is?
Ms. Killoran. Yes. That system is a system that we actually
have that plaintiffs can file appeals to claims that they have.
It is actually a business process flow and goes through three
of the five levels of appeals.
Mr. Lieu. And a fair number of Americans have Medicare
appeals, and the system helps them?
Ms. Killoran. Yes. It allows them to get not only
notifications and status, but it also sends out letters.
Mr. Lieu. And the system also helps respond to
congressional inquiries, correct?
Ms. Killoran. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. Do you have any plans to update that legacy
system?
Ms. Killoran. So that legacy system is 10 years old. We
actually do have--the system has been updated to make sure that
the software is current and the hardware is current. One of the
things that we slightly disagree with on the audit is just
because something has a particular age doesn't necessarily mean
that it is end-of-life.
As Mr. Scott had talked about, all of the operating system,
the software and the hardware for this particular system, is
completely up-to-date and supported by the vendor at this time.
So we don't have a plan to replace, but we are going to keep
updating it and making sure that it is current.
Mr. Lieu. So your view is the system is working currently,
and there is no need to upgrade it?
Ms. Killoran. So we have been doing continual upgrades as
we have different mandates and there have been requirements for
operating system changes and software to keep it current, yes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Let me conclude by thanking Ranking Member Cummings and
Chairman Chaffetz for holding this hearing, and I want to thank
the ranking member for his support of the IT modernization
bill, which I'm a co-author of as well, and hopefully we can
get that through.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. [Presiding] I thank the gentleman.
We will now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Mulvaney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank the chairman. I'm over here in the
corner.
I guess my questions are, Mr. Connolly was here, and I'm
always frightened when I agree with him, but I agree with him
more and more when we do these oversight hearings. I want to
focus a little bit on how we got here.
I heard the ranking member talk about the draconian budget
cuts. Mr. Milholland, I heard you mention draconian budget
cuts. Certainly, at the IRS, I apologize, I don't have the HHS
numbers or DOD, so I don't want to appear to be picking on the
IRS, but they are the numbers I could get in the last 5
minutes. Certainly, your budget has been cut in the last couple
years, 3 percent this year. It was up 0.8 percent the year
before that. Down 5 percent the year before that. Down 2.5
percent the year before that.
But I think we would all agree that when you are still
using technology and computer systems from the 1970s and 1980s,
this is not a problem that started in 2012, okay?
I see that Mr. Milholland is nodding his head.
I go back to 2000, Mr. Milholland, when the Republicans
were in charge, actually, and your budget went up almost 6
percent, the next year 8.5 percent, the next year almost 4
percent, then 4 percent, 4 percent after that. The Democrats
take over in 2007, your budget is up 4.73 percent, 3.8 percent,
5.4 percent.
How can you really sit there and tell us this is money? I
mean, you got bigger increases than everybody else in the
country in 2008. I can assure you there were private industries
and businesses and households that didn't see a 5.4 percent
increase in their budgets during the recession.
I mean, how can you sit there with a straight face and say
it is money? While that is convenient today and ties into what
the ranking member was saying, haven't you been mismanaging the
money since the 1970s and 1980s? Isn't that the only way you
end up in this problem?
Mr. Milholland. I think there is a different way to
characterize it than management. I can't speak for my
predecessors at all, but decisions made back in the 1970s and
continued into the 1980s and 1990s and the first decade of this
century basically said, ``Let's build a set of systems that
automate the paper processing set of systems.'' So the way
taxes were handled in the 1940s and 1950s and 1960s became
automated in the way that computer systems were designed.
That means that when you file your taxes even
electronically today, they are actually batched up
electronically in a set of files that then need to be passed
from system to system. There are lots and lots of
interconnections that make that possible.
The program was written in Assembly language. By the way,
it is written very elegantly. It is incredibly well-engineered
for the time it was designed and built. The underlying
infrastructure is very much state-of-the-art. That is why we
can process returns so fast.
But we are constrained by those past decisions and the
ability to share that data with I will just say new programs
that we want to provide, so we are--I'm sorry, go ahead.
Mr. Mulvaney. Does anybody that you know, anybody on the
whole panel, does anybody in the private sector do it the way
the government does it? Are there any private companies out
there using 8-inch floppy disks and expired languages and
machines they cannot get pieces for? Is there anybody out there
who does this?
Mr. Milholland. There are certainly companies that use old
programming languages like Assembly language and COBOL and
Fortran and others. Most are converting themselves like we are
to a modern programming language, all new development beginning
with Java, for example, or other modern programming languages.
They use modern development techniques, so that you start
with building a data model for your enterprise rather than have
it as an afterthought with security built in.
I think the current practices, we would not have done it
that way, if we had the knowledge we have today.
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Milholland, you mentioned something about
your predecessor, and someone mentioned something in the
previous testimony. How long have you been in this position at
the IRS?
Mr. Milholland. I have been here not quite 8 years.
Mr. Mulvaney. What is the average tenure? This may be to
the OMB or GAO. What is the average tenure of a CIO at our
major agencies?
Mr. Powner. Two years.
Mr. Mulvaney. Is that a problem?
Mr. Powner. It is a huge problem.
Mr. Mulvaney. Why?
Mr. Powner. Well, in regards to legacy systems, what CIO
wants to come in over a 2-year period and undertake one of
these massive conversion efforts? They pick the low-hanging
fruit and get quick wins, and they don't tackle the difficult
stuff often enough.
Mr. Mulvaney. Who controls the tenure of a CIO at a major
agency or department? Does Congress? Anybody?
Mr. Scott. It depends. Some are Senate confirmed. Most are
appointed politically.
Mr. Mulvaney. Right, but if we are going to say that Mr.
Halvorsen is going to be CIO at DOD, and we leave him there 2
years, whose call is that? Is it ours or somebody else's?
Mr. Halvorsen. Depending on when the 2 years started, it
would generally be the Secretary of Defense's call. But I am
politically appointed, so I will change out with the
administration.
Mr. Mulvaney. It is an executive decision. It was sort of a
rhetorical question. Congress doesn't say that you have a 2-
year term at DOD, or a 2-year term at HHS, or at any agency. It
is an executive decision under both administrations.
Mr. Powner, I take it your data goes back to Republican
administrations as well.
Mr. Powner. Yes, it goes back a long way. We have done
multiple studies dating back for years on this.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the ranking member,
for holding this hearing. It's very important.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record the GAO report to congressional requesters entitled,
``Federal Agencies: The Need to Address Aging Legacy Systems.''
We have been referring to that during our questions. I just
wanted to get on the record.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also have another report here that was generated with a
bunch of folks, including the Department of Homeland Security,
Intel, EMC, a whole bunch of people. And it is entitled, ``2016
Data Breach Investigations Report.''
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
The trend that the data are indicating from these reports
are that the time frame for breaches and infiltration is going
down, so it is measured now in days or, in many cases, minutes,
yet our time for detecting breaches and infiltrations and the
detection of fraud and response is weeks and months. So the
numbers are going against us. Time is not on our side, as some
have said.
At a previous hearing, we had OPM up here. They did not
even encrypt the Social Security numbers for 21.5 million
Federal employees. So while I hear a lot of this positive talk,
I am concerned about factually what is going on.
Mr. Powner, the GAO did a great report, by the way. Thank
you very much. I appreciate that. But one of the GAO's key
findings is, and I quote, ``While Federal agencies had specific
plans to retire or modernize some of these legacy investments,
most of those legacy investments did not have specific plans
with time frames, with activities to be performed, or functions
to be replaced or enhanced.'' Is that correct?
Mr. Powner. That is correct.
Mr. Lynch. So all this talk here is happy talk, and it
worries me, especially as Mr. Lieu's line of questioning.
With respect to the Internal Revenue Service Individual
Master File, GAO stated, and I quote, ``The agency has general
plans to update the system, but there is no time frame
established for this transition.'' Would you agree with that
statement?
I want to ask you next, Mr. Milholland.
Mr. Powner. Yes, that is true.
I will add, though, there has been a lot of good work done
to get the ball rolling that ----
Mr. Lynch. Yes, that's not what I'm asking.
Mr. Powner.--Mr. Milholland started. I will say his tenure
over 6 years, he has done a lot.
Mr. Lynch. I know.
Mr. Powner. Hopefully, he can stick around a little bit
longer and get IMF decommissioned.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, that is not what I want to hear, but as Mr.
Mulvaney said, this problem didn't happen yesterday. You are
not to blame for the existence of this problem, but we have to
do better, a lot better.
So, Mr. Milholland, do you want to defend yourself? Go
ahead.
Mr. Milholland. We, in fact, do have ----
Mr. Lynch. And thank you for your service, by the way.
We just have a problem here, and we have to fix it.
Mr. Milholland. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lynch. So a little criticism ----
Mr. Milholland. I described the replacement of the
Individual Master File. We are doing it in three phases. The
second phase will end in 2019, at the latest 2020, again,
depending on funding.
The principal issue there is now to convert the mainline
code from Assembly language to Java. We have, in fact, have
tackled the hardest, knottiest, most gruntiest part of this
code, which is critical for processing taxpayer returns, to
convert it to Java.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Milholland. We, in fact, think, literally, we have
found a breakthrough that we can do this. We think we can apply
for three patents for this that will allow, once we are done,
next March ----
Mr. Lynch. Okay, sounds good.
Let me ask you, the master file there, so is our health
care information on that now with Obamacare, because you are
the repository for our health care information. How are you
protecting that? Is that in the same file?
Mr. Milholland. It is not in the same file, but there are
links to it. It is actually in a relational database that we
built separate from the Individual Master File. But the systems
are interconnected with appropriate data calls and ----
Mr. Lynch. All right, let me jump to the GAO here.
The same GAO report found that HHS Medicare appeals system
says, this is the report, ``Agency officials state that they do
not have any plans to address the gaps that were found by GAO
and that doing so was contingent on funding.''
So let's go right to Ms. Killoran on that one.
Ms. Killoran. So, as I mentioned, for the Medicare appeals
system, we actually have been making sure that that system is
up-to-date, both with patches and software, and on a platform
that is actually supported by the vendors.
So as a total system, we don't have plans to replace, but
we are keeping it current and making sure that it is able to be
supported.
Mr. Lynch. Okay, my time is expired. Maybe we will do
another round. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will soon. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows of North Carolina is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Killoran, let me come to you. I think earlier in your
testimony, you were talking about the fact that the FISMA
reporting, you have submitted that. Is that correct?
Ms. Killoran. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So you have submitted that. Who do you submit
that to?
Ms. Killoran. So we submit that to all of our FISMA
committees, and we did that through our legislative channels.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So who is responsible for that
oversight? Is that Mr. Scott at OMB? Is he charged with making
sure that those are all submitted properly? Do you submit it to
OMB?
Ms. Killoran. So if you could clarify the question, are you
talking about the report or ----
Mr. Meadows. Let me ask Mr. Scott. Mr. Scott, as the chief
financial officer, is it your responsibility, I guess, for the
executive branch, for the implementation of FISMA?
Mr. Scott. Yes, and we collect--I am the chief information
officer, not the chief financial officer, but it is our ----
Mr. Meadows. Excuse me. You are the CIO for the Federal
Government.
So essentially, it all comes to you, so they are required
to submit that to you and to Congress, is that correct?
Mr. Scott. Correct. We aggregate and then submit to
Congress.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So as it is submitted in those
FISMA reports, as we look at that, each agency is required to
do that. Is that correct, Mr. Scott?
Mr. Scott. Right.
Mr. Meadows. So let me ask you this. It appears that the
Executive Office of the President, basically the White House,
including OMB and the National Security Council, hasn't
submitted the required FISMA. Is that correct?
Mr. Scott. I don't know off the top my head. I would have
to check and get back to you. I don't know ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, we have done some checking, and we have
been looking. Can you name a single year where the Executive
Office of the President and OMB and the National Security
Council have submitted a FISMA report?
Mr. Scott. We submit to Congress what has been submitted to
us.
Mr. Meadows. I am talking about you. I understand they are
doing it, but you are the one that has the charge. So has OMB,
the White House, submitted it?
Mr. Scott. Oh, I see.
Mr. Meadows. Because we couldn't find yours.
Mr. Scott. Yes, we are not required by the law ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, but that's not correct.
Mr. Scott. That is our ----
Mr. Meadows. Is that what you're saying?
Mr. Scott. Our legal counsel has given us that ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, your legal counsel doesn't make the law.
So, Mr. Scott, let me remind you, Congress was very clear,
extremely clear, that, indeed, the White House, and, indeed,
OMB, is required to submit that. Yet we can't find where you've
done it, and we specifically in the legislation mention the
White House.
So you are saying your legal counsel has told you that?
Mr. Scott. That is the opinion we have gotten.
Mr. Meadows. When did you get that?
Mr. Scott. I have asked multiple times.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, I would suggest that you go back, check
the law, and report back to this. Do you not think that if you
are required by law to do it, and all these other folks are
doing it, that it sets a bad example for you not to do that?
Would that set a bad example, if you are required to do
that?
Mr. Scott. If we are required to, I think it sets a bad
example, correct.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you have counsel behind you. Are
they saying that you are not required to by law?
Mr. Scott. I will go back and check and report back to you.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. And we would like to know some of the
correspondence and actually where you've gotten that opinion
from. Are you willing to give that to this committee as well?
Mr. Scott. That is not my call, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay, well, obviously, you are saying that you
were told that, that you checked on it, and this is a conscious
decision not to give a FISMA report on behalf of OMB and the
office of the executive branch. Is that correct? That was a
conscious decision?
Mr. Scott. It was a discussion and that was the conclusion
that we came to.
Mr. Meadows. So what rationale would you really embark on
embracing that would suggest that it is not a good idea to give
information that you are requiring all the other agencies to
give to Congress? Why would it not be a good idea for you?
Mr. Scott. Again, our intent is to comply with the law.
Mr. Meadows. But do you think it is a good idea that, even
if it is not required, since you are requiring all the other
agencies, don't you think it would be a good idea for you? I
think the answer--don't you think it would be good idea?
Mr. Scott. I don't have an opinion on that, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I do, and I think it would be a good
idea.
Let me come to the GAO. We are talking about all these
legacy systems, and we continue to have hearing after hearing
after hearing. What I find troubling is, is there a lot of
savings that could be realized if we get rid of the legacy
systems, jump off the cliff and say, ``Let's make a commitment.
We are going to do it.'' Is there substantial savings that
could happen?
Mr. Powner. Yes, there are. That $60 billion we spend on
O&M. We have old legacy that if we could get more efficient
systems, it would be less costly to maintain, it would be more
secure. Then you already know that we have duplicative spending
on commodity IT and inefficient data centers.
So the $60 billion has all kinds of inefficiencies in it.
Our point is, we need more plans. I agree not everyone needs a
plan. There might be some higher priorities. But we need more
plans, so that we move that spending from 60 into the 20
bucket.
Mr. Meadows. Well, thank you. And I thank your staff for
their great work.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I'll recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I intentionally wanted to wait and listen to some of the
testimony. I listened to Mr. Lieu, and I agree with him. When
we read the resumes of you all, we realize that you could be
somewhere else, making a lot more money. I think, in a way,
that's what is kind of depressing about this. We have people
who, first of all, care, who are experts. You come into
government to try to make a difference, or you have been in
government, and we seem to be going in a circle, trying to get
off the merry-go-round, Mr. Scott, but still going in a circle.
I'm not blaming you all. It just seems that we have a set
of circumstances where we have an old system that is breaking
down, trying to keep that afloat, and at the same time trying
to catch up with technology that is not changing by the week,
but changing by the hour. That is a tough one.
Sometimes we can start talking politics, and we still don't
get to where we have to go to. That's what I want to talk about
for a moment here.
Mr. Scott, you have been in your job a little less than 2
years?
Mr. Scott. About 1.5 years, sir.
Mr. Cummings. The chairman was very complimentary, gave you
a lot of nice compliments, and they are deserved. You come from
private industry, is that right?
Mr. Scott. That's correct.
Mr. Cummings. Do you see, first of all, progress? You've
been there 1.5 years. Do you see us moving in the right
direction?
And this is the thing that bothers me, this wrestling with
this issue of money. I don't want to sit here and wrongfully
say that, if we had more money, we can do better, if that is
wrong, if that is not accurate. But on the other hand, if we
need the money, I don't want to act like we don't.
And then there's a second part of it. We may need the
money, but then the question is whether or not we are using the
funds that we have effectively and efficiently.
Can you address that for me? And then tell me how does the
modernization act, because I understand it is like the best
practices, it's an example of best practices from private
industry, how that would remedy this.
I know I have said a lot.
Mr. Scott. Sure, I'd be happy to.
I would say, in answer to one of your questions, I do think
we are making progress, just not fast enough and
comprehensively enough. Almost every agency is trying to
prioritize in some way or another, and address the most urgent
issues. But what we see quite often is that it takes too long
for them to put together the money to go do the replacement, or
to try to harvest savings to put together in one place to go
fix things.
I think there is a broader set of issues that ITMF tries to
address.
Comprehensively, what it does is marries management, money,
and a different mode of operation than the pattern that we have
been in. The world of digitization, and our government is
digitizing just like every other enterprise, digitization
starts to tear down traditional boundaries of the org chart,
and so on, and comes at what we do from a citizen-centric
perspective.
Today, because of our boundaries and our funding models and
the way we have architected IT, we require our citizens to
decode our org chart in a way that, frankly, they don't want to
do.
So this modernization fund relies on principles that we
borrowed from the private sector. If you are in the private
sector, you go to a capital committee, and you come in and you
make a business case for why you want to do what you're going
to do. And the capital committee evaluates your ability to do
that. They look at the business case. They ensure the
commitment, that the money is going to get paid back.
We think that that commitment of management, along with
this different mode of operation that we are proposing, will
start to help us along the path to a much more and needed
modernization of our Federal Government.
I will note as well that if we continue to do the same
thing we have been doing before, we are just making the
situation worse. A good friend of mine once told me, if you are
riding a dead horse, best dismount. I think it is time for us
to dismount from this past practice and get onto a more modern
method.
Mr. Cummings. You don't have to tell us what your plans
are, but if I were to guess, you probably will not be in this
position but so much longer.
So the question becomes, what are you doing to try to put
something in place so that, after you leave, there is at least
the mechanism to take us where you just said we need to go?
Because I can see somebody else coming in and saying, ``You
know what? Scott was a nice guy, but now he's gone, and now
we're going to start all over,'' and our problems are 10 times
worse.
By the way, the reason I am asking is because the American
people are just totally, totally frustrated with us.
Mr. Scott. Certainly.
Mr. Cummings. They feel like we cannot get anything done,
and I'm trying to figure out how we get something done that
makes sense, solve the problems that we are talking about here,
Mr. Mulvaney and all of us trying to figure out, how do we
spend our money wisely and how do we get the American people
what they deserve? That is a well-run system that keeps up
with, as best we can, the changes in technology and, at the
same time, serve them well?
Mr. Scott. Well, there are a couple things we're doing.
First of all, we're putting together a set of requirements
that will require the agencies to identify modernization
efforts in a much more comprehensive way, whether this fund
comes through or not.
Secondly, we are revising the job descriptions for CIOs to
make sure that, as we hire future CIOs, we get the right kind
of talent in place.
Frankly, this is important work, and I think there are
quite a number of people who, given the right point in their
career, are perfectly willing to come and do public service and
help fix this, if there is hope that they can make progress.
Nobody wants to come in and say, ``I just want to be saddled
with the old dead horse way of doing things.'' So I think that
is key to attracting talent and continuing to make progress on
this.
Lastly, I will say I intend to be involved and influence
one way or another even beyond this job. I think it is
critically important that we do this. I think our relevance to
citizens is going to depend on how good a job we do in this
area.
The ITMF is my best guess about the fastest way to
accelerate progress toward that goal. I'm happy to listen to
any other alternatives.
What I do know is what won't work. Going around tin-cupping
7,000 different investments across the Federal Government is
the slow way to nowhere, as far as I'm concerned.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize myself.
Mr. Milholland, you have been a good witness to us a couple
times. You provide a lot of candor. The question is, why did we
have to subpoena you this time to attend?
Mr. Milholland. That was the decision of the Commissioner,
and he wanted to testify himself. I understand the reasoning.
He didn't speak to me about it, but in the past, he thinks that
the political appointee should be the one to speak to the
Congress, not careerists like me.
Chairman Chaffetz. Were you willing to testify without a
subpoena?
Mr. Milholland. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. This is something we are going to have
to continue to discuss, because on the one hand, in another
committee, the IRS Commissioner said he was too busy and didn't
have time to prepare, couldn't show up to answer hard
questions. Then we have a hearing here, where we have to dive
deep into how the IT systems are working, and he is begging to
come and, in fact, told our office that we have to issue a
subpoena to have Mr. Milholland come here.
I think it puts a bad light on the IRS. I think it puts a
bad light on you personally. But I did want to clarify and
appreciate your candor in saying that was totally and wholly
unnecessary. We did it. It's paperwork. I can do it
unilaterally, but I shouldn't have to do it. Nobody else
required a subpoena to be here.
Again, it is not a personal reflection on you, but I think
it is a personal reflection on Mr. Koskinen and the ridiculous
manner in which he tries to manage a 90,000-person
organization.
The Congress of the United States of America and certainly
the Oversight Committee, we can talk to anybody at any time. We
can investigate anything anywhere and we can call anybody we
want before this committee, not just the Senate-confirmed IRS
Commissioner. It is arrogant. It is beyond belief. And it
continues to thwart our activities here in Congress.
And I am not letting go of this. I do think he should be
impeached. I do think he should get out of government. He
should do the right thing for this country, and somebody else
should be at the helm. He was hired by the President with the
best of intentions, and the President made a personal
commitment. He made a personal commitment that we are going to
work together. We are going to do is hand-in-hand. And that is
not happening. And this is another example here today.
Enough of that speech about that. I do want to talk about
the Obamacare files that were mentioned before.
Mr. Powner, do you have a position on this? Have you looked
at how, from the GAO perspective, how this is going? It is a
massive undertaking, a great vulnerability.
Have you done anything in this regard? Do you have any
perspective on this?
Mr. Powner. I have colleagues who have looked at Obamacare
implementation, as well as some of the IT issues, in
particular, security around the systems with Obamacare. We have
some outstanding recommendations on security.
I, personally, have not done that. I will say, though, I
did testify in front of this committee when there was the
initial failure with the rollout, and I will say I worked
closely with Mr. Milholland, because at the time I was doing
IRS work and I knew where they were at getting their systems
ready for Obamacare, which was different than where HHS and
some others were.
Chairman Chaffetz. So the housing of all this data and
information, I guess as a follow-up, Mr. Milholland, at the
IRS, and certainly Mr. Powner from the GAO, we would love to,
and request, if we need to do this formally, we will do it
formally, but we would appreciate a keen eye on this, just
because of the vulnerability and sensitivity and the sheer
number of people that will be involved and engaged in this.
Mr. Powner. Okay.
Mr. Milholland. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. I want to switch gears here to HHS,
Health and Human Services.
This is your first time testifying, and I appreciate that.
How long have you been working IT at HHS?
Ms. Killoran. About a year and a half.
Chairman Chaffetz. A year and a half, okay.
The committee made a request. I thought it was a fairly
benign request, and it gives us a perspective. We asked to
identify the top three mission-critical IT systems in need of
modernization. That seems like a simple request. Every other
agency and department we asked for it was willing to cooperate.
The only one that wasn't was HHS.
You claim that it was classified information. It is not the
Department of Defense. This is not the CIA. This is Health and
Human Services. Why claim it's classified?
Ms. Killoran. It is around the sensitivity of the
information that is stored in the systems. As folks have
mentioned today, some of my colleagues, information, especially
around personal health information, it is one of the increasing
threat vectors across the organization and in the public
overall. So we want to make sure that we are protecting the
American public and the health information.
Chairman Chaffetz. But you understand that that information
that we are asking for is not classified, correct?
Ms. Killoran. As an individual system, but there are
concerns about what those systems are and the targets that
would ----
Chairman Chaffetz. And you understand that the Oversight
Committee can access classified information, correct?
Ms. Killoran. Yes. We were actually able to--we actually
had members of the committee come over yesterday to our ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Why should the committee have to come to
you? Why do we have to go to look at in camera?
Ms. Killoran. We are just concerned about what those
systems are and putting ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, well, here's what you need to
understand. We are entrusted with nuclear secrets, CIA
information, a lot of very sensitive information. You cannot as
an agency start to make up new classifications and new rules
saying, ``Well, we're sensitive and we don't trust Congress.''
We shouldn't have to go to HHS to review this information in
camera.
In fact, it gives us a real sense that you really don't
know what you're doing over there.
Ms. Killoran. These are not classified systems. We actually
transmitted the information to OMB that it requested as
classified. These are not classified systems, and they do not
have ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Correct. You used a classified system to
transmit it, but then when we request it, why do we have to
ratchet this up?
Again, Health and Human Services has already identified one
of the three systems to GAO, and another system that the HHS
told us about was shut down.
We are just asking for the top-level review of what are the
three mission-critical systems. Then we finally get to see one,
and then it is figured out that you had to come back to us and
say, ``No, it was really shut down.''
Can you see where you have a flashing red light over there
at HHS that nobody else has?
Ms. Killoran. Understood. Like I said, we are actually
willing to provide that information.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay, just to be clear, and again, you
strike me as an exceptionally nice person. You are going to
provide--the request that we made, by this committee, you are
going to provide those to us, correct?
You have a staff person there. Feel free to talk to them,
if you want to confer.
But I need to know if we are going to get this information
or not.
Ms. Killoran. Yes. Yes, you will.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
I have some other questions, but let me recognize another
member, and I will come back on another round here.
Let's recognize Mr. Lynch of Massachusetts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have to say, it is a bipartisan frustration sometimes,
especially with these data breaches. Everybody is getting
hacked. All the agencies are getting hacked. It seems like the
hackers have better access to the information than the
Oversight Committee does. That is the frustration here, that
the information is going out the door, and then there is some
stonewalling going on. When this committee asks for
information, it is not forthcoming. So that is some of what you
are hearing.
I want to go back to Mr. Scott. I know you have a set of
guidelines, a guidance, I guess you would call it, to these
agencies on how to prioritize their responses to some of these
high-risk legacy systems.
Are any of the agencies on that right now? Have any of the
agencies actually adopted that guidance and are implementing
it?
Mr. Scott. Let me clarify the guidance that you are
referring to. As a part of the Cyber National Action Plan, and
the earlier Cyber Sprint, we asked agencies to look at their
high-value assets, and then some corrective measures were taken
immediately on the initial set of things.
There is a review going on now with a larger set of
identified high-value assets. That is in progress right now.
Mr. Lynch. Maybe you could drill down on that a little bit
more. High value, is that the same as high risk? Because in the
GAO report, it indicated there was a guidance to prioritize
high-risk legacy systems. Now, that may not be high-value
systems, but ones with greatest vulnerability, I guess.
Mr. Scott. Let me talk about our guidance, generally.
It is best practice to constantly be evaluating your
systems for all kinds of different things. Risk would be one of
the factors that you would look at there. Technology
obsolescence would be another one. So that is, in fact, a part
of our guidance.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. It indicated in this report that the
Department of Transportation and USDA had started acting in
compliance with this. I thought you might have some information
regarding that.
Mr. Scott. It is work in progress right now.
Mr. Lynch. All right.
Mr. Powner. If I could clarify that?
Mr. Lynch. Please.
Mr. Powner. So there was draft guidance, and we did our
review. We think that guidance is really good. We would like to
see OMB finalize that guidance and have agencies apply the
guidance, so that we could have a prioritization of these
things that need to be replaced, similar to the chairman's
questions that he asked directly with this data call, and that
we would like to see more action on the prioritization and what
we are tackling to modernize.
I actually think that's needed to implement the
modernization fund, if, in fact, that moved forward.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, it makes sense, especially when you talk
about the continuity problem that Mr. Cummings raised where, if
Mr. Scott leaves at some point, we want the person coming in
behind him to follow that same guidance and maintain those same
priorities and get that job done, rather than somebody coming
in with a whole new idea and taking us in a new direction.
So those are some of the problems we see coming down the
pike.
But look, I appreciate your work, and I know you are all
trying to do the right thing. We just need to do it faster.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I will recognize
myself again. I want to pick up on Health and Human Services.
Health and Human Services, unlike the DOD, which has had
significant cuts in its budget by billions of dollars in annual
expenditure, Health and Human Services has more than doubled--
doubled--the funding for your operations in the IT sector,
going from roughly $5.6 billion to more than $13 billion. So
they are in a totally different mode here.
Your responsibility includes CMS. Is that right?
Ms. Killoran. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. I want to talk about, for a second,
Health and Human Services has to deal with Medicare appeals.
And from the information I've read, the HHS Inspector General's
Office reported that the Office of Medicare Hearings and
Appeals, OMHA, is still largely paper-based. It is so bad that
Medicare contractors were converting records from electronic to
paper format to send to administrative law judges.
Can you give us the status of where this is at and what is
being done to solve this?
Ms. Killoran. Thank you for the question.
Yes, that is the case, but they actually are in the process
right now of establishing a system to do that automated
process. And CMS is actually working with that organization, as
that system comes online, of how to integrate the medical
appeals system with the system that OMHA is working on right
now.
Chairman Chaffetz. Health and Human Services entered into a
$1.3 billion settlement with hospitals to clear the backlog on
Medicare appeals. This lack of automation, did that contribute
to this problem?
Ms. Killoran. That I would have to get back to you on,
because, obviously, I need to get to program and get a full
answer on what were the factors in that particular issue.
Chairman Chaffetz. So with a little bit more specificity,
when do we expect the implementation of this plan that CMS--is
there a CMS plan?
Ms. Killoran. So the system that you are specifically
talking about is actually not in CMS. It is in the Office of
Medicare Hearings and Appeals. And yes, they do have a plan.
That process--that program is in development, and they are
working toward an implementation within the next year.
Chairman Chaffetz. Are they building their own system or
are they buying something or leasing something?
Ms. Killoran. It is a combination of some custom
development and also commercial off-the-shelf.
Chairman Chaffetz. Has that been contracted out yet?
Ms. Killoran. Yes. Development is actually in plan. We are
actually working with them to do security testing and are in
the final stages of development.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will send a letter, but are you
committed to providing us the details of that plan?
Ms. Killoran. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. That would be very helpful.
Let me go back to the Department of Defense here. The
Department of Defense identified a system called the MOCAS,
which stands for Mechanization of Contract Administration
Services. It is an example of a mission-critical system
scheduled for modernization. It had its 50th birthday in 2008,
so it is a bit old. We congratulate on how robust it is.
But this contract management payment system for DOD is
jointly managed by the Defense Contract Management Agency, the
DCMA, and DFAS, the Defense Finance and Accounting System.
It was originally developed, as I said, back in the 1960s.
It supports business processes for more than 350,000 DOD active
contracts with roughly $1.6 trillion in contract obligations
and entitlements valued at approximately $230 billion annually.
The DOD in 2014 released a request for information for
ideas on how to modernize this. Can you give us a sense of
where this monster is? And what is the plan is moving forward?
Mr. Halvorsen. We definitely need to modernize the front
end of that system. One of the reasons that we are delayed a
little bit is, in looking at that, I wanted more input from the
private sector. This is one where I do believe we could buy the
front end of this.
The backend of the system is in pretty good shape. It is
old, but it is in COBOL language. It supports it.
One of the things I do think that we want to recognize here
is that the front end of systems, obviously, many times, we
need to fix those. When you are interacting with customers,
we've got that, and we have examples of that. Some of these
backend systems I do think we want to make that investment the
same way the private sector would, which is to do the business
case to say, ``Does it pay to change that?'' In many cases
right now, it will not pay to change the backend of some of the
systems we have.
COBOL is not going away anytime soon. The predictions you
look at, it is going to be around as our major business system
for a while.
The front ends, make it look more consumer-friendly. Go
with what the private sector is doing there. And that is what
we will end up with here.
Chairman Chaffetz. When do you think you have a game plan
in order to actually address this?
Mr. Halvorsen. By the end of the summer.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
One more question back for Health and Human Services.
Today, the committee issued a report about Cover Oregon. We
looked at this for a year. The Federal Government, through HHS,
gave the State of Oregon more than $300 million to develop a
Web site. They never got a Web site. They never got any money
back.
What is Health and Human Services doing about that?
Ms. Killoran. So that would be done through our grants
programs, so we would actually have to talk to--I would have to
get back to you with our grant system owners and make sure I
provide you with the right answer of how they are doing
oversight and giving the grants. It is outside of the purview
that I have.
Chairman Chaffetz. So the money that is appropriated to
Health and Human Services for IT, help me on how it is broken
down. So you don't feel any obligation, you have no
responsibility to oversee the grants that are given?
Ms. Killoran. There are two sets of funds. There is
internal IT funding, which is $5 billion that we spend
internally. That is where the oversight I have authority and
responsibility over.
There is another over $7 billion that is given to our
grants programs through that business mechanism. They are
responsible through legislation for providing those grants out
to States, locals, tribal, and education, universities, and
other things for either access to our systems or to do research
on our behalf. All of that funding is actually the
responsibility of those individual programs to provide out and
to provide oversight to.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay, you can let Health and Human
Services--they are about to get some inquiries from the
Oversight Committee about what obligation they think they have
or don't have when they give out a grant. Because in this case,
$300-plus million went out the door, again, no Web site and no
money back.
I think there was a lot of misrepresentation. I think there
was fraud. I think there are potential criminal elements to
this that we have referred now to the Office of Attorney
General here in the United States and also the Attorney
General, who we believe who should recuse herself there in
Oregon, because the mix of political with the government, it
was something that I believe was done fraudulently.
We issued about a 150-page report, and we will continue to
follow up.
But I appreciate the clarification, because the grant
system is the majority of that IT budget, and it does make you
wonder. We are looking for $3 billion. There is $7 billion that
is given to HHS that is just given away to other entities not
even within the Federal Government.
So if we want to go capture and claw back and find $3
billion to make major changes--I really am warming up to this
idea that Mr. Hoyer has presented, and Mr. Cummings and others.
And I do believe you and your perspective, Mr. Scott.
This may be the type of area where maybe we are going to
have to trim those feathers back in order to do the right thing
with the Federal dollars and the Federal obligations.
I will now recognize Mr. Cummings for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Scott, I want to just follow up on a few
things. I want to go back to this modernization act and how it
works.
According to estimates by the administration, after an
initial funding of the $3.1 billion, the fund would be self-
sustaining and would address at least $12 billion in
modernization projects over the next 10 years. Is that right?
Mr. Scott. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. Can you explain to us how the fund would be
self-sustaining over that period of time?
Mr. Scott. Essentially, as projects get funded, and then
either go live or--each project would have its own contracted
repayment schedule. As those funds are paid back to the fund,
they could then be reused for the next series of projects.
As was mentioned before, one of the criteria for funding a
project would be its elimination of risk, its adoption of
modern technology, and the business case that underlies it.
So we think there is a high likelihood, given the
governance model we put in place, that the funds would both be
repaid, but also be able to be reused.
Mr. Cummings. So how would the funds support modernization
projects that exceed the initial amount of funding?
Mr. Scott. The modernization fund could supplement what an
agency has in its budget and accelerate plans. That is one
example. We have seen cases where agencies are doing the right
thing, but they have a project that will last 5 or 6 or 7
years, and they tell us they could do it in 2 or 3 years, save
a ton of money, and start the savings actually that would come
from modernization much sooner.
That is just one example of a business case.
Mr. Cummings. As part of the proposal, the fund would be
overseen by an independent review board, as I understand it,
and that would provide technical assistance to agencies in
connection with any upgrade projects the board approves. Is
that the way it works?
Mr. Scott. That is our proposal.
Mr. Cummings. Can you explain how that review board would
work in overseeing the fund?
Mr. Scott. Sure. The idea behind the board is we wanted to
take a more holistic look at the factors that make a project
successful. So is the right governance in place? Is this the
right technical architecture? Do we have the right procurement
strategy in place? Do the economics make sense?
Some of those kinds of factors that, frankly, in the
private sector are now just the norm and are sometimes missing
from what we see.
But we also, and this is an important point, want to
encourage cross-agency collaboration for shared services in
some of these projects. Getting that to work across agencies is
not a mechanism that works terribly well today.
Mr. Cummings. So I take it one of the things that they
would be doing, this board, is trying to make sure that folks
use best practices. Is that right?
Mr. Scott. Correct.
Mr. Cummings. And how would they accomplish that?
Mr. Scott. First, the sharing of best practices as we find
them in the Federal Government is one of the key things, but we
would also leverage expertise from the private sector and make
sure that that was available to projects that are funded by the
fund.
Mr. Cummings. Now what are the cost savings the Federal
Government would realize if this bill were adopted and
implemented? I mean, I know you have to guess that.
Mr. Scott. Well, I think our common experience in the
private sector is that if you get in a continuous refresh mode,
you can either do one of two things. You can either can
increase your capacity or you can lower costs, or something in
between.
I think, in this case, we will see some of both. We have,
certainly, agencies where there is more demand than we can
satisfy today, and some of the savings could be used to address
that demand. But we have many other cases, such as data center
consolidation, where this activity would accelerate
consolidation and accelerate savings, and that money could then
be used for other purposes.
Mr. Cummings. So I guess it would be safe to say that it
would exceed the $3.1 billion.
Mr. Scott. I'm quite comfortable in that. You saw it in the
chart that I showed earlier. We have direct evidence where
injection of modernization funds leads to savings, and the
question is just, do we want to accelerate that?
Mr. Cummings. My last question, folks in Washington--that
is us, Members--get concerned about risk. What are the
arguments against doing something like this?
Mr. Scott. Well, I think the risk that we all see is that
we have an accelerating amount of risk. The longer we don't
address these ----
Mr. Cummings. That is the greater risk.
Mr. Scott. That is the greater risk. I am quite concerned
about it, in total.
In particular, it is not just applications. We also have to
address the infrastructure, the networks and the storage and
all of the other components, not just the applications. We have
to address this holistically.
Mr. Cummings. I want to thank all of you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I would just like to allow
you each 30 or 45 seconds, you can go shorter or a little bit
longer, if you want. What are the things the Congress, what
would you like to see us do in order to make sure we are moving
in the right direction?
Let's start with Mr. Scott and go this direction.
Mr. Powner, you take a lot longer, if you like.
Mr. Scott. Sure. I'll be quick, because I think I have said
most of what I had to say earlier.
But I appreciate the support this committee has shown for
this important topic. And in formulating the idea for the
modernization fund, we looked at a number of different
alternatives. Our team at OMB asked a bunch of hard questions
about how else could we do this, what would be the best way,
what is faster rather than slower, what is more effective? We
borrowed heavily from private sector best practice, in terms of
formulating this.
While we are open to any alternative that makes sense, it
is our recommendation at this point that this is the best we
can think of, in terms of how to go forward.
So I appreciate all the support that we felt in a
bipartisan way on this topic. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Killoran. So HHS also agrees that what OMB is putting
forward on the ITMF is the right move. Being able to invest in
our technology and making sure that we are using technology
that is current, that is scalable, and meets not only the needs
of today, but is scalable for the needs of the future, is the
right direction for us to go into.
We have been able to make small incremental changes with
the funding that we have, and we have actually seen those
successes. So we are a good case study on what positively can
happen in this type of situation, and we would be willing,
obviously, to share that not only with the members of this
committee, but also with OMB as we move forward and work to
adopt this model.
Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Halvorsen?
Mr. Halvorsen. I thank the committee. This committee has
taken this problem seriously, and I do appreciate that. And I
think you've understood the complexity of the problem, which is
very helpful, in itself.
The other area that this committee has been helpful with,
and I hope that will continue, is giving us some flexibility on
how we hire the cyber and IT work force.
Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I happen to agree. I think
the personnel issue is probably as big as anything. Attracting
the talent, retaining the talent, I mean, it's--I have a new
son-in-law, a couple weeks old, this son-in-law. But he just
graduated and that kid is more employable than I am, so I
agree.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Milholland, you are now recognized.
Mr. Milholland. Thank you for asking that question. I think
there are two things. I put it in my written statement and in
my opening remarks.
It comes down to, from an IT point of view, certainty in
our budget, at least restore us back to the levels we were at a
number of years ago. It has really handicapped our ability to
modernize our legacy environments and our aging infrastructure
and provide the services that taxpayers need.
The second thing deals with the people issue you just
mentioned, and it is the streamlined critical pay authority. We
have nine IT folk who a year from now will disappear. They are
absolutely critical to the architecture work we are doing for
legacy system modernization, the engineering, the
implementation and operations. And they said that they would
serve their country, but right now, if the law is not renewed,
they will literally leave and increase the risk on the IT
organization to serve the taxpayers of this country.
So thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Again, not your fault, not your issue,
the senior leadership, the Commissioner himself, is the number
one impediment to moving those things forward. Nobody believes
him. Nobody trusts them. He is not trustworthy.
I think that problem will continue to linger as long as he
is the Commissioner. If he changes out, I think the world will
change.
Mr. Powner, you are now recognized.
Mr. Powner. Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you for
highlighting this legacy IT issue. We talked a lot today also
about transition. There is a lot of talent sitting here to the
left of me. And I would like to highlight the importance of
FITARA and your efforts in ensuring that we continue to
implement that law.
The first part of FITARA is about strengthening CIO
authorities. We need more CIOs like some of the folks sitting
here. But FITARA is also about understanding what we spend on
IT and then executing it.
Legacy IT management is executing, so it is all part of
FITARA.
So your grades looking at areas you looked at to date have
made a lot of progress to date, and we need to continue to make
progress through this transition period that we are in.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. It is important, and again,
particularly to the agencies that are represented, and those
that aren't, it really is the FITARA model, I think, is a way
for us to gain perspective and set reasonable goals and do
self-analysis and be candid in where we're at.
Again, I want to thank you all personally for your
commitment to our country. It's a difficult thing. If this was
easy, it would have been done a long time ago.
Making these transitions away from legacy systems, that is
a major, major overhaul and very difficult project, to say the
least.
So I appreciate your expertise and working with this
committee and your presence here today.
The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
