- FROM PREMIUM INCREASES TO FAILING CO-OPS: AN OBAMACARE CHECKUP

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FROM PREMIUM INCREASES TO FAILING CO-OPS:

AN OBAMACARE CHECKUP

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH CARE,
BENEFITS AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-122

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

23-646 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Sean Hayes, Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative
Rules Staff Director
Sarah Vance, Professional Staff Member
Chris Hinkle, Counsel
Willie Marx, Clerk

------

Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative Rules

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee              Ranking Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, Distict of
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming               Columbia
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                MARK DeSAULNIER, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina, Vice  BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
Chair                            JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
JODY B, HICE, Georgia                Vacancy
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 13, 2016....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Kevin Counihan, Chief Executive Officer of the Marketplace
and Deputy Administrator and Director, Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services
Oral Statement...............................................     3
Written Statement............................................     6
Linda J. Blumberg, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, The Urban Institute,
Health Policy Center
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

FROM PREMIUM INCREASES TO FAILING CO-OPS: AN OBAMACARE CHECKUP

----------

Wednesday, July 13, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and
Administrative Rules
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in
Room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Jordan
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Jordan, Walberg, DesJarlais,
Meadows, Walker, Hice, Carter, Cartwright, DeSaulnier, and
Lujan Grisham.
Mr. Jordan. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Government
Reform on Health Care, Benefits, and Administrative Rules will
come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Welcome, Mr. Cartwright, and welcome to our witnesses. We
will get to you in just a moment. You know how this works.
You've done this many times, opening statements, and then we'll
get your testimony, and then we'll get right to our witnesses.
Just about everything stated about ObamaCare when it was
passed has turned out to be false. You like your doctor; you
can keep your doctor. False. You like your plan; you can keep
your plan. That turned out to be false. Premiums are going to
go down, we were told. That turned out to be false. Premiums
are going to go down an average of $2,500. Of course, that
turned out to be false. The Web site will work, we were told.
That turned out to be false. The Web site is secure. That was
false too at the time. Deductibles will decrease. We found out
that wasn't accurate either. And, of course, we were told 21
million people would get insurance under the exchange. Now
that's been revised down to almost half, 11 million Americans.
And, of course, we were told the CO-OPs were going to work.
Just yesterday, Illinois' CO-OP folded. That's the fourth one
since May. That's 16 now out of 23. That's after the
administration spent $2.4 billion setting up nearly two dozen
CO-OPs. Over $1.6 billion in Federal loans have gone to the
failed CO-OPs, money that probably will never be recovered.
More closures are expected. My guess is every single one of
these, every single one, all 23, are ultimately going to fail.
And that's why we're having this hearing today, to just
underscore the simple fact that it's not only just CO-OPs. It's
not only some of the things--it's just this law has been a
complete failure. And the American people know it. Business
owners know it. I think insurance companies know it. And we're
looking forward to hearing from our witnesses today on the CO-
OP issue and other issues related to ObamaCare or, as some call
it, the Affordable Care Act.
So I want to thank our witnesses for being here, and with
that, I would now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cartwright,
for an opening statement if he has one.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I'd like to thank our witnesses for taking the time to
be with us today. I hope the committee uses this hearing as an
opportunity to have a meaningful, productive discussion about
the ACA, what aspects of the law are working, areas still in
need of improvement. But I've been on this committee long
enough and this subcommittee long enough to know that this
hearing was called to give my colleagues in the majority an
occasion again to attack the law. In fact, just the one-sided
title of today's hearing says it all, ``From Premium Increases
to Failing CO-OPs.'' A fair approach might be titled ``From
Improved Access to Health Care to Historically Low Uninsured
Rates'' or ``From Reducing Medical Debt to Slowing National
Health Expenditures.'' But, of course, my Republican colleagues
don't want to highlight the ACA's successes, only its flaws.
That's the kind of partisan political hearing they believe
serves their interests in an election year, but another
partisan hearing doesn't serve the public interests because
there are some accomplishments of the ACA that the Republicans'
partisanship ignores.
Because of the ACA, 20 million people who used to be
without insurance now have access to quality, affordable
healthcare coverage. And what that means at home on Main Street
is that your hospitals, your local hospitals, are much less
likely to fold because they are not doling out as much
uninsured care as they used to have to do. That's true in my
district. We had two hospitals that failed after 2010 and
before the implementation of the ACA.
But here's another accomplishment. The uninsured rate in
this country is at a historic low. That means there are fewer
people in this country than ever before that have to worry
about what happens if they get sick, they can't afford to go to
the doctor, or can't afford to pay for for their medications
out of pocket.
And here are some more accomplishments. Because of the ACA,
people with preexisting medical conditions can no longer be
denied access to coverage because of their health. Hospitals
and States that expanded Medicaid have seen their rates of
uncompensated care decline, as I just mentioned. Those States
have also seen a decline of medical debt. So many of the people
that declare bankruptcy in this country had to do so because
medical debt put them under water.
But even with all these accomplishments of the ACA, my
Republican friends have chosen to hold more than 60 votes
attempting to repeal or undermine this law. And we all know
there are aspects of the ACA that still need a lot of work. For
example, CO-OPs have faced daunting challenges, just as any
startup businesses would. We have to remember the reason that
CO-OPs were created: to inject much-needed competition into the
insurance market so that rates can stay low for consumers.
Instead of taking steps to help support the CO-OPs, however,
the Republican-led House, has voted multiple times to slash
that program's funding. There are certainly other aspects of
the law that could be improved. I'm looking forward to hearing
from our witnesses about how we can make the ACA better, how we
can make it stronger and work for all Americans.
But I'd like to close by focusing on why we passed this law
in the first place. In June 2015, Brent Brown of Wisconsin
wrote the President a letter thanking him for enacting health
reform. Mr. Brown who has, quote, ``voted Republican for the
entirety of his life,'' unquote, but who also had a preexisting
medical condition that made it impossible for him to get health
insurance before the ACA, he wrote, quote, ``I would not be
alive without access to care I received due to your law,''
unquote. Mr. Brown's letter is a reminder to all that the ACA
is about helping real people live better, healthier lives, and
it is working, unlike the harmful proposals recently put
forward under the Speaker's Better Way plan, which would roll
back healthcare protections for women, raise medical costs for
seniors, and cut long-term Medicaid funding to the detriment of
patients and medical providers.
After 6 years, Republicans still have not proposed a viable
legislative alternative to the Affordable Care Act. I would
urge my colleagues to keep this perspective in mind during
today's hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
We'll hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement, and we'll
now recognize our witnesses.
I'm pleased to welcome Mr. Kevin Counihan, Deputy
Administrator and Director of the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight at the Center for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services; and Ms. Linda Blumberg, Ph.D., senior fellow at the
Urban Institute.
Welcome, again, to both of you.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. Please raise your right hand, if
you would stand and raise your right hand, excuse me.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Let the record show that both witnesses answered in the
affirmative. We will now start with--we'll just go right
across, Mr. Counihan and then Ms. Blumberg.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF KEVIN COUNIHAN

Mr. Counihan. Good afternoon, Chairman Jordan, Ranking
Member Cartwright, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to provide an update on the Affordable Care
Act.
I joined CMS nearly 2 years ago after over 30 years serving
various roles in the health insurance industry. At CMS, my
focus is on the day-to-day operation and management of the
Marketplace and other programs that help consumers gain access
to affordable, high-quality healthcare coverage. Thanks to the
Affordable Care Act, millions of Americans who were previously
uninsured now have access to affordable, high-quality health
care. An estimated 20 million more people now have coverage
because of the law, and at 9.1 percent, the uninsured rate in
America is the lowest it has been on record. Preexisting
conditions no longer preclude individuals from gaining health
insurance, and lifetime and annual dollar limits are now a
thing of the past. Tens of millions of Americans have new
access to preventive services with no cost sharing, and
consumers now have the comfort of knowing that if their
employment changes or if they lose coverage for any reason,
they can purchase affordable coverage through the Marketplace.
The Affordable Care Act has also resulted in cost savings
for both consumers and taxpayers. The law requires health
insurers to provide consumers with rebates if they spend too
much of a consumer's premium on advertising and marketing
instead of health benefits and quality care. Since this
requirement has been put in place in 2011, almost $2.9 billion
in total refunds have been paid to millions of consumers. And
before the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies in many
States were able to raise rates without explaining their
actions. The law brought unprecedented transparency into health
insurance pricing through the rate review process, and in 2015,
rate review led to an estimated $1.5 in savings for consumers.
Since the Affordable Care Act became law, healthcare prices
have risen at the lowest level in 50 years. The Congressional
Budget Office has estimated that the law will generate
substantial deficit savings that grow over time, translating to
a total savings of more than $3 trillion over the next two
decades.
One critical provision of the Affordable Care Act is the
creation of the Health Insurance Marketplace. The Marketplace
was designed to foster competition, facilitate comparison
shopping, and ensure affordability. Three years in, the Health
Insurance Marketplace is a competitive, growing, and dynamic
platform, a transparent Marketplace where issuers compete on
price and quality, and people across the country are finding
health plans that meet their needs as well as their budgets.
Every year, we encourage consumers to return to the marketplace
and shop for the plan that is best for them and their family.
For 2016, marketplace coverage, approximately 67 percent of
marketplace consumers selected a new plan and saved an average
of $42 a month, or $500 a year, in premium costs.
In addition to providing consumers with a simple way to
compare and find the plan that's right for them, the Affordable
Care Act also includes tax credits to help make that coverage
more affordable. Roughly 85 percent of marketplace consumers
receive these tax credits, and for 2016 coverage, their average
monthly premium increased by only 4 percent or just $4. After
taking these tax credits into account, nearly 70 percent of
healthcare.gov consumers had a coverage option for $75 a month
or less, and 74 percent had an option for $100 a month or less.
Importantly, consumers say they can now afford primary care,
prescription drugs they could not afford before the Affordable
Care Act, and a majority are satisfied with their coverage.
While we are encouraged by the progress we have made, we
know that implementation of the Affordable Care Act is a
multiyear process. As CMS, our efforts to improve all of our
programs, including the marketplace, are an ongoing commitment.
This year among numerous other efforts, we are taking steps
to enhance our outreach to young adults who are more likely to
remain uninsured. We have also strengthened requirements for
enrollment through special enrollment periods, ensuring that
this tool is available for consumers when they need it, while
preventing misuse and abuse.
And we aren't the only ones that are learning. Since the
Affordable Care Act became law, I've seen an unprecedented
amount of innovation in the private sector. The marketplace is
increasingly serving as a laboratory for strategies that are
helping improve care and control costs. For example, one issuer
is creating plans based on the different needs of unique
geographic communities, bringing together interdisciplinary
teams focused on improving care for high-risk populations in
particular communities.
We look forward to continuing to work with Congress and
other key stakeholders on ways to strengthen our operations to
ensure the American people have access to affordable coverage
and high-quality health services. Using the tools created by
the Affordable Care Act, we are all working toward a healthcare
delivery system that works better for everyone, where care is
improved through better coordination and integration, where we
spend our healthcare dollars in smarter ways, and where our
system is person-centered and Americans are healthier.
I know you have a number of questions, and I am happy to
answer them to the best of my ability.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Counihan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Counihan.
Ms. Blumberg, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF LINDA J. BLUMBERG, PH.D.

Ms. Blumberg. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cartwright, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today. The views that I express are my own
and should not be attributed to the Urban Institute, its
funders, or its trustees.
The Affordable Care Act can claim substantial successes,
including health insurance coverage for 20 million additional
people through Medicaid and private nongroup health insurance
and the elimination of discrimination related to health status
in small employer and nongroup markets. The law also has
contributed to the slowdown in national health expenditure
growth and has created significant price competition in many
nongroup health insurance markets. At the same time employer
coverage rates have remained steady, and there have been no
adverse employment affects.
No one should expect one piece of legislation to address
all problems in the Nation's complex healthcare system, nor
should one expect the full promise of the legislation to be met
in the first few years of reform. Now is the appropriate time
to assess remaining issues and to work seriously to improve
upon these without sacrificing the many gains already achieved.
I am going to address two areas where public policies could
make further strides toward ensuring access to adequate
affordable health care regardless of health status or income.
First, some geographic areas have had less success
engendering strong price competition in their nongroup
insurance markets. Second, while the ACA has improved
affordability for many families, some still face high
healthcare expenses relative to income given premiums and out-
of-pocket costs. In many larger States, the ACA has led to
strong insurer participation in nongroup insurance markets and
true price competition for the first time, replacing the
previously rampant insurer competition for the best healthcare
risks. Our research shows that areas with low premiums and low
premium growth tend to have more insurers competing, larger
State populations, and competition from provider-sponsored and
formerly Medicaid-only insurers.
Nationally, 48 percent of the population lives in rating
areas where the lowest cost silver premium in the marketplace
either decreased or increased by less than 5 percent in 2016.
However, 36 percent of the population lives in areas that
experienced increases of 10 percent or more. Thus the dynamics
at play are uneven both across the country and across areas
within individual states.
We need to design approaches that improve competition where
it is missing without disrupting competition where it has been
successful. Competition could be strengthened by reducing
insurer and/or provider market power, adverse selection into
the nongroup insurance market, and insurance policies not
compliant with ACA standards. Strategies, such as continuing
the reinsurance program or introducing a Medicare-based
qualified health plan, can be useful to address these problems,
but markets vary considerably, as will the appropriate types of
intervention. The attraction of the ACA's private sector focus
was its potential to create real economic competition, yet that
approach also allows for instances of continued local
variability.
Next, healthcare affordability remains an issue for some.
While the share of families reporting difficulty paying for
medical bills or having unmet medical need due to cost has
decreased significantly since 2013, not all families have
enjoyed similar gains. Poor adults in 19 States are ineligible
for Medicaid because their State governments did not choose to
expand eligibility despite the strong State budgetary
advantages of doing so. Further incentives or other strategies
may be required to bring all States into the expanded program.
Financial assistance through marketplace tax credits and cost-
sharing reductions are generous for those with incomes below
200 percent of the Federal poverty level, but assistance
decreases markedly above that level, leaving adequate coverage
for some still out of financial reach.
Healthcare costs have grown much less than originally
anticipated when the ACA was implemented. Using just a portion
of the systemwide savings that have resulted from that lower
growth, we could improve upon the ACA subsidies to ameliorate
the remaining affordability gaps and further reduce the number
of uninsured Americans.
In contrast, repealing the ACA would by 2021 increase the
number of uninsured people by 24 million, reduce private
insurance coverage by over 9 million people, increase State
government spending, and substantially reduce the amount of
medical care delivered to low and modest income families.
The House Republicans' plan combines repeal of the ACA with
the introduction of policies that would substantially reduce
assistance to low- and middle-income individuals and would
undermine the ACA's many advances in improving access to care
for people with health problems. The ACA's underlying framework
increases the sharing of healthcare costs between the healthy
and the sick. The House Republicans' proposed strategies, such
as continuous coverage requirements, elimination of benefit
standards, sale of insurance across State lines, and individual
health pools, would place much higher financial burdens on
those with current or past health problems. And while such
strategies can create savings for those who are healthy at a
given time, they discount the fact that we tend to develop more
health problems as we age and that even a 20-something who
appears perfectly healthy one day can wake up the next to find
his luck has changed horribly. Focusing on how someone benefits
financially by being insured in any given year is to
misunderstand the inherent nature and purpose of insurance and
seriously underestimates the value of continuous access to
adequate affordable coverage regardless of circumstances.
With that, I'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Blumberg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Ms. Blumberg.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Dr.
DesJarlais.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
panel, for being here.
Mr. Counihan, let's start with the CO-OPs. How many CO-OPs
were initially created under the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Counihan. Initially, we had granted 24. One never
started, so in all practice, 23.
Mr. DesJarlais. And how many are still active today?
Mr. Counihan. Seven.
Mr. DesJarlais. Seven. Okay. And we had a hearing in
February, and at the time, I think there were 11, so there has
been 4 more that have failed since February?
Mr. Counihan. Yes.
Mr. DesJarlais. About how many individuals have been
impacted by the CO-OP closures?
Mr. Counihan. I'm going to have to get back to you on that.
Mr. DesJarlais. I have 870,000. Does that sound right?
Mr. Counihan. I need to confirm that one.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. If you and your family were going to
buy insurance through one of the remaining CO-OPs, would you
think that maybe you should be warned that two-thirds of these
CO-OPs have closed in the past year or so?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. I do not, and I'll tell you why. The
CO-OPs are like any other insurance company that are certified
by a State division of insurance. They have to have the same
actuarial standards, the same capital standards. They have to
meet a solvency requirement. They have to meet a variety of
certain circumstances. If the State certifies those issuers, if
the State certifies that CO-OP, that feels to me that they
should be on a level playing field with any other issuer.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. Well, President Obama said if you
like your plan, you can keep it. But, apparently, if you get a
CO-OP, that's not necessarily the case. You got a two-out-of-
three chance that you're going to lose your insurance. So
you're saying you would still recommend people and their
families to go to the CO-OPs to obtain insurance?
Mr. Counihan. I would say that, if they are certified and
licensed by the State, which they are, that they should be
judged on the same basis as any other, and I think it would be
unfair not to.
Mr. DesJarlais. The two-thirds that have failed, they
weren't certified and licensed by the State?
Mr. Counihan. As you know, sir, this is a challenging
business. The CO-OPs are not the first issuers to have felt the
challenge of that or to have closed.
Mr. DesJarlais. Well, you painted a pretty rosy picture of
the successes of the healthcare law. Our chairman tended to
disagree. Mr. Cartwright said that we're enjoying a
historically low uninsured rate. What is the historical low,
and what year was that noted or documented?
Mr. Counihan. Well, as of 2015, the uninsured rate is 9.1
percent. That was a drop from 16 percent before the Affordable
Care Act.
Mr. DesJarlais. And what's the historical low? Do we know?
I'd asked this question before dating back to 1950, and no one
knew, and they were supposed to get back to me, but they never
did.
Mr. Counihan. I will need to do the same, sir.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. So how many people are uninsured now
in America? What percentage?
Mr. Counihan. 9.1 percent.
Mr. DesJarlais. Is that taking into account the people who
have lost their insurance because they couldn't afford
premiums? Has there been any study? I guess I would like to
know where we got this data. The chairman mentioned that 11
million had insurance. You're saying 20 million. What did
President Obama say was uninsured when we needed this law?
Mr. Counihan. Well, I think the difference there between
what the chairman had quoted and what I had quoted was the
difference is Medicaid expansion. So the 20 million that I
quoted, for example, includes marketplace enrollment plus
expanded Medicaid enrollment.
Mr. DesJarlais. So the average person has not really been
helped then by the healthcare law that has to pay for it with
the increased deductibles and increased premiums. We don't
really have a study showing how many are just opting to pay the
tax that the Supreme Court ruled was not a penalty but a tax.
Do we have any studies indicating how many people have just
opted out of the insurance and chosen to pay the tax?
Mr. Counihan. Well, I think it's actually the opposite. I
think what we're finding is that the average American has
completely benefitted from this law, and I'll tell you how. A
is through the elimination of preexisting conditions. B is
through the elimination of lifetime caps. C is there are no
gender premium differentials that there were. There is expanded
coverage. It's more affordable than before.
Mr. DesJarlais. I get the talking points. You're in a
parallel universe with what I'm hearing. We hear different
things back home, but I appreciate and respect your right to
have an opinion. I just don't know that those can be backed on
facts.
Now, we had $1.6 billion in loan money that was given out.
Dr. Mandy Cohen was here before, and she said that we're going
to recoup this. I asked, why didn't they just call them grants,
because I don't think we have any real chance of getting them
back? Now she said that they were very much loans, and we
expect to get these taxpayer dollars back from these failed CO-
OPs. And at the time, she had just started. Can you give us an
update of how successful the recoupment efforts have been?
Mr. Counihan. So the Department of Justice is engaged in
the recoupment efforts. I cannot speak for them with respect to
their progress. Happy to have somebody from DOJ come to report.
Mr. DesJarlais. A half year later, we still have no update
on how we're going to recoup the $1.6 billion to these failed
CO-OPs. This is taxpayer money, and they have a right to know.
Mr. Counihan. As I said, the way taxpayer, these moneys can
be received, how they can be recovered, is typically when
administrative expenses are paid and runout claims are fully
satisfied. For most of these wind-downs, that has not occurred
yet, so it's really premature to be able to speculate.
Mr. DesJarlais. So I'm just about of time, but I guess I
tend to agree with the chairman. We have seen 24 turn to 23 to
11. Now we have seven, and you're telling people they should
still go use these CO-OPs with confidence that their family can
get insurance, and they're not going to lose it, and then
you're also trying to tell them that we're going to recoup the
money from all these failed businesses. I have an idea we'll
probably be having this hearing again in a few months, and I
anticipate, unfortunately, the chairman's predictions will come
true, but we'll see where we're at. I would like to get the
data on the numbers where you're saying 20 million are now
uninsured, and I'd like to see how many people have lost their
insurance because that's what I tend to hear back home, not the
successes that the both of you have laid out for us today.
I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman, and I now recognize Mr.
Cartwright for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the 6 years since the ACA was enacted, as I mentioned,
Republicans have held over 60 votes to repeal or undermine the
law, but they still haven't proposed a viable legislative
alternative. Now, the Speaker recently unveiled his, ``Better
Way'' plan for health care. The title of this plan is something
of a misnomer because it is the wrong way, not a better way. A
Better Way plan is short on specifics but contains many ideas
that really would be harmful to working Americans.
And, Dr. Blumberg, I'd like to ask you, are you familiar
with Speaker Ryan's Better Way plan?
Ms. Blumberg. Yes, I did read the materials that they
released.
Mr. Cartwright. And you commented on this in your
testimony. Do you think it's a viable alternative to the ACA?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, it is not an alternative to the ACA in
terms of an equivalent way to expand coverage and to reduce
costs for individuals--regardless of their health status, to
make that coverage adequately accessible.
Mr. Cartwright. One element of the Speaker's plan is to
encourage the use of these health savings accounts combined
with high-deductible health plans, and according to the plan,
this is supposed to help patients understand the true cost of
care.
Dr. Blumberg, isn't it true that this change could increase
the out-of-pocket costs for middle class Americans?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, it certainly increases out-of-pocket
costs when individuals move into a health savings account
combined with a high-deductible health plan. They are designed
to be, at this point anyway, to be combined with a high-
deductible plan. Individuals then have larger cost-sharing
requirements, but they have certain tax advantages which tend
to accrue most greatly to those who are high income, so they
are--the health savings account itself can act, if not used for
health purposes, as an additional IRA, which is beneficial for
the high income. The problem comes in for those individuals who
don't get the tax advantages and don't have the extra money to
put into the HSAs. They are certainly disadvantaged, and it
tends to pull healthy people out of the insurance market where
they would otherwise be sharing healthcare costs with those
with healthcare problems.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. So it's the Better Way plan for
higher-income people, is it?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, a lot of components of the Better Way
approach would be most advantageous to those with higher
incomes and those very much in particular who are healthy at a
given point in time.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, do you think the people who couldn't
afford health insurance before the ACA was enacted really need
help understanding the true costs of their medical care?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, for the lowest income population, those
that are assisted through the Medicaid expansion under the
Affordable Care Act and those who receive the most generous
assistance under the marketplaces really are in situations
where having higher out-of-pocket costs are going to very much
reduce the amount of care that they receive. And contrary to
popular belief, individuals are not very good at discriminating
between care that is necessary and care that is unnecessary. So
what happens is, when you increase their out-of-pocket costs,
particularly for the modest income, they use much less care,
and a lot of it is necessary care.
Mr. Cartwright. The Speaker's plan would also irreparably
harm Medicaid. First of all, it would prevent any more States
from expanding Medicaid as provided by the ACA. It would also
force States to choose between receiving Medicaid payments as a
per capita allotment or a block grant.
Now, Dr. Blumberg, what would these changes mean for people
who rely on Medicaid for their health coverage?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, in both cases, regardless of what the
States chose, the amount of Federal dollars going to States for
the Medicaid population would be reduced over time. There would
be both initial reductions because of changes in matching
rates. There would also be--the intent is to lower the rate of
growth in Federal dollars going to States. The biggest concern,
while there's danger for sure with the per capita caps, the
block grant, as I read it in the materials that were released,
suggests that the only mandatory populations that would
continue to be required that States provide Medicaid coverage
for under the block grant approach would be the elderly and the
disabled.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. Now, the Speaker's plan would once
again allow insurance companies to discriminate by charging
higher premiums based on health status, sex, and age, and it
would eliminate caps on out-of-pocket expenses.
Mr. Counihan, aren't these the types of abusive insurance
practices that the ACA protects against?
Mr. Counihan. Those are good examples of dramatic
improvements that the Affordable Care Act brought.
Mr. Cartwright. The Speaker's plan would also harm seniors
by raising the Medicare eligibility age to age 67. Now, the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities said this about the
Speaker's plan, ``Overall, the plan would represent an enormous
step backward for our country, reversing historic progress in
expanding health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.''
Dr. Blumberg, do you agree with that statement?
Ms. Blumberg. I do.
Mr. Cartwright. I don't know why anybody would want to go
back to the bad old days before the ACA, and that's apparently
exactly what the Republicans are trying to do with this
misguided plan.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, for
his questions.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I respect my colleague, but I thought we were here to
discuss the Affordable Care Act and ObamaCare, and I have
anything to say about it other than the false belief that
somehow it has ushered us into the good old days. This has been
nothing but a disaster and continues to be a disaster. Premiums
and deductibles are raising. I hear it every time I go home.
People can't afford it. Insurers are reducing plan offerings.
CO-OPs, as we have already discussed, are imploding. We have
administrative requirements that are ballooning to the tune of
$273 billion in administrative expenses attributable to
ObamaCare, which amounts to hundreds and thousands of hours of
paperwork to try to keep up with the requirements. The
enrollment is skewed, going down. I don't see how in the world
this has ushered us into the good old days. It is absolutely a
disaster every way I can possibly look at it.
Mr. Counihan, you mentioned today that, because of the
Affordable Care Act, that a lot of people have insurance
because of ObamaCare. But what you did not mention, in all
honesty, is that these folks are older; they're sicker; they're
more expensive to insure even than the administration ever
anticipated. As a result, we now have insurers who are rising
the premiums because it is so expensive to insure these folks.
Kaiser predicts that premium increases this year are going to
be steeper than they have seen so far. And it has already just
gone up and up and up since the beginning. The former CMS
Administrator recently predicted the same thing.
We have high deductibles that, quite frankly, are just
making insurance coverage less affordable and less accessible
to the people. This is anything but an Affordable Care Act.
People can't afford it. I hear it constantly, not only from
people in my district but from small rural hospitals: 17
percent of the people have a deductible over $5,000. They can't
afford the deductible. They go to the hospitals, and hospitals
end up never getting paid, and they are going under.
We have already mentioned ObamaCare promised to keep the
doctors, keep your health plan, and we, of course, all know
that that simply has not been the case. Insurers have limited
their provider networks trying to cover the cost of this thing.
Brian Webb of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners recently said that the individual market is a
mess. I mean, how in the world can we look at this in any other
possible honest way but to say, ``This is a disaster''? And I
really, Mr. Chairman, I really don't have any questions. I'm
just flabbergasted that we are still in any way trying to
defend this and trying to continue to push it on the American
people, rather than face the reality. We have fewer plans. We
have fewer doctors. We have reduced choice. And I guess my only
question, is this the legacy of ObamaCare? I don't see any
other way out of it.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing.
And I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
I couldn't agree more with his sentiments on the disaster
that this legislation has turned out to be.
Mr. Counihan, is the CO-OP program in ObamaCare a complete
failure?
Mr. Counihan. No, not in my view, and I'll tell you why.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Tell me why or define to me what would be
a complete failure if the facts--let me just recite the facts
again. Twenty-three programs were given money just 2 years ago,
and 16 of them have already failed. The seven that haven't
failed yet, four are on corrective action plans. Isn't that
accurate?
Mr. Counihan. No. Six are on corrective action plans.
Mr. Jordan. So the six that haven't failed--six of them are
on--of the seven that haven't failed, six of them are on
corrective action plans?
Mr. Counihan. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, wow, so it's worse than I thought. Because
of the last four that failed, all those were on corrective
action plans, and they all failed here, one in Ohio just a few
months ago. So 23 started. Sixteen have failed. Of the
remaining seven, six are on corrective action plans. Every
other CO-OP that was put on a corrective action plan did, in
fact, actually then later fail. $2.4 million allocated--$2.4
billion allocated; $1.5 given out and now lost. And yet you
don't think that defines a complete failure?
Mr. Counihan. Let me just if I can, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Jordan. Tell me what would be a complete failure. Let
me ask this way, if all 23 actually fail, would that be a
complete failure, because that's where this is headed----
Mr. Counihan. I think we're seeing with the CO-OP program,
as we are with other parts----
Mr. Jordan. No. Answer that question. If all 23 fail, would
that be a complete failure?
Mr. Counihan. I think if all 23 fail, it underscores how
challenging the health insurance business is.
Mr. Jordan. That's not what I asked you. Would it be a
complete failure if every single CO-OP that you guys authorized
just 2 years ago failed? Would that be a complete failure?
Because we all know that's where it's headed. Sixteen have
already failed. Of the seven left, six are on corrective action
plans, and they're going to fail too. So when all 23 fail,
would that be a complete failure of the CO-OP program under
ObamaCare?
Mr. Counihan. As I said, I think it underscores how tough
this business is. I think it underscores how challenging it is
it being a small business----
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Counihan, you're a witness here today, and
I'm asking you to answer one question. If they all fail, if
they all fall apart, like we know they're going to, is that a
complete failure? Just give me a yes or no to that one. That's
all I'm asking you.
Mr. Counihan. I'm just, Mr. Chairman, it underscores again
that this is a very tough business.
Mr. Jordan. Is it a no? Is it a yes?
Mr. Counihan. And, Mr. Chairman, I've worked for an
insurance firm that was about the size of one of the larger CO-
OPs. We became successful, but I understand very, very
specifically----
Mr. Jordan. Are you saying some of these 16 are going to
come back to life? They're not dead forever. They're going to
miraculously revive and resurrect themselves? Is that what
you're saying?
Mr. Counihan. What I'm trying to say is the following.
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask you this. Are you sitting here today
and saying you're going to assure me that the seven left, that
they're not going to fail? Those seven are going to keep
working? They're going to be fine. Will you tell me that? Would
you tell me that? Are they going to continue to be in
operation? The seven that haven't failed yet, are they going to
still be good when you come back here in a few months and we
have this same kind of hearing?
Mr. Counihan. Nobody could make that kind of prediction,
sir, but let me tell you one of the reasons why. It's because
there are so many variables that could impact the success of a
business like that, most fundamentally claim costs. So, for
example, if an issuer like a CO-OP has a very tough year----
Mr. Jordan. We just heard from you, Dr. Blumberg, and the
ranking member that ObamaCare is the greatest thing since
sliced bread. We just heard that. And yet we have this
phenomena in front of us. Sixteen of 23 have completely failed.
And we know the other seven are going to fail. And yet you just
all told us ObamaCare is the greatest thing in the world. And
I'm just asking you, can we at least just focus on the CO-OP
and say, if all 23 of those fail, that part of ObamaCare, at
least that has to be a complete failure, right?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. As I've said, I've worked for a company
that's one of the sizes of the larger CO-OPs. What can impact
the business of a CO-OP----
Mr. Jordan. I'm not looking for excuses. I'm just looking
for an answer to that question. If they all fail, is it a
complete failure?
Mr. Counihan. What I'm trying to tell you, number one, is
that the CO-OP program is not the whole Affordable Care Act.
Number two is that it's a very, very tough low margin business.
Number three is it deals with a lot of----
Mr. Jordan. Do you know what the COOP program is, Mr.
Counihan? It's one more thing that was promised when ObamaCare
was first enacted that was going to be just so special, just
like you all just had said earlier--well, one of the other
things that was promised: ObamaCare passes, there will be no
one without insurance. We know that's not the case because you
even said it. There are still several million people that don't
have insurance. One of the things we were promised when
ObamaCare passed is 20 million people will use the exchange. We
know that's not true because you all had to change the
definition. You now say, well, it is 20 million, but it's the
exchange plus Medicaid expansion. You totally changed the
definition to meet that number.
So, not to mention all the other--if you like your plan,
keep it; like your doctor, keep it; premiums are going to go
down--all those other things have turned out to be false as
well. And all I'm asking you is one program, the CO-OP program,
and you won't answer my question. It seems, by definition, if
23 out of 23 fail, then you should be able to say that, of
course, by definition is a complete failure.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So let me tell you, sir, what the CO-OP
program has done. The CO-OP program has provided more choice.
It's provided more competition. It's helped consumers in a
variety of different States, giving them opportunities that
they may not have had before. If I may, sir, tell you something
else. It's also given the opportunity to innovate. Several of
these CO-OPs have introduced new types of care management
programs that have been new in their markets and new in their
States.
Mr. Jordan. So new and so great; that is laughable. So new
and so great that they actually went out of business. I find
that to be laughable on its face.
Mr. Counihan. But the others, sir, are replicating. So the
health insurance business and the healthcare business, as you
well know, is highly dynamic. It changes. There are a lot of
variables to it. The CO-OP program has provided a lot of choice
to people, and that's a key part of what it was for.
Mr. Jordan. Are you willing to tell this committee today,
Mr. Counihan, that when you come back later this fall and we
have another hearing on the CO-OPs, that the seven that are
still in business are still going to be in business then?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, I would, number one, be very happy to
come back at any time. Number two is I could not predict the
future of any issuer.
Mr. Jordan. You were here a couple months ago, and it was
11, and we asked you then, and you wouldn't commit. We said we
think they're all going to fail, and here we are a couple
months later and four more are gone, and the other six or the
other seven are on corrective action plans. Let me ask you
this. Have you done anything to recover the $1.5 billion that's
out the door?
Mr. Counihan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. What have you done?
Mr. Counihan. So the Department of Justice is in the
process of working with several of the CO-OPs----
Mr. Jordan. I didn't say that. I said ``you.'' Not the--
you're CMS. You don't work for the DOJ, do you?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. So I'm asking CMS. You have the ability
to terminate the loan agreements, don't you?
Mr. Counihan. Well, what I was trying to do----
Mr. Jordan. Is DOJ a signatory on the loan?
Mr. Counihan. What I was trying to say, sir, is that these
are Federal loans. Once those Federal loans become in recovery,
that moves over to the DOJ.
Mr. Jordan. What are you doing? You're the one who gave out
the--you're the one who decided who got the money. You
allocated the money. You gave it out. What is CMS doing to
recover the $1.5 billion of taxpayer money?
Mr. Counihan. The process of how this works, sir, is when a
Federal loan goes into recovery of that sort, it moves to DOJ
for that process, and I am very happy to have someone from DOJ
come here to give you an update.
Mr. Jordan. You can't terminate yourself?
Mr. Counihan. Well, I'm talking about loan recovery. I
thought your question was about recovery of the loan. The
process of recovering a Federal loan is that DOJ takes over
that process.
Mr. Jordan. But what have you done? Have you terminated a
loan so that DOJ, in fact, can do that?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, it very much depends on the situation of
the CO-OPs. I think what's important for everyone to remember--
--
Mr. Jordan. We know the situation, Mr. Counihan. Sixteen of
them have completely failed. What are you doing to get the
money back?
Mr. Counihan. And these are independent, licensed issuers
by States. They compete just like any other health insurance
company in that State.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. I went a couple minutes over. I
apologize.
So we will now turn to the right fine gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Meadows, for his questioning.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you both. Kevin, good to see you. Let me do a
little housekeeping if I could on one particular issue, Mr.
Counihan. You are aware I guess that Ways and Means and Energy
and Commerce has issued subpoenas as it relates to I guess the
cost-sharing reduction program. Is that correct?
Mr. Counihan. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. And so have you been instructed to collect
materials that are responsive to that subpoena?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. Meadows. You haven't?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. Meadows. So no one has reached out to you? Because
that's a real problem.
Mr. Counihan. My job----
Mr. Meadows. Again, if that's your sworn testimony--so what
you're saying is no one has asked you to collect any documents
responsive to a congressional subpoena regarding that program?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. We have a staff of people that I work
with that are responsible for collecting documents of that
sort, and they're responsible for doing it. That's not in my
role.
Mr. Meadows. But you haven't been instructed? So have you
instructed anyone to collect those documents?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. Meadows. So are you aware of anyone who has been
instructed to collect those documents?
Mr. Counihan. You know, as I said, sir, we have a whole
staff of people that are responsive to that.
Mr. Meadows. But you know the point I'm trying to get to.
Is somebody collecting those documents or not, Kevin?
Mr. Counihan. Congressman, to that very issue that you are
speaking to, we have tried to be as responsive as we possibly
can because I know the issue about document retrieval is very
important to the committee----
Mr. Meadows. So when will we get them--or when will they
get them?
Mr. Counihan. I'll need to get back to you.
Mr. Meadows. But you're saying no one's asked you, and
you've instructed no one. Wouldn't you know if someone were
instructed? Because you're the head of the--we have had a
number of conversations about responses and the lack thereof.
Mr. Counihan. That's right.
Mr. Meadows. And I guess my question is--you've got a staff
behind you.
Mr. Counihan. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. Are they aware of anybody collecting the
documents?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, I want to be responsive to you. Let me
get back to you, please.
Mr. Meadows. And you can get back to me by when?
Mr. Counihan. I'll have to circle that back with you.
Mr. Meadows. I mean, it's not a hard question. You got a
subpoena. I'm sure when the subpoena came in, somebody said,
``Oh, my gosh, we got a subpoena,'' because we don't issue
subpoenas just willy-nilly. We only issue subpoenas after you
don't respond.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. And Congressman----
Mr. Meadows. So have you been asked for the documents
personally?
Mr. Counihan. Congressman, we want to be responsive. I know
we have already provided----
Mr. Meadows. Let me tell you the last person who told me
that. The last person who told me that was not responsive,
Kevin. I apologize. I shouldn't be calling you Kevin, Mr.
Counihan. The last person who told me that was actually part of
a rulemaking process who they had been working on it for a
year, and we came to find out they hadn't been working on it.
So I guess my question is, when can Ways and Means and when can
Energy and Commerce expect a production of the documents
according to the subpoena that you acknowledge you're aware of?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, what I would like to say is I need to
get back to you with that timing.
Mr. Meadows. Actually, it would be appropriate for you to
get back to this committee but also to Chairman Brady and
Chairman Upton with regards to a timeframe, and so can we
expect a response by the close of business on Friday in terms
of a timeframe?
Mr. Counihan. We'll get back to you.
Mr. Meadows. Yes or no, is that not reasonable?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, I need to get back to you.
Mr. Meadows. Mr. Counihan, you do not have the option of
not giving me a timeframe, because in doing that, you're
thereby forcing the same issue, and it would be a contempt of
Congress to continue to stonewall. So is that what you're
saying is, is that you're not willing to give me any kind of a
timeframe?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, what I'm telling you is the following: I
want to be as responsive to you as possible. I want to give you
an accurate timeframe. What I'm asking from you is to give me
the time to be able to be responsive.
Mr. Meadows. What's a reasonable amount of time?
Mr. Counihan. As I said, sir, I need to go back with my
folks, understand it, and get back to you then.
Mr. Meadows. Let me, by Friday, the close of business, I
either want a response on why you can't respond by then, why
you haven't been able to find it, or some kind of legitimate
response in terms of a timeframe, okay?
Mr. Counihan. That's fair.
Mr. Meadows. And so, as we start to see this--and I
apologize, Mr. Chairman, if you'll indulge me just a few
moments. Let me say one of my concerns, and you know,
philosophically, we probably have a big difference. I don't
want to get into the philosophical differences. Let me tell you
where I am troubled, is for all the stories of people who now
have coverage, I continue to get a disproportionate number of
people who are saying their premiums are going up or their
companies are going out of business. And so today we're talking
about really a CO-OP program. And I've had some of the major
insurers in the country come to me saying that not only are
they losing money, but they're hemorrhaging a loss of money
because they can't get either this on a profitable point of
view or costs continue to go up. Are you hearing some of the
same concerns from insurance companies?
Mr. Counihan. You know, let me tell you what I'm hearing,
and I talk to a lot of CEOs. And in this past open enrollment,
I was in 13 States talking to people. What I'm hearing is that
looking at the traditional way of managing care, contracting
with the providers, servicing this new population is less
effective than it is by designing newer, more customized
approaches that often exist within Medicaid plans. So issuers--
--
Mr. Meadows. So let me make sure I'm understanding that.
So, in your 13-State tour and talking to CEOs, they're
suggesting that we go to a Medicaid?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. Meadows. Because I thought that's what you were saying.
Mr. Counihan. I apologize. I was not clear. What I meant to
say was that if you look at issuers that have a strong Medicaid
background, that have served the Medicaid population, that work
to design and customize care management tools that are more
specific to this new type of population, they're finding
themselves being more effective than those that have just
traditionally served, say, the small group insurance market or
the large group market.
Mr. Meadows. But you and I both know that I'm a numbers
guy.
Mr. Counihan. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. In a Medicaid patient, the amount of money
spent per Medicaid patient is higher than the other patients
typically. I know it is in North Carolina, exponentially
higher. So what you're saying is, is that we need to go to a
model where we spend more per patient?
Mr. Counihan. No. I'm actually saying the opposite. What
I'm actually saying is that one of the interesting things I'm
seeing in talking to CEOs is that they are retooling their
provider contracting to match a number of issuers that have
been successful in this business from the beginning. And what
we're finding, Congressman, is that there's a clear opportunity
for issuers that have thought of this market more
strategically, that have used a lot of data to understand the
specifics of their market, understand the uninsured in their
State, design products that meet them, tier networks, if
appropriate, and provide new cost-management tools. That's what
I'm saying.
Mr. Meadows. So let me go to one of the biggest ones, Blue
Cross Blue Shield, in my State, obviously the largest provider.
They have gone up 30 percent, 34 percent, and anticipated 20-
plus percent this year in terms of the insurance rates. We're
hoping that it's lower. I talked to them just 2 weeks ago. So,
when you look at that, you know, you aggregate all of that
together.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Meadows. That is not affordable health care, and
certainly my rates are not anywhere close to what they used to
be 3 years ago. Fortunately, I can afford to pay it. Many
cannot. They are just barely scraping by. What they shared with
me is that emergency room visits are not really down. Is that
correct? Because that was the whole premise: we would get this
group of uninsured from going to use the emergency room as
their primary healthcare provider. And, actually, they're
saying that that went up, and it continues to stay at an
elevated rate. Are you finding that?
Mr. Counihan. A couple things that you've raised. First of
all is that, if you look at cost increases, cost increases are
at the lowest level during the ACA than they've been
historically over the past 50 years----
Mr. Meadows. Lowest level against what? What are we
comparing it to? Mr. Counihan, how can you say lowest level?
I'm 57 years old. I've been paying insurance premiums for over
35 years. So 35 percent, 30 percent, and 18 to 20 percent is
not the lowest level of increases that I've faced. That is just
factually incorrect.
Mr. Counihan. But if you've looked at the average in the
markets, so, for example, if you looked at the cost increases
on average nationally----
Mr. Meadows. Let's look at North Carolina. You knew I was
going to be here, and you know my numbers, so let's look at
North Carolina. Is it better in North Carolina over the last 3
years than it was in the previous 10 years, in terms of rate of
increase?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. And, unfortunately, Congressman, I
don't have the benefit of the insight of North Carolina----
Mr. Meadows. Well, you can get back to me.
Mr. Counihan. But I can speak to nationally, and I can tell
you that from 2000 to 2010, the average rate increase was 8
percent. From 2010 to 2015, it was lowered to 5 percent. So I'm
talking nationally.
Mr. Meadows. So what you're saying is we're an anomaly in
North Carolina? Is that your sworn testimony? Because we went
30, 35, 34 percent, now 18, and we are astronomically more than
anybody else?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, what I am saying is that there's not any
monolithic or consistent level of rate increases nationally. If
you look at rate actions, they vary by urban areas versus
rural, as you and I have discussed?
Mr. Meadows. They vary by Medicaid and Medicare more so
than anything else.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Counihan. Well, okay. All right.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Tennessee for an additional round of questions.
Mr. DesJarlais. I guess I'm going to kind of follow up
where Representative Meadows was on numbers. You are saying
that 20 million people now have insurance. What percentage of
that is Medicaid expansion?
Mr. Counihan. Roughly half, about 9 million.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. So what did President Obama claim we
had in terms of the number of uninsured when he was proposing
his healthcare law?
Mr. Counihan. I can't remember, Congressman, exactly. You
want to use your percentage? You said 16 percent?
Mr. Counihan. Oh, excuse me. The percentage of uninsured?
Excuse me, 16 percent.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. And we have 300 and some odd million
people in the country, so 40, 45 million people.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah, 43 or so, yeah.
Mr. DesJarlais. So what we have done is we have doubled the
number of people on Medicaid, and of the other 10 million that
now have insurance, how many of those have significant
subsidies?
Mr. Counihan. About 85 percent of our population have
subsidies apply, tax credits apply.
Mr. DesJarlais. I can see where the cash flow problem might
be coming from then, because only just a million and a half
then are actually paying for their health care or a small
number, small percent?
Mr. Counihan. I guess I believe, Congressman, that
everybody is paying for their health care. It's just that these
individuals, based on their income, are getting tax credits to
help them make it more affordable, but everyone's paying.
Mr. DesJarlais. Did we ever figure out how many people--
there are people that are living here illegally that are
getting health care, correct?
Mr. Counihan. I'm not familiar about the number of people,
illegals, that are getting health care in this country.
Mr. DesJarlais. It seemed like there was an estimate of--I
don't remember--10, 15 million people possibly that were
getting that, but you don't know?
Mr. Counihan. No.
Mr. DesJarlais. We're talking about the cost of
deductibles. Even President Obamaacknowledged that too many
Americans are straining to pay other physicians for their
deductibles and costs. And I think somewhere that you said the
deductibles have decreased $850. We have heard numbers thrown
around here upward of $5,000 is the deductible cost. Why the
discrepancy? That's a big difference.
Mr. Counihan. The median deductible in our plans actually
was lower this year by about 5 percent from the year before, to
about $850.
Mr. DesJarlais. That's the median. And that's for the
people who are being subsidized, the 10 million who are not
getting Medicaid expansion?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. That's correct. That's in that number
of the 11 million. That's right.
Mr. DesJarlais. So, basically, healthcare costs have gone
up for about 90 percent, maybe even 95 percent, of Americans
because of ObamaCare?
Mr. Counihan. I think it's actually the opposite, sir.
Mr. DesJarlais. You're saying that healthcare costs have
gone down?
Mr. Counihan. What I'm saying is that healthcare costs have
been made more affordable than ever because of the Affordable
Care Act. If you look at last year, just as an example, the
average individual out-of-pocket increase went up by $4, 4
percent. So we're making costs more affordable. We're making
coverage more accessible.
Mr. DesJarlais. And the CO-OPs are going broke, and there's
been money that's come out. The Court ruled that the Obama
administration was using funds to subsidize insurance companies
that it wasn't authorized to do. That's probably a topic for
another hearing.
Ms. Blumberg, you're talking about access to care. I
practiced medicine for 20 years. I know if you're on Medicaid,
you essentially have no deductible. You can go to the ER. You
can go to a clinic, but if you have private insurance, if you
go to the ER, your deductible might be $300, $400 or more. So,
even if you have an emergency, you can't afford to go to the
ER, so you might wait to the next day to come see the doctor. I
know I've seen that happen. Now people have deductibles up to
$5,000. Middle class folks are not going to the doctor, and
they're not seeking to get care, so their quality of care is
actually going down. We have helped some people. We have helped
some people. As you've said, we've helped people get Medicaid,
and we have helped subsidize people, but there's a whole lot of
other people hurting because they can't afford to go to the
doctor, or they won't go to the doctor, and they let problems
fester because of that high deductible. What would you say to
them?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, I think, with regard to the emergency
room care, according to the rules under the Affordable Care
Act, if it's emergent care that you're receiving through the
emergency room, you don't face those deductibles. So it may be,
yes, if you're going in to get nonemergent care through the
emergency room and you've got a private insurance plan----
Mr. DesJarlais. Are you talking Medicaid or private
insurance?
Ms. Blumberg. But if you're getting nonemergent care, then
out-of-pocket cost is going to be significant if you go use the
emergency room because the intent is to give financial
incentives to get alternative sources of care for nonemergent
care. And what we have found in our survey work is that,
indeed, the number of--the percentage of adults reporting a
usual source of care outside the emergency room has increased
significantly since 2013, and those not obtaining necessary
care due to cost has gone down substantially since then.
Mr. DesJarlais. I'd like to see those numbers.
Ms. Blumberg. Certainly.
Mr. DesJarlais. Mr. Counihan, quickly, how many people
now--ObamaCare has been around for a while. How many people
have paid the penalty on their IRS taxes rather than getting
health care? In other words, how many people had health care
that have dropped their health care and opted to pay the taxes?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So I--sir, I can't remember the exact
number of people that have paid that penalty. I'm, again, happy
to get back to you with that figure.
Mr. DesJarlais. Can you ballpark? Can you guess?
Mr. Counihan. You know, I really wouldn't----
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. We still have 10 percent uninsured by
your number.
Mr. Counihan. Nine percent, yeah.
Mr. DesJarlais. Nine percent. Okay. So that is roughly 30
million people. Who are they?
Mr. Counihan. Excuse me?
Mr. DesJarlais. Who are the 30 million people that don't
have insurance? If 10 percent are still uninsured and we have
all of these other people that now have insurance, who are the
ones that don't have it?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So it's in a couple of different
segments. So one would be Medicaid expansion States, States
that have an expanded Medicaid; a significant component there.
Number two would be young people. I mentioned earlier about the
importance of enrolling younger folks and the outreach efforts
that we are making to that. That's another cohort that's
critical for that.
Mr. DesJarlais. Yeah. It's really expensive for young
people. I know that by talking to them. But I think what we've
done is shifted health care. Some people that didn't have
health care where now they get subsidized, but a large group of
people that had health care can't afford it now, so they are
paying taxes to the IRS and going without insurance. And the
ones that do have high deductibles and they can't get health
care because they are afraid they have to spend their
deductible. But somehow you both seem to think this is a
success; not at all what we are hearing back home.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. To your point, sir, around young people
and affordability, the vast bulk of them would be eligible for
subsidies, for tax credits, and I think that would make that
coverage much more affordable for them.
Mr. DesJarlais. But that's going to make the overall
program--any time you give cash subsidies to somebody, it makes
it way more expensive somewhere else. Right?
Mr. Counihan. As I said, sir, our job is to enroll people
into affordable care. I think we've made good progress. We've
got more to do, as you say.
Mr. DesJarlais. Sounds like socialized medicine. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I'm going to throw this one open to both witnesses. It's
a tossup question. Mr. Hice of Georgia just said that because
of the ACA, we have fewer doctors. Is there any substance to
that? Do we have fewer doctors in this country since the
enactment of the ACA?
Ms. Blumberg. I don't know that we have any evidence of
that whatsoever.
Mr. Cartwright. That would have been a shock to me. And of
course, my friend, Mr. Meadows of North Carolina, was lamenting
the premium increases and he was talking about his advanced
age, and I'm a bit long in the tooth myself. And I was a
business owner for many years and year after year, we would
have premium increases. This was long before the Affordable
Care Act, you know, 20 percent and 30 percent and 35 percent in
a single year. And that was tough to take. It's still tough to
take. But how about either of you, can you put your finger on
the ACA as the reason for annual premium increases as opposed
to what went on in the world before ACA?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. If I could just answer that,
Congressman?
Mr. Cartwright. Sure.
Mr. Counihan. I understand exactly what you're referring
to, and I actually think that the ACA has had the exact
opposite effect. It's moderating increases. And I will just
give you an example. In the mid-1980s, mid to late 1980s,
annual trend, inflationary trend in health insurance was in the
mid 20s, 24, 25, 26 percent. That's beyond the impact of any
utilization expense. That was pure inflationary trend. That's
been dramatically, dramatically cut back. So I think that helps
prove your point.
Mr. Cartwright. Do you want to weigh in on that, Dr.
Blumberg?
Ms. Blumberg. Sure. There definitely has been a long
history of variability in premiums from year to year. What we
are finding in terms of the increases in the nongroup
marketplace plans, which I think is the focus of some of the
concern here, is that there is huge variation by geographic
area. We have seen that in the areas that tend to have the
biggest increases, we're talking about the smallest population
centers. We're also talking about seeing larger increases
coming where the premiums had been in the prior years quite low
relative to the national average.
And so we think some of this is a regression to the mean
over time, that some of these insurers came in too low and
they're correcting now, but it's not necessarily that they're
all going very high, relative to what you're seeing in other
parts of the country, but they made some errors in judgment
originally and they're correcting for them. So some of these
large percentage increases are on a much smaller premium basis.
And so the----
Mr. Cartwright. Like a market correction.
Ms. Blumberg. Exactly.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. And I don't mean to cut you off.
You have long interesting answers, but we're on the clock here.
Ms. Blumberg. Sorry.
Mr. Cartwright. So we're very--we have to have short,
couple of sentence answers. Not paragraph answers.
Ms. Blumberg. Understood.
Mr. Cartwright. Your research found, and I quote, ``Rates
of increase vary tremendously across States and across rating
areas within States.''
The question is: Why do premium rates vary in this way?
Ms. Blumberg. They vary depending upon the market
conditions that were there prior to the Affordable Care Act to
some extent, how many insurers are competing, and that is
related to the historical situation, what types of insurers are
competing and the types of insurers that have come in or have
exited from the market.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay. And here's my question. The
Affordable Care Act, has it helped facilitate increased
competition that is needed to drive down the rates?
Ms. Blumberg. Definitely. Because in the nongroup insurance
market, in particular prior to the ACA, we didn't really have
price competition in these areas. But what the insurers were
doing was competing for healthcare risks. Now there is
transparency, there is equivalency of the plans. And so for the
first time, we're seeing price competition where we didn't see
it before in this market.
Mr. Cartwright. Now, Mr. Counihan, I want to get your
answer on that as well.
Mr. Counihan. I just wanted to say, in addition to that, we
have significantly enhanced the quality of the coverage that
the individual market now gets access to. Both the substance of
that coverage and also the elimination of the ability to
discriminate in that coverage. So just the elimination of
preexisting conditions alone is a significant and a huge
improvement. The fact, again, that there is no annual lifetime
maximums, there is no caps on specific types of procedures. All
of these types of things are significantly enhancing.
Mr. Cartwright. No penalty for being a woman.
Mr. Counihan. That is exactly right. In my old State, women
were typically priced twice as high as men for the same type of
coverage. We have also seen that the number of bankruptcies due
to medical costs have dramatically reduced since the
introduction of the ACA. So, again,you know, significant
movement and progress.
Mr. Cartwright. Now, it's also important to remember that
the premium rates insurers have filed for next year, 2017, are
not necessarily the rates that will be approved by State
departments of insurance. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Counihan. Correct.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. And in fact, ACA created a rate
review program to help State departments of insurance
strengthen their rate review process. Is that right?
Mr. Counihan. That's correct.
Mr. Cartwright. According to a 2015 HHS report, rate review
reduced total premiums in individual small group markets by
$1.5 billion.
Mr. Counihan. That's right.
Mr. Cartwright. Rate review process. Mr. Counihan, what
other tools did the ACA provide to help consumers mitigate the
effects of the premium increases?
Mr. Counihan. Well, number one, we talked about the tax
credits. We talked about other ways to make things affordable.
You've mentioned already the ability of States to take a more
aggressive, transparent view for the creation of rates. We've
created more competition. We've created more choice.
Just to give you a quick example, last year the average
enrollee had an option of looking at three health plans--three
issuers, and 50 health plans to choose from. So there's a
variety of different ways that we're using the marketplace to
help dampen prices and give people more options.
Mr. Cartwright. You know, I was just complaining about, you
know, as a business owner, what it was like to go through these
every year, double-digit premium increases. I just saw a figure
that premiums increased by 58 percent during the last 6 years
of the Bush administration.
Have you seen that number?
Mr. Counihan. I hadn't.
Ms. Blumberg. I haven't.
Mr. Counihan. My colleagues in the majority have also
brought up the fact that UnitedHealth and a small number of
other issuers have decided not to participate in the ACA
marketplaces in 2017 as evidence that the ACA is not working.
Dr. Blumberg, what do you make of that argument?
Ms. Blumberg. We looked pretty seriously at the United
situation and they came in very--mostly in the second year.
They really didn't participate much at all the first year and
where they came in, they ended up coming in really high. In a
few areas they were the low-cost insurer, but in general, they
priced very high relative to the others. As a consequence, it
is a very price-sensitive population. They really didn't get
much enrollment.
Mr. Cartwright. Is that evidence that the ACA is not
working?
Ms. Blumberg. No. It's evidence that United strategically
was not paying enough attention to how this market was working.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay.
Mr. Counihan. And Congressman----
Mr. Cartwright. Yes.
Mr. Counihan. --that is not uncommon in business of any
sort or in the health insurance business. People's strategies
change, their strategic direction can evolve. So we see more of
that. But the----
Mr. Cartwright. Not only that, startup businesses in
general fail for a whole spectrum of reasons. Right?
Mr. Counihan. That's correct. And particularly health
insurance. It's a low margin, very, very challenging industry.
Mr. Cartwright. Now, a recent article in JAMA, the Journal
of the American Medical Association, it's titled ``Reports of
ObamaCare's Demise Are Greatly Exaggerated.'' It notes other
large insurers like Anthem and CIGNA have, quote, ``expressed
more confidence in the ACA's marketplaces as a business
opportunity.'' In fact, CIGNA is even planning to expand its
presence in the marketplaces.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Cartwright. Mr. Counihan, what do you make of the fact
that some insurers are deciding not to participate in ACA
marketplaces in 2017?
Mr. Counihan. I think it's a couple of things. I think, A,
this is an example as strategies evolve. Two, I think an
example so that people look at opportunities. You used the
example of CIGNA. That's a good example. There are other
examples of big national publicly-traded firms that are
expanding into new markets.
I think the other thing that it's showing is that with any
new market--and this is a new market and there hasn't been a
new market like this in a long, long time--it takes a
combination, whether looking at it from an underwriting
perspective, an actuarial perspective, a risk management
perspective, a care management perspective, a provider contract
perspective, all these are different. And what we're finding is
that those that are using the same kind of pattern that they
used for their commercial business are being less successful
and are in the process of retooling, versus those that have
looked at this market and this enrollment more uniquely.
Mr. Cartwright. All right. Last question, and this is the
$64,000 question, Dr. Blumberg. If my Republican friends get
their way and we repeal the ACA, what do you think will happen
to health insurance premiums in this country?
Ms. Blumberg. Well, I think health insurance premiums would
go up extraordinarily for those who have past health problems
or current health problems. And that's really the key is, are
we going to leave those who are most vulnerable at their time
of most need with inadequate access to care or are we going to
pool them together with people who are currently healthy?
Mr. Cartwright. Well, thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
Dr. Blumberg, Mr. Counihan wouldn't answer the question,
probably can't answer the question. He is in the
administration. When I asked him the fact that 16 of 23 CO-OPs
have already failed and the other 7 are going to, he wouldn't
answer the question whether that's a complete failure. But you
don't work for the government. You work for the Urban
Institute. Is that right?
Ms. Blumberg. That's right.
Mr. Jordan. You are here on your own capacity today.
Ms. Blumberg. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. All right. So you're not part of the
administration. Right?
Ms. Blumberg. I am not.
Mr. Jordan. So when you have a program where 23 CO-OPs are
created in this CO-OP program in ObamaCare, 16 have already
failed and 7 are going to, would you describe that as a
complete failure?
Ms. Blumberg. I'd say it's a--you know, you can't say
that's a success when all of those plans fail. But I also think
that there's--the important thing is for us to look at why
those plans failed. I think it was a combination of issues
related to they had a big hill to climb as new insurers to
begin with. But I also think that the problem with the
redefinition of what the risk corridors were going to be and
making those, forcing those to be budget neutral, which they
were not intended to be, had bad implications for those CO-OPs
as well. And that was something that came after the Affordable
Care Act.
I also think that it's an indication that we have some
improvements to make in the risk adjustment system that I think
are some in progress, additional ones that could be done. And I
think that, you know, the timing of those support payments from
the risk adjustment reinsurance and risk corridors were
important there.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Counihan, we've asked certain individuals
to be scheduled for transcribed interviews, including yourself,
Mr. Cleary, Ms. McNeill, and--I guess just three. When are we
going to get that scheduled?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, I need to get back to you on that. I
don't do that type of scheduling and I'm happy to respond to
you fast.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah, but you're the boss there at CMS and so
we've been trying to do this. Can you make a commitment that
you're going to get it done here? We want to get it done this
month.
Mr. Counihan. You're absolutely right, sir, that I am the
boss. But the CO-OP program, for example, has its own director,
it's own team of people that are dedicated to it. I need to
circle back with you.
Mr. Jordan. But they answer to you. Right?
Mr. Counihan. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Well, that's why I'm asking you. You're
the guy here on the witness stand. You're the boss at CMS.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Jordan. So we want to get you and two other people in
for an interview.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Jordan. We're just asking you, can we make that happen
in 2 weeks?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. And, sir, I want to comply with that.
As I said, I'm just looking----
Mr. Jordan. Okay. We've also requested----
Mr. Counihan. --for a time to be able to get back to you.
Mr. Jordan. We've also requested documents from you. When
are you going to give those to us?
Mr. Counihan. So, sir, we have already given you, as you're
probably very, very much aware, thousands of pages of documents
to be responsive.
Mr. Jordan. We want them all. We want the ones--we want the
ones that we need, the ones we've asked for, not some--you
know, we hear this every time in congressional committees.
We've given you thousands of--I don't care if you have given us
a bazillion. If they're not the ones that matter----
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Jordan. --who cares? I want the ones that matter. When
are you going to give those to us?
Mr. Counihan. Well, and the ones that--and I'm not sure how
you're defining the ones that matter, but the one that have----
Mr. Jordan. The ones that matter are the ones we asked for.
Mr. Counihan. Well, the ones that have business risk to
those businesses, those CO-OPs, have been available in camera.
They continue to be available in camera to your staff. We're
not hiding anything from you. But----
Mr. Jordan. Sure sounds like you are when you're saying in
camera. Give them to us. We want them. We don't want to have to
come over there with a special thing in a special room, look at
them, can't take notes and all this. We've been through this
before in other committees as well.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Jordan. It's just ridiculous. It's a congressional
investigation, congressional inquiry. We want the information.
Give it to us.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. And we want to give you the
information, but we can't have the information leak out for
businesses. As I told you, I worked for a small business----
Mr. Jordan. Now, that is, again, almost laughable. They're
all going to fail. Anyone with a brain can see that, and now
you are telling us, oh, we got to be X--we're going to be
confidential with the information. But to say you have to see
them in camera because, oh, by the way, some of these things
might fail, we already know that. Anyone with a brain knows it
because every one of these are going to fail. So that's sort of
a lame excuse, frankly, Mr. Counihan. Just let us have the
documents. Will you?
Mr. Counihan. Well, sir, I respectfully have a different
perspective on your comment about them all going to fail. What
I would tell you is that we have an obligation, a fiduciary
obligation, to make sure that no confidential information about
their businesses gets leaked out and can be used against them.
And I'm sure you can appreciate that.
Mr. Jordan. I certainly can, and we can certainly keep
confidential information confidential.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Jordan. How about the materials relating to the CO-OP
risk committee? When are we going to get those materials?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So I will have to check on the status
of your request for information related to that. That's not an
area that I personally get engaged with, so I will follow up
with you on that.
Mr. Jordan. What about the notes from the weekly calls you
have with the CO-OPs? When are we going to get that
information?
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. Sir, as I said, I'm not responsible for
responding for those types of document requests. And we'll be
happy to get back to you with details.
Mr. Jordan. The gentlelady from New Mexico is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to
the witnesses.
So I know that Mr. Counihan is very familiar with New
Mexico and our woes. And to be fair, given what I've heard in
your answers today and in reading your prepared testimony--and
I agree with my colleague Mr. Cartwright, that there were
plenty of significant difficult issues pre-ACA. And the reality
is, is that a private insurance, private healthcare market has
significant challenges for a sick population in this country
that's not very homogeneous and we are effectively, as a
result, have been very poor healthcare consumers.
I believe in the fundamental consumer protections
unequivocally in the ACA, but between my colleagues asking
questions, I find myself in a very interesting position where I
may disagree with you about the ACA and its impact and about
whether or not we've really been proactive in dealing with the
issues that we were clear or we wouldn't have had a risk
corridor, we wouldn't have worked on a CO-OP model. We knew
there were going to be some very interesting competitive
issues. We were also a bit nervous about premiums and premium
stability, which is why were alerted to the fact, but I think
in many States, particularly mine, very surprised by the out-
of-pocket costs and the very high deductibles which, quite
frankly, has just pushed people into emergency rooms. And we
just cost shift somewhere else.
And as you're well aware, New Mexico has never had
competition in the marketplace. And now, in my district, this
minute, I only have one. Now, Secretary Burwell, and I know
that you're aware, have known that these issues--so to the
credit of my colleagues behind me, you have seen them coming.
I've alerted the White House. I've alerted HHS. I've alerted
CMS on multiple occasions. Our superintendent of insurance is,
you know, feeling really confident that he can manage this. I
would say I don't share his confidence. We've got another
10,000 enrollees, 80 percent of whom need those and get those
subsidies. They are going to find themselves maybe in a
precarious position.
The rates that are published that are not yet agreed to is
an 80 percent increase by Blue Cross Blue Shield. That was with
Presbyterian in. If they're out, I don't know what that means,
and given that nationally they've been another one like United
that's given us great pause about what they can and should and
are willing to do.
So given that, that New Mexico doesn't fit any of the
things that you've described as successes, what are we going to
do? And that CO-OP is in the most precarious position. What
strategies have you specifically thought about, given that
rural and frontier States and poor States, higher risks to
begin with--it's not like we didn't know that.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I've seen nothing that's been targeted
or strategic for those States, and I've seen very little, quite
frankly, from the administration about dealing with these
issues, except telling me that the marketplace is incredibly
competitive and people have great choices and it's all going to
work itself out. So I want to know, and I haven't given you
very much time, but what specifically have you done in the 7
years given these serious issues? I know that you weren't there
for the whole 7----
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. --but you are at the top now.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. --about New Mexico, and what are you
going to do to help us make sure that consumers really are, in
fact, protected as is the vision in the ACA? Because I'm not
seeing it.
Mr. Counihan. Okay. First of all, thank you for the
question. I happen to be fairly familiar with New Mexico and
with the competitive environment there.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Or the lack thereof, you mean.
Mr. Counihan. I'm aware too--I have a valued relationship
with the DOI superintendent, and actually just spoke with him
about 10 days ago about the competitive environment, also rate
actions by Blue Cross. So I had that review. So we had a good--
--
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Did he actually tell you that
Presbyterian was going to pull out yesterday?
Mr. Counihan. No, he did not.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I would say that your relationship with
our superintendent needs to be reevaluated.
Mr. Counihan. Well, I value the relationship that we have.
And I will tell you that he and I have discussed a variety of
things about different issuers. One of the things that we both
understood is some of the complexity about urban versus rural
counties.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. In fact, the rural counties, Mr.
Counihan, have higher competition, given the regional plans
that are on the marketplace. It's the urban area that is the
most at risk currently today with both the CO-OP and now
Presbyterian, all the large insurance carriers are pulling off
the marketplace in the largest city and the most urban area in
the State. It's contrary to what you just said, in fact.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. Well, one of the things that we've
talked about is I think that the CO-OP is a good example of new
choice, of more competition, of innovation.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Right. But that hasn't translated. And
I'm out of time. But the reality is, I'm going to ask you to
give me in writing--and hope that the chairman will continue to
let me have a few more seconds. I need those specific
strategies, given that we have asked for them from this
administration on multiple occasions. I believe you have an
obligation to hold us accountable, to work on strategies that
are going to protect those consumers, because so far, that has
not translated and I think we can get it right. We have
significant challenges. That is not occurring currently, and I
don't think that the administration has really been thoughtful
about that.
In addition, which is not really in your wheelhouse, but
I'd like you to take back to the administration that I think
that they should be--look very seriously at the 6 percent
Medicaid cuts that are going to drive even more providers out
of New Mexico. So you have a very precarious situation there
that I'm not sure is getting the attention that it really
deserves and needs.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Carter. [Presiding.] The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Counihan, to date, we know that 16 of 23 ObamaCare CO-
OPs have collapsed and it's impacted 870,000 enrollees. That's
including the Land of Lincoln, Co-Op of Illinois, which
announced just yesterday, just yesterday, that it will close
after only 3 years of operation, leaving 50,000 enrollees
without insurance.
What's more troubling than that, perhaps, is that CMS
loaned nearly $1.5 billion to these failed CO-OPs, despite the
administration's projection that the program would lose a
significant amount of taxpayers' dollars, over 40 percent
predicted to never be repaid. That's a lot of taxpayer dollars.
I think you would agree with that. A lot of taxpayers' dollars
casually thrown away to prop up yet another failed facet of
ObamaCare.
Mr. Counihan, I'm concerned that despite the previous
oversight hearings that we've had and on the failing CO-OPs and
the staggering amount of taxpayer dollars that are at risk,
that CMS still has yet to come up with a plan or a process for
recouping the loans lost by these CO-OPs.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So----
Mr. Carter. Am I right? I mean, tell me I'm wrong.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Carter. Do you have a plan to recoup the money?
Mr. Counihan. We have a specific process for recoupment of
moneys. I explained some of it just before you were able to
arrive, and if you don't mind, I'd like to explain it again.
Mr. Carter. Very briefly.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah. So fundamentally, this is a matter of
make sure that claim runouts are finally resolved and paid and
administrative expenses to vendors are paid. Moneys left over
from that are typically the best ways for us to recover money.
The Department of Justice is in the process right now of doing
just that with a couple of these CO-OPs.
Mr. Carter. So you're trying to do it through payment
offsets or what?
Mr. Counihan. No, I'm trying to do it through recovery of
Federal loans. And recovery----
Mr. Carter. And are you doing witness all of the CO-OPs
that have failed?
Mr. Counihan. As appropriate as in at the appropriate time.
Mr. Carter. When is the appropriate time? I mean, after
they fail, they failed, and there's no money left. Right?
Mr. Counihan. But--no, not necessarily. And as I mentioned,
the vast majority of these CO-OPs still are in runout, which
means that their claims, their incurred but unreported claims
still need to be paid.
Mr. Carter. Okay. So let's go back here. It's my
understanding that now we have got seven remaining CO-OPs. Is
that correct?
Mr. Counihan. Correct.
Mr. Carter. How are they doing? From my understanding,
they're not doing well at all. They're in very similar
situations and they're set to fail.
Mr. Counihan. Sir, these are small businesses. They're
small businesses in the health insurance business. This can
very much depend on a month-by-month basis. So----
Mr. Carter. Well, let me ask you something. You know, I was
always taught that you don't want to throw good money after
bad. While they still have got some good money, why don't we
just go back and get it and recoup it and just call it a day?
Obviously, if 16 out of 23 have failed, why should we think
that the remaining seven are going to make it?
Mr. Counihan. The moneys that have been--that we have have
been obligated already to those businesses. Those businesses
right now are in the process of succeeding like any other
business or any other insurance company does in the State where
they do business. This is a tough industry, as you very well
know. It's very tough to be a small business and it's tough to
be a small health insurance company. I used to work for one, so
I can tell you that.
But we're doing everything that we can to collaborate with
the State divisions of insurance, and with the CO-OPs to make
them successful.
Mr. Carter. But it's not working. It's failed 16 out of 23.
Another one failed yesterday. The remaining seven are in bad
shape and you know it.
Mr. Counihan. So, sir, if you look at the history of new
entrants in health insurance, typically, at least half of them
or so have a hard time making it. So this is not inconsistent
with the industry.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Well, let me ask you something, Mr.
Counihan. Out of the seven that are still currently operating--
--
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Carter. --how many of them are profitable?
Mr. Counihan. So profitability very much can depend on the
month.
Mr. Carter. That's yes or no.
Mr. Counihan. It depends on the month, sir.
Mr. Carter. It depends on the month?
Mr. Counihan. Yes.
Mr. Carter. This month, how many of them are profitable?
Mr. Counihan. I can't tell you that.
Mr. Carter. Last month?
Mr. Counihan. The claims data that we have right now----
Mr. Carter. Can you tell me last month?
Mr. Counihan. --it's typically through May. You know, we've
got actuarially certified data through the second quarter. You
know, we're trying--actually, we get that in August. We're
trying to do our best to keep up, as we are with the State
divisions of insurance, but when you're a small carrier like
this, it very much depends on the claims you get for that
month.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Counihan, this looks like a total failure.
I mean, not only are we throwing good money after bad, losing
money, but now we got all these enrollees who don't have any
insurance coverage.
Mr. Counihan. Well, so, can I give you another perspective
on that?
Mr. Carter. Please.
Mr. Counihan. So another perspective on that is that
because of these CO-OPs, we've been able to give people more
choice. Because of the CO-OPs we've been able to enhance
competition in these States. Because of these CO-OPs we have
been able to innovate. Many of these new CO-OPs have come up
with new care management models that are being replicated by
some of their larger competitors. So there's been all sorts of
dynamics.
Mr. Carter. If I were one of their larger competitors, I
would not--I wouldn't copy anything they've done. They've
failed.
Mr. Counihan. But, sir, there's a variety of different
reasons that lead to the expenses in a health insurance
company. Care management models are things that can help
migrate between sizes of firms and profitability of firms. So
I'm giving you three examples of where they've added specific
value.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Okay. Okay. If there is a silver lining,
perhaps you just--you've just described it. I fail to believe
that. Nevertheless, let's shift gears for one second. Okay?
Let's talk about--we know the CO-OPs are not the only entities
that are struggling under ObamaCare. UnitedHealth has pulled
out of a number of markets, abandoned a number of exchanges due
to profit concerns. If the Nation's largest insurers can't
assume the risks and burdens of ObamaCare, why should we
believe that anyone can?
Mr. Counihan. Well, could I--if I could just give you some
examples for that, because----
Mr. Carter. Please very quickly.
Mr. Counihan. Okay. I've got a deep history in this
industry. Often, insurers that came into this market were
making some assumptions about the utilization and the morbidity
of the new enrollees. What we're finding is some of those
assumptions and old care management tools have been less
appropriate to this new population than those that innovated
and created new ones. And so many right now, issuers, are
retooling based on looking at new models.
Mr. Carter. Okay. All right. I need to finish up. I'm
sorry, Mr. Counihan. Out of all due respect, sir, they're
failing. They're losing money. The patients aren't being
covered. Their premiums are going up. It looks to me like it's
a total failure.
Mr. Counihan. Sir----
Mr. Carter. I've got a closing statement I want to make.
Okay. In a July 11, 2016, article in Healthcare Reform,
President Obama acknowledged that too many Americans still
strain to pay for their physician visits and prescriptions,
cover their deductibles, or pay for their monthly insurance
bills. That's directly from the President. Even the President
can't avoid the fact that after 6 years, his signature
healthcare reform bill has completely failed. Completely
failed. Healthcare costs are higher than ever. Families have
seen their premiums double and deductibles increase and the
average American cannot afford health insurance.
This is why we've come out with Speaker Ryan's A Better Way
policy agenda, and I hope that we will look at that. We all
want healthcare coverage here in America. Republicans,
Democrat, we want it. And we feel like we have a better way.
Obviously, to anyone who's looking at this, this is not
working. It is failing.
Finally, there's some documents that we've asked you to
produce. On November 20, December 23, and May 18, we sent
letters, and on February 17 we sent a subpoena to Secretary
Burwell. Are you familiar with this?
Mr. Counihan. I am familiar with the request, yes.
Mr. Carter. Have you been asked to collect any of the
material?
Mr. Counihan. Sir, a couple of things. One is, I know that
we've already sent thousands of pages in response. Number two
is, to the extent that there are requested documents that are
confidential that could put any of these businesses at risk--
and again, I used to work for one.
Mr. Carter. I thought it was a subpoena we sent.
Mr. Counihan. We have made those available in camera. They
remain that way, but we can't have those divulged publicly or
those businesses----
Mr. Carter. Mr. Counihan, if we agree on anything in this
committee, Democrats, Republicans, Independents, whoever, it is
that y'all need to pay attention, and when we ask you something
we expect for you to get it to us. I don't think you will find
anyone who disagrees with that.
Mr. Counihan. That's understood. But we have a fiduciary
responsibility to these firms, as I'm sure you can appreciate.
Mr. Carter. I can appreciate that, but you have an even
greater responsibility to this committee and to answering to
the people who have been elected to represent the American
citizens. All right. That's all.
Mr. Cartwright. Mr. Chairman, I have a unanimous consent
request.
The witness was questioned about profitability and was not
able to answer questions on second quarter because they won't
be out until--and audited until August.
Mr. Counihan. Yeah.
Mr. Cartwright. I request unanimous consent to put into the
record a Financial Press article noting that for the first
quarter, at least three ACA created CO-OPs turned Q-1 profits
in Maryland, New Mexico, and Massachusetts.
Mr. Carter. Without objection.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Counihan, Ms. Blumberg, I want to thank
both of you, and thank you for taking time out to appear before
us today.
Is that it? Did you have anything else? We're all done.
If there's no further business, without objection the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
