- U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION: INFORMATION SECURITY REVIEW

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION: INFORMATION SECURITY REVIEW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-84

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-383 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Katie Bailey, Government Operations Subcommittee Staff Director
Michael Flynn, Counsel
Sharon Casey Deputy Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 17, 2015................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Greg Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Kathleen S. Tighe, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Education
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35
Mr. Danny A. Harris, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Education
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

APPENDIX

Rep. Connolly Opening Statement..................................    84
Department of Education FITARA Implementation Scorecard..........    86
FY2015 Cybersecurity Sprint Results..............................    87

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION: INFORMATION SECURITY REVIEW

----------

Tuesday, November 17, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Jordan, Walberg,
Amash, Gosar, Gowdy, Massie, Meadows, Mulvaney, Buck, Walker,
Blum, Hice, Carter, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Maloney, Clay,
Connolly, Kelly, DeSaulnier, and Lujan Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order. Without objection, the
chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
We appreciate you joining us for our review of the United
States Department of Education: The Information Security
Review.
And at this time I would like to yield to the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz.
Today's hearing is an opportunity, an opportunity to start
managing the cybersecurity vulnerabilities and risks that this
nation faces every day.
I said it during the July hearing this committee held on
the data breach of the Office of Personnel Management. It is an
undeniable fact that America is under constant attack. I am not
talking today about bombs dropping or missiles launching, but
the constant stream of cyber weapons aimed at our data.
The good news for this hearing, we are not talking about a
data breach today. But, Dr. Harris, I want my message to be
heard loud and clear. You do not want to be before this
committee explaining to the American people how you left a PII
of the sons and daughters of millions of Americans vulnerable
to hackers.
And it is important to realize that this is not a problem
without solutions. The GAO and the inspector general have made
recommendations, not to mention the standards, policies, and
programs of OMB, DHS, and NIST. What I am trying to tell you is
that this is not an issue of technology. This is an issue of
management and leadership.
Dr. Harris, you are on the spot today but don't think you
are being singled out. I have put and we have put Federal CIOs
and agency heads on notice time and again. Whether it be on
FITARA implementation, data privacy, encryption, or compliance
with Federal information security policies and practices, this
committee will be watching. We are talking to the inspectors
general and reading their recommendations. Federal CIOs and
agency heads need to be implementing the recommendations of the
IGs and GAO or be able to explain to me and this committee why
they didn't.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. And I want to
just kind of--let's stick to the facts here and go through some
key numbers and metrics because the liability, the
vulnerability is enormous.
Roughly 17 years ago the liability to the taxpayers in this
category--we are talking about the Department of Education.
Outstanding student loans 17 years ago was roughly $150
billion. Today, taxpayers are liable for roughly $1.18
trillion, making the Department of Education essentially the
size of Citibank.
Most people don't realize how large and enormous of a
financial institution the Department of Education is. There are
roughly 40 million borrowers utilizing the Department of
Education as essentially their bank and financial institution.
This is an organization, the Department of Education, that
spends some $683 million--spent $683 million this year on
information technology.
[Slide.]
Chairman Chaffetz. But as we put up this slide, doing a
self-assessment, if we can do the FITARA self-assessment, this
is also an organization based on their self-assessment gets an
overall ``F'' grade as it relates to IT. So we can look at data
center consolidation, IT portfolio review savings, incremental
development, and risk assessment transparency, earning it an
``F''.
Chairman Chaffetz. You can take down that slide now.
This is a system that we are not necessarily--all the
systems are utilizing encryption. This is a department where
the OMB cyber sprint exercise--if you would put up the second
slide.
[Slide.]
Chairman Chaffetz. OMB has engaged in the cyber sprint. It
is one of, I believe, only four agencies in all of Federal
Government where they scored a negative 14 percent, negative 14
percent. You can put down that slide. We can provide that
information. It is very hard to read in that group.
Chairman Chaffetz. But one of four institutions where it
actually scored negative on assessment of, say, dual
authentication. In fact, the inspector general went in and
looked at the Department of Education's IT operations, and the
report finds ``the department-wide information systems continue
to be vulnerable to security threats.'' The inspector general
made 16 findings, 6 of which are repeat findings. The inspector
general made a total of 26 recommendations, 10 of which are
repeat recommendations.
So how big is the vulnerability? We talked about it in
terms of dollars. Americans need to know that the Department of
Education holds roughly 139 million Social Security numbers in
the Central Processing System. But let's also remember that 139
million Social Security numbers isn't necessarily all of them
because it does not include all the systems. That is just the
Central Processing System. It does not include information for
parents who submitted information but whose children did not
get aid. If your child applies for aid, you are going to have
perhaps your mother's information, perhaps your father's
information in there as well. That is also in the system and
potentially very vulnerable.
The Central Processing System processes Federal aid
applications at roughly 22 million of them per year. We have
been talking a lot about the vulnerability of the Office of
Personnel Management, OPM, understanding the vulnerability
where we believe it is 22 million. The vulnerability at the
Department of Education, we are talking about a trillion
dollars but we are also talking about over 130 million
Americans.
The Department has 184 information systems, 184. This is
just the Department of Education. One hundred and twenty are
run by contractors, 29 are valued by OMB as high assets. But
one of the concerns that we have here is that the inspector
general also looked at what's called the COD, the Common
Origination and Disbursement system. It is deemed as a major
system. It is what is actually the system used to disburse
Federal student aid to students and borrowers. This year alone
there was roughly $109 billion in direct loans and $31 billion
in Pells disbursed through the COD.
One of the fundamental problems that we have had here is
access to that information and allowing the inspector general
to be able to go in and peak at the system, test and verify it.
But this is also a problem.
Another key system is the National Student Loan database,
which houses significant borrower information. It is called the
NSLDS, the National Student Loan database, has 97,000 accounts.
This is the people that have access to student loans. These are
the schools, the contractors. That is a lot of people being
able to tap in and have access to this system.
But it is our understanding that only 5,000 of the 97,000
have actually undergone a background check, which again begs
the question about allowing access to information that could be
potentially vulnerable. It begs a lot of questions about
safety, security, and integrity of this system.
We are also going to hear--and we have a hearing today on
the Department of Education, but we also have hearings tomorrow
on the Department of Education. And part of what we are going
to hear tomorrow is that Department of Education was
potentially responsible for roughly $4 billion in improper
payments, $4 billion.
So we go home, we talk to our constituents about roads,
bridges, infrastructure, about getting more money in the
classroom. Utah has the lowest, lowest in the Nation. We are
not proud of it, lowest spending per pupil in the Nation, and
yet the Department of Education sends out $4 billion in
improper payments. You know what a difference that would make
in my classroom where we have got way too many kids in the
classroom?
I am just telling you, it has become a monster, an absolute
monster. We don't know who is in there. We don't know what they
are doing. We know there are improper payments. And the
inspector general, the person we trust the most to go in there
and take a look at it can't even have access because there are
so many contractors who say no, we are not going to let you
look in there; no, you can't see it. And that is a problem.
That is a problem that has got to change.
Chairman Chaffetz. So I have gone well past my time. There
is lots to talk about over the next 2 days. This is going to be
a good, healthy hearing. I appreciate members' participation.
There are a lot of competing hearings. You are going to see
members coming and going as the second day back, 10:00 a.m.,
there are a lot of hearings going on. But this should be a good
hearing.
And I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Connolly, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panelists for being with us today.
I appreciate the opportunity to examine the information
technology and security programs and practices within the
Department of Education and the Federal Student Aid program.
This department might not seem like an obvious target of
cyber-related threats, but it is responsible for managing and
securing student loan portfolios of more than $1 trillion, as
you indicated, Mr. Chairman, along with the personal
information of more than 50 million students between Federal
loan borrowers, Pell Grant recipients, and other assistance
programs. And as you indicated, Mr. Chairman, that may be the
tip of the iceberg when one looks at over 130 million Social
Security numbers available to the Department.
In the wake of two massive data breaches disclosed by the
Office of Personnel Management earlier this year, which
collectively put at risk the personal information of more than
28 million current and former Federal employees and their
families, including Members of Congress like myself, every
Federal agency ought to be reassessing its own information
security protocols and reinforcing efforts to detect and deter
cyber attacks and other threats.
Perhaps this should be the first of a recurring set of
hearings to gauge successes and shortfalls across agencies when
it comes to protecting the vast amount of sensitive information
held by the Federal Government. I know Mr. Hurd and Mr. Meadows
and yourself, Mr. Chairman, intend to do that certainly with
the implementation of FITARA, but maybe we need to do it with
cybersecurity as well.
I think we would find most agencies in a similar situation
to this department, which has made some progress in fortifying
its information security defenses in recent years but continues
to struggle with recurring vulnerabilities.
In its latest report in the Department's efforts to
implement the Federal Information Security Modernization Act,
FISMA, the inspector general identified 16 findings with 26
recommendations, one-third of which are repeat recommendations,
Dr. Harris. Last year's audit found that the Department did not
perform adequate remediation of weaknesses identified in
previous OIG audit reports. That is very troubling in light of
the OPM breach.
While it appears the Department has beefed up its
remediation efforts, there is still obviously much work to be
done, and I am confident that unfortunately this is not the
only department with these kinds of problems.
This year's audit flagged weaknesses across four key areas:
continuous monitoring, configuration management, instant
response and reporting, and remote access management. For
example, the IG found user accounts from inside Federal
employees and outside Federal contractors with excessive or
unnecessary permissions and unauthorized access to data. In
fact, one of the Department's IT service contractors could not
verify to the IG's satisfaction that its other non-Federal
customers did not have unauthorized access to the Department's
data through a shared service, very troubling.
Even more troubling, the OIG said it was able not only to
gain access to the Department's network through a simulated
attack, but also it was able to launch other attacks on systems
connected to the Department while going completely undetected.
Another critical finding in the IG's report that applies to
the Department of Education, as well as other Federal agencies,
is that existing information security protocols, if implemented
and implemented consistently throughout the organization, could
and should be effective. That is the good news.
Nowhere is this more important than in cybersecurity and
privacy training for new employees. To be successful here, we
must bring about a wholesale cultural revolution so that
Federal agencies and the workforce understand the critical
importance of cyber safety, including basic elements of what
may be called cyber hygiene.
Along those same lines, we must hold agencies accountable
for implementation of the bipartisan FITARA legislation on
which we recently held a hearing and issued a preliminary
scorecard for agency progress. The chairman has already noted
that scorecard for this department. One of the key reforms of
that legislation, which I was pleased to co-write with the
former chairman of this committee, is enhancing CIO authorities
to increase transparency and improve risk management to address
all of these issues.
Unfortunately, the Department of Education received an
``F'' rating on this preliminary assessment based in large part
on its self-reporting of few IT investments, delivering
functionality, and their ability to produce savings. That is a
snapshot in time, and we are hoping that it is a work in
progress and that the next snapshot will show that progress. I
look forward to hearing from Mr. Harris about the steps he is
taking to address both FISMA and FITARA challenges.
The severity of recent data breaches in both public and
private sectors in recent years underscores the urgency for
Federal agencies and Congress to get serious about investing in
IT solutions that better secure our data and taking actions
that will be clear deterrents for would-be hackers. This is a
challenge that has confounded both Democratic and Republican
administrations.
The number of IT security incidents reported by Federal
agencies increased by 1,121 percent from the reporting period
in the last several years. Unfortunately, these attacks on our
private industries and government simply reflect the new normal
of the 21st century where nation states represent advanced and
persistent threats against one another, constantly seeking to
gain unauthorized access to sensitive and classified
information on each other's people, intellectual property, and
sensitive security information. The likes of North Korea,
China, Russia, and Iran are increasingly testing the waters and
becoming emboldened by the lack of reprisal or effective
deterrents.
The House earlier this year did pass two bills on a
bipartisan basis to encourage voluntary sharing of information
between the public and private sectors, but information-sharing
is not enough. We need to get serious about strengthening our
cyber workforce both within the Federal Government and among
our private sector partners. We also need to devise more
effective data breach notification policies so that victims are
aware of the fact they may have been compromised.
As my colleagues know, it has now been almost 4 months
since the breach on background records was announced, and
notifications are still being made.
So, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this opportunity to look at
what the Department of Education is doing right and what it can
improve upon with respect to securing data, but obviously, this
can't be the only hearing. Successfully detecting, defending,
and deterring cyber threats will take a concerted effort across
all agencies and among our private partners. And I thank you,
Mr. Chairman, because this hearing clearly sends a signal this
committee will take that charge seriously.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
And it is now my pleasure to recognize our witnesses. We
are pleased to welcome Mr. Greg Wilshusen, who currently serves
as the director of Information Security Issues at the
Government Accountability Office where he leads cybersecurity-
and privacy-related studies and audits of the Federal
Government and critical infrastructure.
We also are joined by Ms. Kathleen Tighe, who serves as the
inspector general of the United States Department of Education.
Ms. Tighe also chairs the Council of Inspectors General on
Integrity and Efficiency, and in 2011 was appointed by
President Obama to the Recovery, Accountability, and
Transparency Board and the Government Accountability and
Transparency Board.
And we also are joined by Dr. Danny Harris, who currently
serves as the chief information officer at the United States
Department of Education. Prior to his tenure as CIO, Dr. Harris
served as the chief financial officer at the Department of
Education where he started his career as a computer analyst.
We welcome you all.
Pursuant to committee rules, witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify, so if you will please rise and raise your
right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Please be seated, and let the
record reflect that the witnesses all answered in the
affirmative.
We would like some time to be set aside for some robust
discussion, so we would appreciate it if you would limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. And obviously your entire written
statement will be made part of the record.
We will start with Mr. Wilshusen, and he is now recognized
for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF GREG WILSHUSEN

Mr. Wilshusen. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Connolly,
and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify at today's hearing on information security at the
Department of Education.
As requested, my statement will address information
security of Federal agencies, including Education.
Before I begin, if I may, I would like to recognize several
members of my team who were instrumental in developing my
statement and performing the work underpinning it. Larry
Crosland, Assistant Director; and Rosanna Guerrero led this
body of work. Lee McCracken and Christopher Businsky also made
significant contributions.
Mr. Chairman, for 18 years GAO has designated Federal
information security to be a government-wide high-risk area. In
February we expanded this area to include protecting the
privacy of personally identifiable information. Recent security
incidents such as the OPM data breaches underscore the
vulnerability of Federal systems and highlight the evolving and
sophisticated nature of the cyber threats that confront Federal
security personnel on a daily basis.
Over the last several years, Federal agencies have reported
a sharp increase in the number of information security
incidents, which have risen from about 5,500 in fiscal year
2006 to over 67,000 in fiscal year 2014, an increase of
approximately 1,100 percent. Similarly, the number of incidents
involving personally identifiable information has more than
doubled since fiscal year 2009 to over 27,000 in fiscal year
2014.
Given the risks posed by cyber threats and the increasing
number of incidents, it is crucial that Federal agencies take
appropriate steps to secure their systems and information.
However, we and agency inspectors general have continued to
identify significant deficiencies in controls protecting
Federal information systems. For example, 19 of the 24 agencies
covered by the Chief Financial Officers Act reported a
significant deficiency or material weakness in information
security for financial reporting purposes in fiscal year 2014.
For its part, the Department of Education reported a
significant deficiency which is less severe than a material
weakness but important enough to merit attention by those
charged with governance.
As we previously reported for fiscal year 2014, nearly each
of the 24 agencies, including Education, reported weaknesses in
most of the five general control categories that we track. Like
21 other agencies, Education had weaknesses reported in
controls that are intended to prevent, limit, and detect
unauthorized or inappropriate access to computer networks and
sensitive information.
Similar to most agencies, Education also had weaknesses
reported in its configuration management of its computing
system, continuity of operation controls, and management of its
information security program. On the plus side, unlike 15 other
agencies, Education did not have weaknesses reported in its
controls to segregate incompatible duties to--among different
individuals.
For deficiencies in security controls and the efforts
required to mitigate them, inspectors general at 23 of the 24
agencies, including Education, declared information security as
a major management challenge for their agency in fiscal year
2014.
Over the past 6 years, GAO has made about 2,000
recommendations aimed at improving their information security
programs and controls. To date, agencies have implemented about
58 percent of them.
Recent actions initiated by the Federal chief information
officer such as the 30-day Cybersecurity Sprint and issuance of
a Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan indicate a new
level of attention by OMB to the security of Federal networks,
systems, and data at civilian agencies. Effective and timely
implementation of this strategy and the rest of GAO's
recommendations, as well as those made by agency IGs, will
bolster agencies' ability to protect their information systems
and information.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Connolly, members of the
committee, this concludes my opening statement. I'd be happy to
answer your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Tighe, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN S. TIGHE

Ms. Tighe. Good morning. Thank you, everyone, for inviting
me here today to discuss the work of the U.S. Department of
Education Office of Inspector General involving information
security and technology security.
The explosion of IT has revolutionized the way the world
does business, and the Department is no exception. Virtually
every department program relies heavily on information systems.
Evaluating whether those information systems are secure is a
top priority for my office.
As noted, the Department reports 184 information systems in
its inventory, more than 120 of which are operated by
contractors or subcontractors, some of which contain sensitive
financial information and PII pertaining to millions of
students, their parents, and others. These systems are accessed
by thousands of authorized individuals, including department
employees, contractor employees, and other third parties such
as college financial aid administrators.
Protecting its complex IT infrastructure from constantly
changing cyber threats is an enormous responsibility and
challenge for the Department and its Office of Federal Student
Aid. We examine the Department and FSA's information security
controls every year through our FISMA audit and in the annual
audits of the Department and FSA's financial statements. We
also have conducted other IT security-related work.
As detailed in our written testimony, our work has
identified deficiencies that impact the security of information
within the Department and contractor systems. For example,
since 2009, including this year, audits of the Department and
FSA's financial statements found persistent IT control
deficiencies in key financial systems, including personnel
security, access controls, and others.
Since 2011, our FISMA audits have identified weaknesses in
security control areas, including a number of repeat findings.
Although our 2015 FISMA audit found that the Department has
made progress and has taken steps to address repeat findings,
our work determined that more is needed.
This year's FISMA audit had two new features. First, the
OIGs were required to evaluate the effectiveness of their
agency's security program in the 10 designated FISMA areas for
the first time, effectiveness meaning the extent to which
security controls are implemented correctly, operate as
intended, and produce the desired outcome.
Second, the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity
and Efficiency in coordination with OMB and others rolled out
the first phase of its new FISMA evaluation metrics called the
maturity model, which summarizes the status of information
security programs and their maturity on a five-level scale with
five being the best. The first phase encompasses the FISMA
security area of continuous monitoring management.
Our 2015 FISMA audit found the Department was at level 1
for continuous monitoring management and was not generally
effective in three additional areas: configuration management,
incident response and reporting, and remote access management.
Notably, our penetration testing this year revealed a key
weakness regarding the Department's ability to detect
unauthorized activity inside its computer networks. We
determined that three areas were in fact generally effective--
risk management, security training, and contingency planning--
although some improvements were needed.
Finally, we found that two areas--plans of actions and
milestones and identity access management--would be effective
if implemented properly, although controls over access to FSA's
mainframe environment need improvement.
Although we did not make a separate conclusion on the
effectiveness of the Department's program to oversee contractor
systems, our review found an issue involving an FSA
subcontractor who restricted OIG access to information, which
left my office unable to complete a comprehensive vulnerability
assessment to determine whether the subcontractor's other
customers improperly accessed department data. This is
particularly problematic because, based on the information the
subcontractor did provide to us, we found accounts with
excessive permissions and unauthorized access.
The results of our FISMA and other work show that the
Department and FSA must work harder to address existing
weaknesses so they can be in a better position to identify and
stop increasingly sophisticated attacks on critical IT
infrastructures. My office is committed to helping them do so.
Thank you very much. I'm happy to answer questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Tighe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Dr. Harris, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANNY A. HARRIS

Mr. Harris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz, Representative Connolly, and members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today.
As the chief information officer for the Department of
Education, I am committed to ensuring we have an effective
cybersecurity program in place that includes strong controls
and continuously monitors--we continuously monitor and evaluate
our posture for opportunities to minimize risk and exposure as
we work to improve our current systems and processes.
While ED has made significant progress over the last
several years in strengthening the overall cybersecurity
program, we are not satisfied and we have solid plans to
continue to increase the security of ED's systems. Before I
dive into the specifics of our evolution, I wanted to provide
brief organizational context that will assist our discussion
today.
ED is organized under one department-level CIO, a role that
I have served in since 2008. The department-level CIO manages
all core IT functions, including but not limited to IT
operations, cybersecurity, enterprise architecture, and IT
investment management.
The Federal Student Aid, a performance-based organization,
also appoints a separate CIO, which reports to FSA's chief
operating officer. While the department-level CIO is ultimately
accountable for the IT portfolio, FSA maintains independent
operational responsibility for its IT portfolio. The FSA
enterprise includes major mission systems that support student
facing and public services. A few examples include the commonly
known Free Application for Federal Student Aid, or FAFSA, and
StudentAid.gov.
During my more than 7 years as the Department's CIO, I've
worked closely with leadership in FSA to ensure that IT
management integrates with the Department's IT systems. Since
fiscal year 2011 when the Department was noncompliant with all
10 areas of FISMA, steady and consistent progress has been
made.
For example, the Department established a continuing
monitoring program to assess the security state of information
systems in the Department's two distinct environments, one
called EDUCATE, which handles all of our infrastructure
services, and the other, FSA's Virtual Data Center.
OCIO and FSA adopted and implemented automated scanning and
detection tools to collect, analyze, and report on security-
related risks, issues, and threats to the Department's systems.
Other improvements include implementation of a network access
control, or NAC, which provides device-level authentication and
data loss prevention, or DLP, capabilities. This allows for
control of data flowing in and out of our environment.
Additionally, the OCIO moved from managed service provider
to an in-house security operations center, or what we call a
SOC, which allows for real-time threat detection and tracking.
As a result, it has gained better situational awareness of its
network environment and is able to respond more rapidly to
network events.
In July 2015 a two-factor authentication solution for
accessing email remotely from personally owned computers and
mobile devices replaced the previous user-name-and-password
authentication method. The new method meets strong
authentication mandates defined by OMB. We have reduced our
FISMA noncompliance from 10 metric areas to 5 and have solid
plans of resolving the remaining deficiencies.
Most recently, the Department actively worked to address
the focus areas of a cyber sprint by completing the review of
identification of our high-value assets, completing the
indicators of compromised network scan, mitigating critical
vulnerabilities, and reviewing and appropriately restricting
privileged user access. OCIO and FSA developed implementation
plans to increase the issuance of personal identity
verification or PIV cards to meet requirements of strong
authentication. The OCIO completed its implementation this
September, and FSA's completion is scheduled for this December.
OIG's objective for the 2015 FISMA audit changed from a
compliance-based auditing approach to a focus on general
effectiveness of the Department's IT security program and
practices. OIG found that while the Department has made
progress in strengthening its information security program with
5 of the 10 reporting metrics noted as generally
effectiveness--effective, weaknesses were still noted in four
of the five reporting metrics. Specifically, the IG determined
it was not generally effective in the areas of continuous
monitoring, configuration management, incident response and
reporting, and remote access.
In response, we are actively engaged in implementing
solutions to address these areas. For example, to meet the
requirements of OMB for implementing continuous monitoring by
fiscal year 2007, the Department has developed an information
security continuous monitoring implementation plan and is
actively engaged with DHS to obtain continuous monitoring
solutions as part of the task order 2 of the CDM program.
Configuration management activities for fiscal year 2016
include continuing the implementation of our NAC solution, to
restrict access for users and devices, strengthen the
Department's patch and vulnerability management program and
prioritize and update policies and procedures to meet Federal
configuration management requirements. For incident response
and reporting, the Department is utilizing additional
capabilities to identify and block attacks, for example, adding
web application firewalls.
And finally, to address weaknesses noted in remote access,
the Department continues to consolidate and standardize the
remote access solutions currently in use. This will allow for
increased consistency in the implementation of controls across
the remaining solutions. FSA continues their implementation of
two-factor authentication requirements to include two-factor
enablement on their remote connections.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and
provide you with specifics of our plans. I will be pleased to
answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
for being here.
Mr. Harris, I appreciate your testimony and the information
you have given. As has been mentioned, DMCS supports back-end
loan collection work for borrowers. As CIO rated DMCS as higher
risk on the Federal IT Dashboard since at least September 12,
2013, due to contracting problems so severe, a cure notice was
even issued. What do you consider when rating the risk of
investments on the dashboard? Review that for us.
Mr. Harris. Thank you for the question. Thank you for the
question.
There are a number of factors that I specifically look at
as the CIO to rate an investment. A lot of it has to do with
the project management of that investment. In other words, are
you meeting deadlines on deliverables? A lot of it has to do
simply with the size of the investment. More times than not, an
investment can be managed properly, but given the size of it,
we still consider it high-risk. In a lot of instances we look
at the kinds of data that that system actually maintains. And
so not in all instances will you see an investment that is
doing well that still won't be perceived as a high risk.
Mr. Walberg. Based on that, can you then explain why the
risk rating went from yellow to dark red in May of 2014, a
rating that changed shortly after the House Education and
Workforce Committee held a hearing on the problems with DMCS,
and why has the rating stayed red through May 2015?
Mr. Harris. Representative Walberg, I don't have that
information in my head right now, but that's certainly
information I'd love to provide you.
Mr. Walberg. It would be great if you could. Any time frame
that you could get that to us?
Mr. Harris. Certainly within the week, sir.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. I appreciate that.
On June 30, 2015, DMCS was re-categorized as low risk. Is
your testimony today here under oath that these contracting
issues are fully addressed?
Mr. Harris. Again, Representative Walberg, I'd have to look
at the details of that, and I will get that to you within the
week as well.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Pretty significant details. We would
appreciate that information.
Inspector General Tighe, are you confident that all the
problems are fixed and contracting with DMCS is okay based on
your work?
Ms. Tighe. Based on our work, no, I can't say with
confidence that everything in DMCS2 is fixed. I mean the
contractor Maximus, who is currently operating DMCS2, had a
number of problems it needed to fix when it--the contract began
a year or so ago. I don't think we can say at this point. We
have not audited specifically what Maximus has achieved, but I
would find it hard to believe that all the fixes are completed.
Mr. Walberg. Have you looked at some of the objectives and
parameters that they are using, and is there any confidence
that flows from that?
Ms. Tighe. We have not audited the dashboard specifically
and what goes into it and whether the analysis related to
DMCS2, as put on the dashboard, is correct or not. We've done a
number of reports related to DMCS2 dating back a few years. As
you probably know, it was a material weakness in the financial
statement a few years ago. It's gradually--they've tackled the
problems and are able to make DMCS2 functional, at least with
workarounds, but I--manual workarounds, but I think the new
contractor is supposed to be working on making it fully
functional.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize
the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
Dr. Harris, I have got to say to you it is not confidence-
building that you were asked questions by Mr. Walberg involving
reports that, you know, going from yellow to red now in a high-
risk category, and your answer is I have got to get back to
you, seemingly unaware of these reports. Is that your
testimony? You were not aware of these reports? This is news to
you?
Mr. Harris. No, Representative Connolly. It's not news to
me. There are--there's a large number of investments that I
review. I want to make sure that I provide you accurate
information.
Mr. Connolly. Well, it just seems to me if we are going to
have a hearing on this subject and you are the CIO, why not be
better prepared frankly coming before this committee to be able
to answer questions that certainly you could have, should have
anticipated.
So in that same pleasant vein, can you address the fact
that you got the lowest grade possible in the FITARA scorecard?
Understanding it is a work in progress and the intent here is
not to put a scarlet letter on one's back, but you really got
failing grades in all but one category, and that was a ``D''. I
wouldn't have gotten into graduate school with that kind of
scorecard. Please address it.
Mr. Harris. Absolutely, sir. I respectfully disagree with
the rating. First of all, I am not aware of the source of that
information, but what I can tell you, sir, is that we have a
solid plan in place, implementation plan in place for FITARA by
this December, and, quite frankly, in multiple meetings with
OMB they made it very clear to us that our plan was very solid.
In fact, many of the requirements of FITARA have already been
satisfied by the Department for many, many years. With the
exception of FSA, currently all IT operations come through the
CIO, specifically spending, for example.
And so I do disagree, respectfully disagree with that
report, and I don't know--I haven't found the source of that
information yet. But I think we're very solid on FITARA.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I go back to my opening statement. It
is not a confidence-building measure to have the CIO saying he
disagrees with the findings, and you think you are solid with
FITARA when you got an ``F''. What do you think you should have
gotten? The highest grade was a ``B'' and only two agencies got
that.
Mr. Harris. I actually think we should have gotten a ``C'',
sir, if I can give you an example of what I mean.
Mr. Connolly. Sure.
Mr. Harris. So take the first measure, for example, when
you look at data center consolidation. The Department
currently, to be real honest with you, we don't own any data
centers but our contractors do. But that's beside the point. We
still report. We have three data centers, three data centers.
And in fact, we will be reducing that to two in fiscal year
2016.
And so it startles me that I see an ``F'' in data centers
when we actually are probably the smallest in the Federal
space. And given the amount of data processing we do, I think
that's astounding.
Mr. Connolly. I will work with you on that because that
happens to be one of my bugaboos. And the Federal Government,
as you know, in our last hearing to my surprise we discovered
2,000 more data centers. So the fact that we have a Federal
agency testifying they only have three is music to our ears and
I will be glad to work with you, Dr. Harris, as I know this
committee will, in trying to clarify that ----
Mr. Harris. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly.--if that is the case. But let me just say
this. I exhort you to do what you can not only in clarifying
that grade, but more importantly, the spirit of this is
improvement because the object here is to make sure that we
don't have the kind of data breach we had at OPM at the
Department of Education. And you have a sacred trust in
protecting the data of 50 million Americans or more in your
care, and, you know, you want to be making the headline that
actually your data breach is twice that of, you know, some
other agency. And, I mean, that is not your only goal. We want
to see you be more efficient. We want you to see IT as a
resource and a transformative process.
Why are there, Dr. Harris, repeat recommendations coming
out of OIG that haven't been acted on by your office or by the
Secretary?
Mr. Harris. I concur with the IG, as well as the committee,
that repeat findings are always troublesome. There are two
reasons why we continue to have some repeat findings.
The first reason is the resolution to some of the findings
are quite complex, and they require multiple years to actually
resolve. An example, our implementation of our NAC and DLP for
the talent that we have, we've spent multiple years
implementing NAC and DLP. And in fact, we will finish our
implementation this year. But it has taken multiple years to
implement those very complex systems. And with the full
implementation this fiscal year, we will actually resolve 90
percent of the repeat findings.
Mr. Connolly. And, Ms. Tighe, you would corroborate that?
Ms. Tighe. We would corroborate that ----
Mr. Connolly. I can't hear you.
Ms. Tighe. Yes, it has been--we have observed that the NAC
solution has taken a long time to fully implement, and it does
impact some of our repeat findings.
Mr. Connolly. But you agree with Dr. Harris's statement
that by I think you said the end of the year about 90 percent
of that will be addressed?
Ms. Tighe. I don't know if I can agree with that. I mean we
haven't audited that conclusion specifically. We'll find out
when we go in next year's FISMA audit.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Connolly. Gladly.
Chairman Chaffetz. I want to help clarify this database
center issue. You have, best I can tell, 184 information
systems, correct?
Mr. Harris. That's correct, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you have 120 contractors that house
that information, correct?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. So how many data centers do you have?
Mr. Harris. We have three data centers that the Department
of Education maintains. We have--Federal Student Aid has ----
Chairman Chaffetz. How many data centers are there housing
this information that you are responsible for?
Mr. Harris. I don't know, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, there you go. There is the
problem. The answer is not three. You are at least 123, and you
don't know? Is a contractor not a database to you?
Mr. Harris. I'm sorry. Ask the question again, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. If a contractor is housing the
information, is that not a database?
Mr. Harris. We do not count that as a data center, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why not?
Mr. Harris. Based on OMB's guidance on how we count data
centers, we don't count that. It--we get that as a service and
so we don't count it as a data center.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you just contract that out; you leave
it alone? The inspector general can't look at it. You don't
even consider one of your databases?
Mr. Harris. We don't, sir.
Mr. Connolly. So ----
Chairman Chaffetz. There is the problem, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly.--Mr. Chairman, could I just ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure. Go ahead.
Mr. Connolly. So your philosophy is that a data is
compromised through a contractor, that is their problem, not
your problem?
Mr. Harris. That is not correct.
Mr. Connolly. Well, you can't have it both ways. Either you
take responsibility for a data center irrespective of where it
is located or you don't. It is under your charge. That is the
point I think the chairman is making.
Chairman Chaffetz. You are paying for it. We are paying for
it. Taxpayers are paying for it.
Mr. Connolly. I mean, fair enough, you don't count it. This
isn't a bureaucratic, you know, checklist process. What we are
concerned about it efficiency, reliability, and security, and
if you have got hundreds or thousands of data centers under the
care of contractors, okay, OMB may not count that as
technically a Department of Education data center, but it is
still in your charge. And our concern here isn't to consolidate
for the sake of consolidation so we feel better. It is because
we believe it is inefficient to have a multiplicity of data
centers. In fact, we know it is. And we need cooperation from
every agency, irrespective of where they are located.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. And as a concluding point, I hope we
could jointly ask that the GAO look at this issue of data
centers at the Department of Education.
Mr. Wilshusen. I would happy to work with your staff to do
that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member for his insightful questions as it relates to
these data centers. I have worked with him in a very close way,
in a bipartisan way, and so I find it just very interesting
that your testimony here this morning would be that you have
three data centers when the GAO would not agree with that. So
you are disagreeing with the GAO on their definition, is that
correct?
Mr. Harris. If GAO is suggesting that we have more--the
Department has more than three data centers, yes, sir, I am
disagreeing.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So here is my concern, Dr. Harris.
You know, the headline should read Department of Education Gets
an ``F''. Now, that is not good when we are talking about
education, but what is even more troubling is the definition of
a data center has been made very clear to me, and I am not a
CIO. GAO has been very clear on what they view a data center to
be, and under your definition, under your definition, everybody
could get rid of every single data center by subcontracting out
the service. Do you follow the logic there?
Mr. Harris. I do, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So are you suggesting that you will go to zero
and get an ``A'' on that dashboard just by subcontracting all
your data centers out to someone else?
Mr. Harris. No, sir, I do not.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Well, then explain the disconnect to me.
Why is your testimony three if indeed you are subcontracting
out those services?
Mr. Harris. So when OMB does a data call and they give us
guidance for how we report ----
Mr. Meadows. I am talking about GAO ----
Mr. Harris. I'm sorry.
Mr. Meadows.--all right, the dashboard. They are going to
be the ones that help define this with FITARA and everything
else, and we're going to have you back in here on a hearing. So
with their definition, how do you think you can consolidate
some of those data centers that are subcontracted right now? So
do you have 120 subcontracted data centers?
Mr. Harris. Sir, the only way to consolidate those is to
actually consolidate contracts.
Mr. Meadows. Exactly. Thank you, Dr. Harris. And so are you
going to consolidate contracts?
Mr. Harris. We're certainly willing to take a look at that.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Would I suggest that you do that,
because if not, you are going to continue to get an ``F'' when
it comes to data consolidation. The risk is spread across 120
subcontractors. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Harris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. And, Ms. Tighe, were you able to
infiltrate their system? I noticed the notes from the fiscal
year 2015 indicated that you were able to penetrate the EDUCATE
system. Were you able to do that?
Ms. Tighe. Yes. During our penetration testing for our--the
FISMA audit this year, we were able to gain access--full access
to the EDUCATE system, which is the general support system that
houses a number of the Department's systems, undetected by
either the contractor for EDUCATE--Dell--or the CIO's office.
Mr. Meadows. So you are saying Dr. Harris didn't know that
you were there?
Ms. Tighe. Correct.
Mr. Meadows. So, Dr. Harris, how do you explain--I mean are
you willing to stake your reputation and your job on the fact
that the system is secure?
Mr. Harris. I am today, sir, with full ----
Mr. Meadows. So if there is a breach from this point
forward, you are willing to resign?
Mr. Harris. No, sir, I did not say that.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Well, I said your reputation and your
job.
Mr. Harris. I certainly will stake my reputation, given
where we are today. Our full implementation of NAC and DLP, for
example ----
Mr. Meadows. So how confident on a scale of 1 to 10 with 10
being the highest are you that we will not have some kind of a
breach? Ms. Tighe was able to get in. I have got hackers I
could probably hire to get in there today. Wouldn't you agree
with that?
Mr. Harris. As of today, sir, I would rank it a 7.
Mr. Meadows. A 7?
Mr. Harris. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. So when ----
Mr. Harris. We're making great progress but I would rank it
a 7.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Now, is this a 7 on the same scale that
you just gave yourself a ``C'' where FITARA gave you--the
dashboard gave you an ``F''?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So this is the grading according to
Dr. Harris?
Mr. Harris. I just believe we've made a tremendous amount
of progress ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So what do we tell the 125 million
people that have their personal identification numbers
potentially at risk when you say that it was a 7, you have
staked your reputation on it, and yet we have a breach like we
had at OPM? Are you confident that we are not going to have
that?
Mr. Harris. I have strong confidence, sir, and may I tell
you why? Even prior to the cyber sprint where two-factor
authentication required level of assurance 4, long before that,
we had two-factor authentication at LOA 3, not as strong as 4
but ----
Mr. Meadows. But on two-factor authentication, you went
down--it has already been testified you went down. You went the
opposite way on our 30-day testing period on, you know, the
two-person authentication. So you may have had it but you
weren't using it.
Mr. Harris. Might I explain?
Mr. Meadows. Sure.
Mr. Harris. Interestingly enough, two things happened
during the cyber sprint. The definition of privileged users
changed, and the LOA, the level of assurance, changed. Take a
look at the privileged users. The definition went from a
technical, hardcore access to technical information to anyone
who had access to PII. As a result of that, we voluntarily
changed our number to significantly increase the number of
privileged users that we were reporting, which dropped our
percentage.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I appreciate the chair's
indulgence. Thank you for your answer. I will yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
There have been a number of significant data breaches over
the past year that have jeopardized the personal and financial
information of millions of Americans. Anthem, Premera Blue
Cross, the Office of Personnel Management, and most recently,
Experian all suffered breaches in which hackers were able to
steal the personal information of millions of individuals.
Mr. Harris, we are not here today talking about that kind
of massive data breach that has actually happened at the
Department of Education, correct?
Mr. Harris. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. The Department of Education systems do
contain large volumes of sensitive information, however,
including personnel records, financial information on students
and borrowers that would be attractive to cyber thieves.
Therefore, it is an important part of our oversight to ensure
that these systems are adequately protected.
Ms. Tighe, according to the 2015 audit your office issued
last Friday, ``the Department and FSA made progress in
strengthening its information security systems.'' What are the
areas where you have seen the Department make the most
progress?
Ms. Tighe. Some of the areas include--they've done a good
job on password controls for system users. They've done a
better job--a much better job of--once incidents are found, of
reporting them up through US-CERT and addressing those issues.
And another area, because we noted in our fiscal year 2014
report, our last year's FISMA report, that there were problems
in CIO's office with the fact that they would say they've
implemented corrective action, but we would go in the next year
and continue to find the same problem even though they said
that they did it. They've now implemented a much better process
for dealing with corrective action, and so we've been very
pleased to see them actually resolve some issues.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. And in your 2015 audit you did identify
several weaknesses in the Department's information security
system. With respect to those weaknesses, your report states,
``we found that the Department was not generally effective in
four security areas: continuous monitoring, configuration
management, incident response and reporting, and remote access
management.''
Mr. Harris, as the Department's CIO, do you agree with the
IG's assessment that the Department needs improvement in the
four security areas I just read?
Mr. Harris. Yes, Representative Maloney, I do concur.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Are there any areas in which you
disagree with the IG's assessment about the Department's
weaknesses in IT security, and if so, what are they?
Mr. Harris. No, Representative Maloney, I do not.
Mrs. Maloney. You do not. Okay. In addition to reporting on
weaknesses the IG found in the Department's IT security, the
report makes 26 recommendations for improving the effectiveness
of the information security programs. Mr. Harris, do you have a
timeline for implementing the IG's recommendations?
Mr. Harris. Our plan is to resolve all of those
recommendations in fiscal year 2016.
Mrs. Maloney. And when will you have all the
recommendations implemented, all of them by the end of 2016?
Mr. Harris. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Do you have all the tools you need to
make the improvements the IG recommended?
Mr. Harris. It is a very, very aggressive plan and
strategy, but that is surely our intent. If we have to move
resources from one place to another, it is certainly our intent
to do so.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I want to thank you. Given the large
amounts of sensitive and confidential information the
Department retains, it is imperative that it move as quickly as
possible to correct the weaknesses the IG has reported in her
report.
Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The inspector general found that the Department's remote
access management program was not generally effective because
it did not enforce its network timeout requirement or, more
significantly, use the two-factor authentication for two of its
network connections.
The failure of the Department to enforce the two-factor
authentication requirement for remote access users opens it up
to the same style of cyber attacks that were used against OPM.
Ms. Tighe, let me start with you if I could please. Can you
elaborate on how the Department's failure to enforce timeout
requirements in the two-factor process for this remote access
opens up the Department of Education to the same attacks
potentially that we saw used against the OPM?
Ms. Tighe. Well, yes. The problem that we identified this
year, we had gone out and asked for the inventory--and this was
to the Federal Student Aid organization--what your inventory of
remote access devices. They identified four. We did penetration
testing, found two more that they didn't even know about, and
those two did not have two-factor authentication.
So they have now, we understand--have put two-factor
authentication on those two additional remote access points,
but we still have, I believe a couple of outstanding
recommendations related to remote access. And if you do not
have proper controls obviously on remote access, then you do
open up the Department to attacks from the outside.
Mr. Walker. Sure. And I am sure you guys are taking the
precaution, you are looking at these two adjustments,
modifications, or things that we can include to prevent maybe
some more of the cyber attacks. Is that fair to say?
Ms. Tighe. Yes.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Dr. Harris, what is the Department of
Education--what are your actions and doing to solve this
problem? Are you guys doing anything specific to making sure--
you know, if I remember correctly, the OPM Director Archuleta
ended up having to resign because the breach was so intensive.
We don't want the same kind of thing here in the Department of
Education. Can you tell me what actions, steps you guys are
taking?
Mr. Harris. Absolutely, Representative Walker.
So for the two incidents you just mentioned, I concur with
the IG. We have since resolved both of those. The incident not
passing the buck, I don't have operational responsibility for,
but at the end of the day I am accountable and responsible for.
And so we have made sure that we continue to harden our two-
factor authentication.
And what's really critical is we are looking at least
privileged. It's not just a matter of managing your privileged
users but making sure they have the minimum privileges that
they need. So we're doing both of those.
Mr. Walker. Would you mind dialing it down just a little
bit more specific? When you say you are doing both of those, is
there a specific date of implementation? Or how exactly are you
doing these things to make sure that it is safer?
Mr. Harris. Yes. On the education side we've already
completed 100 percent two-factor authentication, LOA 4, the
strongest. And on the FSA side of the house, the--their
completion date is December of this year.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Thank you for your answers.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank each of you
for being here and testifying.
I would like to begin, Ms. Tighe, with you. According to
the 2015 audit, as has already been brought up a couple of
times here this morning, there were six repeat findings and 10
repeat recommendations. That, of course, I think, raises a red
flag for a lot of people as to why these things are not being
addressed. So from your perspective, what is the issue? Is it
an inability--are they unable to take care of these issues, or
is it a matter more of an unwillingness to do so?
Ms. Tighe. Well, I think there's a lot going on here.
There's no one particular reason. I mean some is, as Dr. Harris
testified, the fact that sometimes solutions are--can't happen
short term. They are sometimes long term. Sometimes we raise
issues on particular systems, and they may achieve a solution
to that particular problem, but what they don't then do is say,
hey, maybe we have the same problem on other systems. So we go
back in the next year because we kind of rotate through our
work looking at different systems because we can't look at 184
every year, right, so--and sometimes we get to the next year
and we see the same problem we identified on this system on
another system, which is what, you know, gets frustrating for
us.
Mr. Hice. So you would put the blame on this systems rather
than ----
Ms. Tighe. Well ----
Mr. Hice.--an inability or an unwillingness to address the
----
Ms. Tighe. Well, I think there needs to be a couple of
things. I think attention needs to be paid to our
recommendations and priority given to them. I think sometimes
long-term solutions can seem to happen--be longer than maybe
they need to be. And also I think that when we make a
recommendation pertaining to one system, it would be good to
step back and think--for the Department to step back and think,
hey, is this same problem happening on other systems.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Harris, it appears to me that we're utilizing outdated
technology, and I think you have acknowledged that as well. In
fact, it appears from what I've read there's 962 operating
systems that are no longer supported by vendors. That's
inexcusable. The vulnerabilities can't even be spoken of. I
mean we can't even fathom the kind of vulnerabilities when
you're utilizing technology that's not even supported any
longer, and yet you said you feel you'd give yourself a 7 out
of 10 that we're currently--how in the world can you give
yourself a 7 out of 10 when we're using technology that's not
even supported?
Mr. Harris. Representative Hice, I would concur with you
that it is kind of ridiculous that we're using this old
technology. The 7 that I give us is the remediation that we
have in place and the tools we have to actually protect those
outdated systems while we work hard to catch up. So on the one
hand you're absolutely right. There are vulnerabilities on that
side, but the remediation is on the side of the tools that we
have in place as we modernize.
Mr. Hice. Why is the Department using that old technology?
Mr. Harris. A lot of it has ----
Mr. Hice. Why doesn't it catch up with the times?
Mr. Harris. Sorry, sir. A lot of it has to do with the
system owners and the applications--application owner's ability
to keep up with the operating system. In some cases, you have
to make a decision do you shut down a mission-critical
application that provides services to the public, or do you
mitigate the risk? And more times than not we mitigate the risk
while we're trying to modernize.
Mr. Hice. All right. So how long is it going to take to
modernize?
Mr. Harris. I don't have an answer to that, sir, across the
entire platform, but I can tell you that we are working hard to
do that modernization.
Mr. Hice. All right. So we are going to continue to have
vulnerabilities for an indefinite period of time?
Mr. Harris. I think we will, sir. And I think what we have
to do is work hard to make sure that we have tools in place
that mitigates that risk.
Mr. Hice. Okay. ``Work hard'' sounds fine, Dr. Harris, but
what does that mean? When can we expect the system to be
secure? We have tens of millions of people whose lives and
personal information is at a potential high risk as it relates
to vulnerability, and your answer is we are going to work hard.
When is the vulnerability going to be removed?
Mr. Harris. And, Representative Hice, I would say that we
are reasonably secure now. I'm not suggesting that we're not
secure, but we do need to strengthen. That's very important.
I'm not going to suggest that we don't have a tremendous amount
of work to do. But I want--don't want the general public to
think that we are not secure.
Mr. Hice. There again, ``reasonably'' is not a very secure
answer. We have got a lot of people whose lives and personal
information is potentially hanging in the balance. And this is
an issue, Mr. Chairman, that hits every district in this
country. And my time is expired but I thank the chairman for
this and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I will now
recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms. Kelly, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Tighe, your office identified key weaknesses in the
ability of the Department and its contractor Dell to detect and
prevent unauthorized access. Can you tell us what your testers
were able to do during the vulnerability assessment testing of
some of the Department's IT environments?
Ms. Tighe. Yes. We were able to--during the penetration
testing, we were able to gain access--or full access to the
complete EDUCATE environment. And EDUCATE, you have to
understand, is a--sort of a general support system that houses
a number of the Department's systems. So we were able to
completely access that and went undetected by either the
Department's contractor or the Department.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. The FISMA audit report explains that
the Department's defenses did not detect or terminate the
unauthorized access and remained on the network for hours. What
kind of risks are the Department's systems exposed to by these
weaknesses in detection and prevention of unauthorized access?
Ms. Tighe. Well, I think the risks would certainly be
access to the Department's data. We could have really done
anything in there. So the fact that we were able to gain access
means that outsiders who have bad intentions are able also to
come back through the same way we did and gain access. And that
really puts the Department systems and data and employees and
everybody who deals with--is involved in our system is at risk.
Ms. Kelly. All right. Mr. Wilshusen, do you know whether
this kind of undetected, unauthorized access is characteristic
of some of the major data breaches that have occurred in the
public and private sectors?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, I think it is actually. Indeed, just
for example like with the OPM breach, that occurred for a
number of months before it was actually detected. And so I
think that's often one of the hallmarks of these very
successful attacks is that they do go undetected. They exploit
known vulnerabilities and systems and then go undetected.
Ms. Kelly. The OIG recommended that the Department ensures
its intrusion detection and prevention system and technical
security architecture are property configured to restrict and
eliminate unauthorized access. Mr. Harris, the Department
concurs with this recommendation, correct?
Mr. Harris. Yes, we do.
Ms. Kelly. What is the status of the Department's plan,
corrective actions, and when do you expect them to be
completed?
Mr. Harris. So I'm pleased to announce that, with the
implementation of our--a NAC system, it allows us to do three
things. It allows us to look at all--look and touch all of our
assets, it allows us to see the configuration on those assets,
and it allows us to manage the vulnerability on those assets.
Fiscal year 2016 we plan for a full implementation. It is in
place now and we can monitor. The full implementation will
allow us to actually block anonymous behavior.
Ms. Kelly. Is this fiscal year 2016 January or March?
Around when in fiscal year 2016?
Mr. Harris. The third quarter is what we're looking at.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you. Ms. Tighe, you said in your
testimony that the Department was effecting in ensuring proper
incident response and reporting once incidents were reported.
Can you describe what steps the Department has taken to ensure
it effectively responds to incidents?
Ms. Tighe. Yes, they have--and I would defer to Dr. Harris
on this if he has more to add--but I know that they have a SOC,
a security operation center, up and running, and that's given
them capabilities they never had before in terms of incident
reporting and response.
Ms. Kelly. Dr. Harris, did you want to add anything?
Mr. Harris. Yes, I would. We have an incident response
process that follows both OMB and NIST guidelines, and we also
have a very strong and well-documented PIRT process, basically
a privacy incidence response team that goes into action when we
have breaches.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. And you discussed in your testimony the
role of the Department of Homeland Security has in helping the
Department identify risks. Can you expand upon that? How do
those programs help supplement your efforts?
Mr. Harris. Sure. I talk about it in very--I'm very
enthusiastic about the progress the Department has made over
the last 3 years. A lot of it has to do with the shared
services that DHS provides to us, specifically with CDM task
order 2 where we will expand our sensors, we will also lower
the cost of licensing, and more than anything else, we will
have access to dashboards that actually allow us in real time
to look at vulnerabilities. That's what we're missing right
now.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Well, thank you, and I look forward to
seeing further progress from all agencies in detecting and
responding to incidents. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I will now recognize the chairman of the Subcommittee on IT
for our Oversight and Government Reform Committee, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start off with a simple question, and this is to
you, Ms. Tighe. When you conduct your penetration testing or
technical vulnerability assessment, who decides when that
happens? Can the Department come and say, listen, this is a
tool we would like to use? Can you do this? Or is this
something that you do independently?
Ms. Tighe. We do it independently.
Mr. Hurd. And is that the same across most agencies?
Ms. Tighe. I think that's the same with most IGs who do
penetration testing. I'm not sure everybody does.
Mr. Hurd. And how often do you plan on doing penetration
testing?
Ms. Tighe. We do it every year as part of our FISMA audit.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. Because that is an industry best practice,
and it is a good thing that this is going on. The information
you glean is important for Dr. Harris and his team.
Dr. Harris, the remaining of my questions are for you. And
I am going to read your statements. And I usually like to dig
into the weeds at these hearings, but there is a lot of big-
rock strategic issues that have come out here today. In your
testimony you say ``the department-level CIO''--that is you--
``manages all core IT functions, including but not limited to
IT operations, cybersecurity, enterprise architecture, and IT
investment management.'' You further add that ``the Office of
Federal Student Aid (FSA) appoints a separate CIO.''
Now, you are saying that you are responsible for all IT
department activities but you don't have control over all the
activities within the Department of Education. Would that be a
true statement?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, Representative Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Does that make sense?
Mr. Harris. I believe that FITARA will strengthen my
ability and authority to actually provide more guidance and
oversight, and if you want to use the word control over
operations. Right now, that is a challenge.
Mr. Hurd. So there are two people missing here today to be
frank. Number one is the agency head, right? And I know Arne
Duncan has announced his retirement and John King will be
taking over as acting duties and I think through the rest of
this administration because ultimately, the buck stops there.
But we are also missing the CIO of FSA participating in this
conversation because it doesn't make any sense.
And we go back to the issue of data centers. Department of
Education is ultimately responsible for all the data centers
that hold information for these kids that are applying for
Federal aid. So saying that we have three is being
disingenuous, right? And my question is, you know, when we have
these issues, who is remediating these vulnerabilities,
especially when it comes to FSA? Are you responsible for it? Is
the CIO of FSA responsible for it? Who is ultimately supposed
to be held accountable for these issues?
And you talk about NAC's implementation. Is this going to
include all the subcontractors or is this just Department of
Education employees that have that on their badge, not
necessarily all the subcontractors that work for you?
Mr. Harris. Currently, it's just the Department of
Education, the latter.
Mr. Hurd. Does that make sense?
Mr. Harris. No, sir, it does not.
Mr. Hurd. So IG reports show that since 2011 there was no
mechanism to restrict the use of unauthorized devices on the
network. Having the ability to find devices on your network,
does it really take 4 years to figure that out?
Mr. Harris. With the talent we had, sir, it took us that
long ----
Mr. Hurd. So you are saying ----
Mr. Harris.--and in the last 3 years we've made a
tremendous amount of progress.
Mr. Hurd. Well, that is not very encouraging. I am hoping
we have increased the talent in order to do that because, Ms.
Tighe, would you have any opinions on how long it would take to
implement one of these systems?
Ms. Tighe. Well, I would hope it would be done sooner but
----
Mr. Hurd. Well, I know ----
Ms. Tighe.--I--you know, but I would point out that this
year's report also highlighted this again as an issue. So to
the extent that ----
Mr. Hurd. Great. So, Mr. Harris, how many users do you have
in the Department of Education?
Mr. Harris. Approximately 6,000, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. And does that include subcontractors?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Hurd. So 6,000, just 6,000?
Mr. Harris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Six thousand is not a lot. All right. And I would
hope you would share with your CIOs and agency heads--
generally, when I ask questions at these hearings, I know the
answer because I used to do this for a living, right? And to
implement controls on 6,000 users should not take 4 years. I
literally thought you were going to say 60,000 or 600,000
users, right? This is completely unacceptable. So who are some
of the vendors--so there are 120 contractors? Is that right,
Chairman? Or do you know the answer? How many other
subcontractors do you have?
Mr. Harris. Now, the 6,000 includes just the individuals
using the Department's data centers. It does not include the
users or the subcontracts outside of the VDC and the ----
Mr. Hurd. So why are these subcontractors not under your
purview in your responsibility, in your operational control?
Mr. Harris. Well, because, for the most part, FSA has
contractual arrangements with them. They don't operate their
data centers.
Mr. Hurd. So why does FSA not--so does Arne Duncan have
control over FSA? Does Arne Duncan tell FSA do this and FSA
does that?
Mr. Harris. I can't answer that, sir. I'd like to get back
to you ----
Mr. Hurd. So the CIO of FSA, can you tell that person what
to do?
Mr. Harris. I cannot, sir. That person reports to the COO
of FSA. I provide ----
Mr. Hurd. And who does ----
Mr. Harris.--direction and guidance.
Mr. Hurd. And do you know who the COO of FSA reports to?
Mr. Harris. Yes, the Secretary.
Mr. Hurd. Interesting. I don't even know where to continue.
I see my time has expired. But this is the kind of issue that
the American people are completely frustrated with. You know,
this is not a bureaucratic exercise, as my friend from Virginia
pointed out. And saying that Department of Education has a
certain level--but you are responsible for all these others,
and if you don't have the authority or the power to do that,
then you know what, we are here to give you that authority
because we want to hold you accountable. But we want to make
sure you have all the tools at your disposal to do these
things. But it is unacceptable to say 6,000 people. I could
probably do that over the weekend. This is completely
unacceptable. And I look forward to the hearing tomorrow.
I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, for going over my time. I yield
back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I now recognize myself. To
the gentleman from Texas, I would say that I believe we have
just in the National Student Loan database 97,000 accounts,
97,000, a little higher than the 6,000. I think you have struck
the heart of what is the problem because--one of the problems.
Under the E-Government Act of 2002 and certainly under
FITARA, you are supposed to not only have the responsibility
but the authority, and I think the gentleman is right.
Secretary Duncan needs to answer this.
And my question, how often do you meet with Secretary
Duncan?
Mr. Harris. On a monthly basis, sir, and ----
Chairman Chaffetz. So ----
Mr. Harris.--I meet with the deputy secretary weekly.
Chairman Chaffetz. So to the gentleman from Texas, I would
suggest here they are managing more than $1 trillion in assets,
liability for the United States. It is basically the size of
Citibank, and the CIO meets with the Secretary maybe 12 times a
year, right, once a month?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. I mean that is absolutely stunning. And
looking at the vulnerability of almost half of the population
of the United States of America has their personal information
sitting in this database, which is not secure by any standard,
any scorecard. It is not secure. A trillion dollars, half of
all America, and the Secretary of Education, once a month. How
long do you meet with him for when you have it? When is the
last meeting you had with him?
Mr. Harris. About 3 weeks ago, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. How long did you meet with him?
Mr. Harris. For an hour-and-a-half.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes. Is it a budget problem? What is
your budget? How much money do you have?
Mr. Harris. We spend approximately $550 million a year, and
about $32 million of that is for IT security.
Chairman Chaffetz. How much is for IT security?
Mr. Harris. Thirty-two million.
Chairman Chaffetz. But ----
Mr. Harris. However, there's a large percentage of embedded
costs for our contractors that would significantly increase
that number ----
Chairman Chaffetz. And we will have to work this out with
you. My understanding is you spend $683 million on IT at the
Department of Education, but do you need more money or do you
have enough money?
Mr. Harris. Certainly, we could always use more.
Chairman Chaffetz. Everybody always says that.
Mr. Harris. Sir ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Everybody always says that, okay?
Mr. Harris. Certainly.
Chairman Chaffetz. So ----
Mr. Harris. But I would say, sir, that ----
Mr. Connolly. For God's sake ----
Mr. Harris.--cybersecurity talent ----
Mr. Connolly.--say yes, Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. I would say that my biggest challenge is
cybersecurity talent even more than money. If you told me to
take a choice between the first or the second, I would say you
can give me all the money in the world but if the Federal space
can't obtain and retain the cyber talent, we are in big
trouble.
Chairman Chaffetz. No, I absolutely agree with you, and it
is something I think this committee needs to look at is the pay
authority to perhaps even pay the IT specialists more in such a
critical vulnerable situation and the ability in the
marketplace to actually attract and retain people. I would
agree with you.
Does the Department implement the Department of Homeland
Security Continuous Diagnostic and Mitigation system, and do
you have the EINSTEIN intrusion detection program thoroughly
and completely integrated into all of your IT systems?
Mr. Harris. We do, sir. In fact, the Department of
Education was one of the first to implement EINSTEIN 1,
EINSTEIN 2. We're now working with DHS to implement EINSTEIN 3.
And, yes, we do participate in CDM task order 2 specifically.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does that include the contractors and
subcontractors or ----
Mr. Harris. It includes those that run our data center. But
it doesn't include some of the partners that FSA has.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So who doesn't it include?
Mr. Harris. It doesn't include, again, some of the 100 ----
Chairman Chaffetz. So if you have 120 contractors ----
Mr. Harris. It doesn't include some of them. I would have
to get you specific information on, okay, if each one is ----
Chairman Chaffetz. If you can follow up with us ----
Mr. Harris. Absolutely, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz.--and the IG and GAO, that would be
great.
Mr. Harris, have you had an intrusion?
Mr. Harris. I'm sorry, sir. Say that again.
Chairman Chaffetz. Have you had an intrusion? Have you had
a data breach?
Mr. Harris. We have had both incidents and data breaches.
Specifically, in 2015 we had 91 breaches and we had 200--about
250 incidents. We have not in the history of the Department--to
my knowledge we have not had a major incident. And so all of
them fall into the minor category.
And if I might give you an example of one?
Chairman Chaffetz. What was the most significant one?
Mr. Harris. I would say, sir, that the most significant one
was in 2012 when, in the FAFSA system for a matter of minutes
as a result of a--an application glitch, users were able to see
other users' PII. And again, it was several minutes, but that's
pretty critical.
Chairman Chaffetz. Did you report that to the inspector
general?
Mr. Harris. I'm sure we did, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. In the past year are you aware of any
foreign, national, state, or other adversary penetrating the
network? Did any of those data breaches and incidents happen in
the last year?
Mr. Harris. Not in the last year, sir, though we constantly
are threatened by them, but no breaches to my knowledge.
Chairman Chaffetz. Not in the last year?
Mr. Harris. That is correct, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. How many onsite IT security reviews has
the Department conducted to date of the contractors that you
engage with?
Mr. Harris. Our reviews of our contractor are actually
constant. We have a security operations center, and we have an
IV&V contractor that are working daily to review everything
that our contractor is doing.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ms. Tighe, what is your view of that?
Ms. Tighe. I'm aware ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry, your microphone.
Ms. Tighe. I'm aware that the Department is taking those
actions. Some parts--I would also point out that some parts of
the Department and systems the Department deals with have--and
it's external business partners like the Title IV services do
get IT general controls reviews every year because they feed
into the financial statement audits. So we do have some level
of assurance outside of the Department that some--that there is
some IT reviews being done of the Department systems.
Chairman Chaffetz. All right. Last questions before I
recognize Mr. Palmer here, departmental policy requires that
all employees and contractors who have access to Privacy Act
data have a minimum of a 5c public trust background check, but
it is also my understanding that roughly less than 5,000 of the
people who have access have actually had such a background
check, which leaves us in the math roughly 85,000 individuals
who have had no background check have access to personal
information in your databases. Would you disagree with any of
those numbers? And what are you doing about it?
Mr. Harris. I would not disagree with that information,
sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. So if it is departmental policy to have
background checks for people who have--remember, we are talking
about mostly--these are student loans, right? We are talking
about students and kids here. So when you are talking about
access to private information and it is departmental policy to
have a background check, and yet 85,000 of them don't have
background check, what are you doing to solve that?
Mr. Harris. Sir, I don't believe that includes the
individuals who have access to their own information. So the
85,000 you mention aren't system operators who are actually
looking at PII. For example, if we have a student looking at
their own information, they do not need a 5c clearance.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, no, that number is in the tens of
millions of people if not hundreds of millions of people. If
they are looking at their own information, I am not counting
that. I am talking about people who have access into the system
to go look and fish around. And, Ms. Tighe, can you provide
more information about that?
Ms. Tighe. Well, I believe that there are--with access to
the National Student Loan database, just taking that database,
that there are--our numbers that there are about 97,000
accounts. This is not--these are non-student accounts. Fifty-
five thousands of those, we should all realize, are at
institutions of higher education because all the financial aid
officers in every college and university or other school that
receives Title IV funding has to access our databases. And I
think that is the biggest area where you're not seeing the
background investigations unless that particular college or
university requires it themselves. But there are other people
who access who have accounts. They're the Title IV servicers,
the debt collection entities. There's 22 of those and other
assorted people who touch our systems.
Chairman Chaffetz. And we know how integrity-failed the
debt collection services people are, so, you know, no need for
a background check there. That is departmental policy. I need
you to get back to us as to what you are doing to rectify that.
It is, I think, a huge vulnerability because these are people
that are authorized. They have the authentication to get in
there, look around, see the personal identifiable information
and yet have not had the required background check.
Mr. Harris. I will do that, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I have gone well past my
time.
I will recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on the question the chairman raised,
Dr. Harris, about EINSTEIN. During the IG penetration testing
of EDUCATE, why didn't you detect they were on your servers?
Mr. Harris. Currently, as I indicated, we have implemented
NAC. The full implementation, however, is not complete, and we
plan to complete that this fiscal year.
Mr. Palmer. So you are saying ----
Mr. Harris. And I do believe we will be able to see that
activity then.
Mr. Palmer. Now, I am asking why you didn't detect it when
they were on your servers at the time they were doing the
penetration testing.
Mr. Harris. We didn't have the tools completely configured.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. What tools are you missing?
Mr. Harris. We're not missing any. We just don't have them
completely configured. For example, NAC has been implemented
but there's a lot of configure work--configuration work that
needs to be done for full implementation.
Mr. Palmer. So you have the tools but you are not able to
apply them?
Mr. Harris. We haven't finished the--we haven't completed
the configuration of it ----
Mr. Palmer. How ----
Mr. Harris.--but we plan to do that this fiscal year.
Mr. Palmer. You should have it done by the end of this
fiscal year or the calendar year?
Mr. Harris. By the fiscal year, sir.
Mr. Palmer. So they will be complete by September 30 of
'16?
Mr. Harris. Sir, I'm hoping to complete them by the end of
the third quarter, not September 30.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. So that would be ----
Mr. Harris. And we're aggressively working to actually do
it sooner than that.
Mr. Palmer. All right. They will be finished by the end of
June?
Mr. Harris. That is correct.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Harris, according to the
Federal IT Dashboard, DOED central processing system carries
out data matching with at least five different agencies and
interfaces with DOED's Participation Management, Common
Origination system, and Virtual Data Center. What is the nature
of this understanding between agencies?
Mr. Harris. Beyond the sharing of data, that really is the
totality of that understanding. We share sensitive data. We
share important data with which to do better data processing on
both sides.
Mr. Palmer. Well, CPS is not PIV-enabled, and if it were to
be breached, an adversary would have access to sensitive
personally identifiable information and data that multiple
agencies rely on. Can you tell me what security measures are in
place to protect the CPS system?
Mr. Harris. I apologize, sir. I don't have operational
oversight of that system and have limited knowledge, but I can
certainly get you more information on that.
Mr. Palmer. Who has that information?
Mr. Harris. The Federal Student Aid CIO.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. One last question, do you allow employees
to use your server to access their personal email?
Mr. Harris. Currently, we do, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Is that not of concern to you on that ----
Mr. Harris. It--I'm sorry, sir.
Mr. Palmer. Well, we have had other hearings on this when
we were dealing with the breach at OPM, and it turns out that
the immigration, ICE, had sent out a memo to their employees
that they could no longer use the Federal server because they
had multiple breaches, and it turns out that there was a union
grievance filed and they weren't able to deny their employees
access to their server. And it appears that that is where one
of the breaches occurred. I just wonder, as the chairman points
out, the enormous number of records that could be accessed, if
you are taking any measures to prevent that.
Mr. Harris. It's an interesting question, Representative
Palmer, and it's one that does concern me. We actually met with
OMB and DHS to talk about the risk level of allowing that kind
of access. I think the CIO counsel is going to spend more time
talking about it, but it is something that concerns me. And
you're right, it is a threat factor.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield the balance of
my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman. I will now
recognize Mr. Clay of Missouri for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Wilshusen, the high-risk report GAO released
earlier this year noted challenges that both the Federal and
private sector face when it comes to securing personally
identifiable information. In particular, the 2015 high-risk
report pointed to the data breaches at Home Depot and Target as
examples of high-profile breaches in the commercial sector. So
is it fair to say when it comes to the subject of
cybersecurity, GAO has paid attention to what has been
occurring in the private sector?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, it is insofar as these types of
incidents occur and demonstrate that it isn't strictly--or
cybersecurity and these intrusions is not strictly a government
phenomenon.
Mr. Clay. Now, I understand that when GAO conducted its
most recent FISMA report on Federal agencies, it wasn't tasked
with evaluating the private sector. I would like to ask you
some questions about challenges facing the private sector based
on your prior work. Are the weaknesses in cybersecurity you are
aware of in the private sector consistent with what GAO found
with respect to Federal agencies?
Mr. Wilshusen. Our review of information security controls
at private sector organizations is somewhat limited primarily
to the work that we do in evaluating the security controls of
our contractors that support the Federal Government. And what
we have found is that those contractors also have security
vulnerabilities that are consistent with those that we find on
agency-operated systems.
Mr. Clay. So do you think the Federal Government is ahead
of the private sector when it comes to cybersecurity?
Mr. Wilshusen. I don't know if I could say that. One thing
that I could say is that at least the Federal Government, and
particularly in respect to the types of information security
policies and guidance that are promulgated by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology is among the best and are
sometimes used by private sector organizations.
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Wilshusen. So we do a pretty good job in identifying
policies and procedures. Where we're challenged is implementing
them in our information systems controls environments over time
throughout the entire enterprise.
Mr. Clay. Ms. Tighe, would you have anything to add?
Ms. Tighe. No. I would agree that NIST provides very
significant and complete guidelines for IT--in the area of IT
security. The challenge is getting them implemented.
Mr. Clay. Thank you. And, Dr. Harris, anything additional?
Mr. Harris. I would absolutely concur. In fact, as we work
with some of our private sector partners, we see that they
don't use standards as stringent as those that NIST provides.
Mr. Clay. Thank you all. Thank all of you for your
responses. May I yield the balance of my time to the ranking
member?
Mr. Connolly. I thank my colleague. By the way, I will
throw you a lifeline, Dr. Harris. We have talked a lot of about
FSA, but it was Congress acting on the recommendations of a
previous administration that actually made FSA a PBO, a
performance-based organization, and even referred to it as--FSA
is generally siloed from the rest of the Department of
Education, although its chief operating officer reports to the
Secretary of Education, as Dr. Harris testified.
So it is Congress in legislation that we passed in 1997 on
a bipartisan basis, our former colleagues Howard ``Buck''
McKeon and Dan Kildee who actually authored H.R. 2536 that did
that. So we now need, because of the passage of FITARA, frankly
to square those two. And I think the current Congress would
favor the FITARA approach and maybe look a little askance at
siloing anything in light of technology progressing and the
threat we are facing.
If the chair would just indulge me one question and then I
am done ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure. Yes.
Mr. Connolly.--if Mr. Mulvaney would--okay. In listening to
this hearing, I am not sure we are reassured. We dispute the
``F'' we get in FITARA. We are not fully aware of these other
rankings that move us to high risk or yellow to red. Systems
weren't quite in place when the penetration exercise, according
to Ms. Tighe, ``we could have gone anywhere'' in that exercise,
very alarming. We only have three data centers but we don't
know how many our contractors have and we are not really
entirely responsible for that even though they are in
possession of data that could be compromised.
Certainly, take the point, Dr. Harris, that we need to bulk
up on the talent pool as much as we do resources, but we need
both. We need both. There is no question about it.
But at the end of the day, Dr. Harris testified with
respect to the question of vulnerability, ``we are reasonably
secure now. I don't want anyone to think otherwise.'' I have
got to challenge that and I want you, Ms. Tighe, and you, Mr.
Wilshusen, to respond to that. My question is should Americans
be concerned that the kind of breach that occurred at OPM
frankly could occur with respect to at least 50 million
Americans whose data is in the hands of the Department of
Education? I am not leaving this hearing feeling that we are
reasonably secure now. Professionally, is that your judgment?
Do you share Dr. Harris's confidence that we are reasonably
secure now?
Ms. Tighe. I am still concerned about the potential for
breaches in the Department. I think that the issues we pointed
to in our current FISMA report, particularly under the areas of
configuration management and under incident detection are very
significant, and they really point to the potential for
significant vulnerabilities. There was also the issue on the
mainframe in Georgia operated by a subcontractor that we were
not even able to properly evaluate. And we found privileged
users with permissions not appropriate. That stuff worries me,
and I don't feel, you know, as rosy about the picture as Dr.
Harris. With all that said, I know the Department is working on
these things.
Mr. Wilshusen. I would defer to Ms. Tighe in her assessment
but also just comment on the types of weaknesses that she and
her team identified at Education as being those types of
vulnerabilities that can be exploited and can be used to gain
access and even, you know, potentially hide an intruder's
presence on a network.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair and I thank Mr. Mulvaney
for his courtesy.
Chairman Chaffetz. I will now recognize the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. I thank both the gentleman. And I have just
got a couple of mopping-up questions here at the end so in no
particular order.
Mr. Harris, you mentioned a couple different times talent,
which is something we don't hear much in here. Ordinarily,
people come in and complain they don't have enough money. I
have not heard that one before. Let me ask you this. Do you not
have access--my understanding was that in other areas of the
Federal Government we have some really, really good people
working on IT. Do you not have access to their expertise and
their subcontractors and their experiences?
Mr. Harris. Thank you so much for the question,
Representative Mulvaney.
I'm so glad you raised it because you do have talent across
the Federal space, in, fact one of the things I am hoping that
this body will help with is actually centralizing some of that
talent so a small agency like the Department of Education can
get more help. But what the Federal--what the private space is
paying we simply can't match that, and in a lot of instances,
folks don't see the Department of Education as an exciting
cyber space to go to. So we're very challenged when we compete
with other Federal agencies, as well as the private space. So
we are really hurting from that perspective.
Mr. Mulvaney. And that is sort of what worries me is that
because you are not exciting, people actually might be
attracted to you in terms of being a target.
Ms. Tighe, I come back to something you said earlier
about--and I am going to butcher the numbers--97-odd-thousand
users, and you made an excellent point, which is that there is
someone in the registrar's office at G.W. who has access to
this system. Let me ask you this. If I am sitting there and I
am at G.W. and I am the, you know, little part-time student who
comes in to work on the FAFSA stuff, what do I need in order to
get Mr. Chaffetz's student loan information?
Ms. Tighe. Well, you need his--most financial aid
administrators--well, you probably need him to either have gone
to G.W. University ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay.
Ms. Tighe.--or put that as one of his schools on his
application. So ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay ----
Ms. Tighe.--they have a more limited purview than they ----
Mr. Mulvaney. All right. So if I am sitting there ----
Ms. Tighe.--have access to.
Mr. Mulvaney.--and I am the person at G.W. who is--and I
hate to pick on G.W. but I went to Georgetown ----
Ms. Tighe. Or his Social.
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes. I went to Georgetown so I love to pick
on G.W.
Ms. Tighe. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. You are telling me I can only gain access to
people who have actually either gone to G.W. or checked that on
one of their FAFSA forms?
Ms. Tighe. Yes, unless they, for whatever reason, would
have their Social Security number.
Mr. Mulvaney. And that was my next question ----
Ms. Tighe. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney.--which is if I have Mr. Chaffetz's Social
Security number and he is in the system, I can get him, can't
I?
Ms. Tighe. That's my understanding.
Mr. Mulvaney. So that means that if I am able to acquire
that Social Security number from any other source and I have
access to your system at tens of thousands of terminals, I can
get just about anything?
Ms. Tighe. That's correct.
Mr. Mulvaney. Now, let me drill down on that a little bit.
What is ``just about anything'' because when I--I got a little
notice from I think it was Target--my wife did--saying that
they had been hacked. I get all that. That is right. That
doesn't bother me too much. I think we use the same credit card
there and I don't use anything else at Target. If you hack into
Mr. Chaffetz's records at the Department of Education, what
type of information can you get on him?
Ms. Tighe. Well, you can--obviously, you can get the
financial information reported in the application for Federal
Student Aid and ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Does that include his parents' income?
Ms. Tighe. Yes, it does.
Mr. Mulvaney. Does it include any bank account information?
We didn't have these forms when I was in school ----
Ms. Tighe. Do we--is it ----
Mr. Mulvaney.--so I am not really sure ----
Ms. Tighe.--bank account information? Yes. I think--believe
there is banking information.
Mr. Mulvaney. What about stocks and bond account
information?
Ms. Tighe. I wouldn't think that would be available.
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay. All right. What else can you get just
out of curiosity?
Ms. Tighe. Let me get back to you on a full accounting ----
Mr. Mulvaney. Okay.
Ms. Tighe.--of what the--is available.
Mr. Mulvaney. And I hope I am making my point, which is
that when Target got hacked ----
Ms. Tighe. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney.--I didn't lose a lot of concern over it. If
someone had my bank account records, that might--including, I
guess, account numbers because I guess you all at some point
verify that information or can ----
Ms. Tighe. Well, there is information related to the
students'--for disbursements as student aid, you know, moving
money into the students' bank accounts.
Mr. Mulvaney. Sure. Okay. And I am sorry; I lost track of
where I was going after that. So I would be happy to yield to
the chair whatever 40 seconds I have left. But I thank you all
for your information and looking forward to going forward.
Chairman Chaffetz. If the gentleman will yield, there are
lifetime loan limits, right? So talk to the scope of time here
that we are talking about.
Ms. Tighe. My understanding is in the National Student Loan
database is that once you get money, your information is kept
in there for--like I don't think there's a deadline or cutoff
for when that information gets moved because there are
statutory limits on the amount of student aid one can take so
they have to keep track of it over a lifetime. So they--it's--
the information is retained for a very long time.
Chairman Chaffetz. And how many people in that database?
Ms. Tighe. There are, I think, currently about 85--at least
somewhere over 75 million student accounts or student account
information.
Chairman Chaffetz. And in addition to that, there are other
individuals, right? So how many individuals are we ultimately
talking about?
Ms. Tighe. Well, Student Loan database--the National
Student Loan database will have just students who get financial
aid. There are other systems the Department has like the CPS
system where you will have the parent information also.
Chairman Chaffetz. So how many Americans? What is the grand
total of number of Social Security numbers--we had ----
Ms. Tighe. Well, the 130--we--by our count from the OIG's
estimation of looking at the Department's databases we have
over 139 million unique Social Security numbers. And that's
just in the student loan application and the PIN registry
systems.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Mulvaney. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. In wrap-up here, I want to address
something just to clarify. You have a responsibility, Ms.
Tighe, as the inspector general to be able to go in and look at
the contractors and the subcontractors, but you have had
difficulty gaining access to some of those systems,
specifically the COD or the Common Origination and Disbursement
system. Have you been able to look at that system?
Ms. Tighe. No, we were not able to. We included the
mainframes of the Department as part of our testing this year.
Two of those mainframes are at the Virtual--the VDC, the
Virtual Data Center. One of them is in Columbus, Georgia, and
operated by a company called TSYS under a subcontract with the
Federal Student Aid organization. We entered into an agreement
with them that outlined everything we needed. We gave them a
timetable.
They did not by any stretch of the imagination meet that
timetable, and in the end, they were not able to provide us
very critical information for us to do a full vulnerability
testing. They limited our information in the end to the
education environment. The problem is that mainframe in Georgia
is a shared environment with their private customers.
And I understand their reluctance, but the fact remains is,
given the problems we found with what--just what they were able
to provide us, seeing privileged users that had excessive
permissions and the like, I worry about what other users we
were not able to see have access to in our data.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, we want to be supportive of the
inspector general community and the good people at TSYS. Is
that their name? They are about to get a nasty-gram from the
United States Congress, and we will use every power we have to
yank them up here and make sure that you get the access to that
information so ----
Ms. Tighe. I appreciate it.
Chairman Chaffetz.--the folks down there can look forward
to that. We are going to make sure you have the access you
need.
Mr. Harris, last bit of questions. Talk to me about how
dilapidated, outdated some of the operating systems software
that you are having to deal with. Do you use a COBOL, for
instance?
Mr. Harris. No, sir, we do not use COBOL.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do ----
Mr. Harris. On the FSA side I'm not sure if they still have
any COBOL-based systems, but I can get that information for
you.
Chairman Chaffetz. But all the other systems, you are not
aware of any ----
Mr. Harris. Do not use COBOL, sir, no.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you use DOS or what ----
Mr. Harris. No, sir. We're primarily a Windows-based. We
use a lot of Linux, Unix. However, it's not just the operating
system; it's the version.
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr. Harris. When you get past N minus 1 and the vendor is
no longer patching it, you have a problem.
Chairman Chaffetz. So how old--what Windows operating
systems are you using? And it is probably a whole gambit,
right?
Mr. Harris. It's a gambit.
Chairman Chaffetz. How old is the worst? I mean if you were
to walk around say, oh, my goodness ----
Mr. Harris. It's--probably the worst would probably be five
versions old.
Chairman Chaffetz. So like what is that, Windows 95, 97?
Mr. Harris. Probably 97.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ninety-seven still? And they are not
even servicing that at Microsoft anymore?
Mr. Harris. That is correct. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. So there are no security patches being
updated? The ----
Mr. Harris. Not for those, sir, but to be fair, many of the
systems using those operating systems do not have sensitive
data. I don't want to suggest that there is student information
sitting on systems that use Windows 97 but ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Understood, but ----
Mr. Harris.--these are OSs.
Chairman Chaffetz. But you feel for the employee, who is
their good, patriotic, hardworking ----
Mr. Harris. Sure.
Chairman Chaffetz.--employee who is going into work trying
to negotiate a Windows 97 operating system as opposed to
something a little bit more up-to-date.
Listen, this has been very productive. I appreciate all the
work that not only the three of you individually do but that
your organizations do. We have got a lot of good people who try
to do the right thing, they work hard, and I want to carry back
that, you know, how much we care and appreciate them and what
they do from the GAO to the inspector general to the Department
of Education.
That is the beauty--and I say this often in this committee.
The beauty of the United States of America is that the Congress
does ask hard questions. That is what we are supposed to be
doing. That is what makes us unique in this country is we hold
people accountable, we ask hard questions, and we have the good
dialogue back and forth.
So I appreciate the attitude and approach, Mr. Harris, that
you have had here, but we do ultimately want to not only be the
Oversight Committee but the Government Reform Committee. To the
extent we can help you with these issues, we want to do that.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Chairman ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Happy to yield.
Mr. Connolly.--we do have--thank you, Mr. Chairman. We do
have a legislative item that sooner or later we are going to
have to review, and that is this apparent conflict between what
FITARA is trying to get at, which is to enhance Dr. Harris's
authority and responsibility, and the older legislation from
1997 that may have been appropriate when Windows 97 was still
operating, but we also need to upgrade our own legislative
mandate because Dr. Harris is handicapped by statute. And we
may have to address that ----
Chairman Chaffetz. And that is where I think the E-
Government Act of 2002 is actually what we should be looking
at, but I look forward to working with you because ----
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz.--you should have not only the
responsibility but the authority, and there should be no
discrepancy there. And we will work with you on that.
Again, appreciate the participation of all the members. The
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
