- PREPARING FOR THE 2020 CENSUS: WILL THE TECHNOLOGY BE READY?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PREPARING FOR THE 2020 CENSUS: WILL THE TECHNOLOGY BE READY?

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-82

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-362 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Jeff Post, Government Operations Subcommittee Deputy Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
Subcommittee on Government Operations

MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina, Chairman
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
TIM WALBERG, Michigan, Vice Chair        Ranking Minority Member
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina            Columbia
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
------

Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 3, 2015.................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. John H. Thompson, Director, U.S. Census Bureau
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Steven I. Cooper, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16
Mr. Robert Goldenkoff, Director, Strategic Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25
Ms. Carol R. Cha, Director, Information Technology Acquisition
Management Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    41

APPENDIX

Rep. Plaskett Statement for Record...............................    78
RESPONSE Director Thompson, Census, Questions for the Record.....    79
RESPONSE Mr. Cooper, CIO, DOC, Questions for the Record..........   100
RESPONSE Mr. Goldenkoff, GAO, Questions for the Record...........   108
RESPONSE Ms. Cha, GAO, Questions for the Record..................   113

PREPARING FOR THE 2020 CENSUS: WILL THE TECHNOLOGY BE READY?

----------

Wednesday, November 3, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Operations, joint with
the Subcommittee on Information Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:36 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Meadows
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Government Operations]
presiding.
Present from Subcommittee on Government Operations:
Representatives Meadows, Walberg, Carter, Grothman, Connolly,
Maloney, and Clay.
Present from Subcommittee on Information Technology:
Representatives Hurd, Walker, Blum, Kelly, and Duckworth.
Mr. Meadows. The Subcommittee on Government Operations and
the Subcommittee on Information Technology will come to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time. Thank you so much for being here. My
apologies for being a little late coming from votes.
We're here today to talk about a very important topic, but
one that does not get much attention in the years that don't
end in zero. And so as we talk about the Census, actually last
month the Bureau released its operational plan for the 2020
Census. The purpose of this plan was to ensure that the Bureau
has all the necessary systems and procedures in place to
effectively complete its core mission.
As our witnesses' testimony will indicate, the plan for
2020 is probably the most ambitious Census plan in our Nation's
history. Quite simply, the Bureau is attempting to rewrite how
the Census is conducted from the ground up, making it easier
for people to respond and better value to the American taxpayer
certainly as we look at that.
These are laudable and necessary goals, particularly in
light of the Bureau's track record. The 2010 Census cost some
$12.3 billion or more than $100 per household. This is
substantially more than the $8 billion or the about $70 per
household cost of the 2000 year Census. In fact, we have to go
all the way back to the 1970 Census to find a Census where the
cost did not rise dramatically compared to its predecessor.
To correct this unsustainable trend, the Census Bureau is
attempting to greatly increase its ability to leverage
technology to utilize preexisting data in a completely new way.
Assuming the current design hold, this will be the first Census
where Americans will be able to respond through the Internet.
It will be the first where Nonresponse Followup enumerators
will be able to collect data electronically and have the case
list updated in real time and organize their route based on
travel efficiency with directions. What a novel idea.
It will be the first time that the Bureau will use both
Federal, State, and local addresses updates for the past decade
to avoid the added expense of a nationwide, in-field address
canvass. It will also be the first time that the Bureau will
use the Federal administrative records like tax returns and
Medicare information to identify vacant housing units and to
encourage self-response. This plan involves sending paper reply
forms only to the older individuals that are in areas with poor
Internet connectivity.
If the Bureau can deliver on its plan, it's believed that
the 2020 Census could cost less per household than the 2010
Census and almost the same on an absolute level. However,
``if'' is the key word in that last sentence, and in
preparation for the 2010 Census, the Bureau spent some $600
million attempting to build a proprietary handheld device for
the enumerators to electronically report the field data.
Despite this massive investment of hard-working American
taxpayer dollars, poor program management led the Bureau to
abandon that project in its entirety in 2008, forcing them to
go back to paper response forms for the 2010 Census.
The Bureau tells us that it has learned valuable lessons
from that failed effort. The initiatives it is hoping to
implement for the 2020 Census are several times the size and
complexity of the program that failed in 2008 and it is why we
are here today. Although I know that there are still some
questions about how exactly the Bureau will use the
administrative records, I feel confident in saying that all of
the members on both the subcommittees are broadly supportive of
what the Bureau is trying to accomplish.
With that in mind, my goal today is to learn more about the
Bureau's ongoing initiatives, but also make sure realistic time
lines, deadlines, operational controls are in place to avoid
the failures of the past. Given the current budget environment,
we cannot afford another incident like happened in 2008.
But in closing, I would like to thank all of our witnesses.
And some of you I've met before. And I'm encouraged to have you
with us for your time today and I look forward to working with
you as the clock ticks towards a Census date of April 1, 2020.
The chair now recognizes my good friend, the ranking member
of the Subcommittee on Government Operations, Mr. Connolly, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for this
joint hearing, which is well-timed given the recent release of
the 2020 operational plan for the Census.
At the midpoint of this decade it's instructive to look at
lessons learned from the last Census and the preparations
underway for the next. The data derived from the Census
provides a treasure trove of information both to the public and
private sectors.
For the government, Census data provides the foundation for
our representative system of governance. From Congress down to
local school boards, Census data is used to prudently and
fairly allocate Federal, State, and local dollars to the
communities we represent. For businesses, this information
informs employment and capital investment decisions, critical
for the private sector.
The Census is one of the few government functions expressly
mandated by the Constitution. By the way, so is the Postal
Service. And the advent of technology holds the promise of
making this once-in-a-decade enumeration less arduous and
hopefully less costly.
Success will be largely dependent on the management and
deployment of technology. The Bureau's botched attempt to
deploy mobile handheld devices for the 2010 Census actually
increased costs--increased costs--by $3 billion. The 2010
Census was 56 percent more costly than its predecessor in 2000.
Today the Bureau is proposing to expand its use of
technology, including new handheld devices, with the stated
goal of lowering its latest estimated cost by nearly one-third.
That is a noble goal. One of the new initiatives the Bureau
believes will produce great efficiencies and savings is the
commonsense step of cross-referencing data from other Federal
and non-Federal sources, such as the IRS, the U.S. Postal
Service, and others. A county-level test earlier this year
showed using such records reduced the follow-up workload at
homes known to be vacant by nearly 12 percent.
In addition, the Bureau intends to expand use of modern
technology. I hope we hear today what lessons from the 2010
experience with handheld devices are being applied to this new
effort.
I'm also pleased to finally welcome the Census to the 21st
century by offering an online response option. In today's high-
tech mobile society, people simply expect to be able to conduct
business online and in many cases in the palm of their hand
with a smart device.
I'm encouraged by Mr. Cooper's prepared remarks in which he
indicates the Bureau is on track to meet its goals. As the
Commerce Department's CIO, he is accountable for overseeing the
Census Enterprise Data Collection and Processing initiative,
which will integrate and standardize systems and data sharing
across the Bureau.
I want to congratulate him on his efforts to implement the
FITARA act--better known as Connolly-Issa, Issa-Connolly--which
is guiding IT investments with enhanced risk assessments and
performance metrics. Commerce has been a leader among Federal
agencies for embracing the new IT management model, and I would
welcome his insight on how it has helped--or not--improve
preparations for the Census.
I also look forward to hearing responses from Mr. Cooper
and Mr. Thompson, Director of the Census Bureau, to concerns
raised by the GAO that the Bureau is not moving quickly enough
to achieve certain milestones. For example, GAO has cited gaps
in staffing and the deferral of key IT decisions, such as the
scope of the IT infrastructure that will be necessary,
cybersecurity protocols, and a procurement strategy for the
handheld devices. These are important issues that must be
resolved soon as the window of time in which the Bureau has to
complete this transformation before end-to-end testing of the
system is scheduled to begin in 2018.
As Mr. Cooper notes, however, the Bureau has delivered its
operational plan 3 years earlier than it did in 2010. And,
hopefully, that allows us time to identify and address gaps or
shortfalls well in advance of the deadline.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, let me address the elephant in the
room, which is the urgency for Congress adequately to fund the
Census. Providing robust oversight of its operations and these
IT investments is a laudable and necessary goal for us, but it
is for naught if the Bureau does not have the resources it
needs with which to execute its constitutional duty in what has
now become a monumental task given the size of our population
and the complexity of our country.
The initial budget proposal offered by my friends for
fiscal year 2016 would have reduced funding for the Census
Bureau by $374 million, almost one-third compared to the
President's request. I'm hopeful that last week's bipartisan
budget agreement will allow us to restore those necessary
investments. We cannot afford to shortchange an activity so
fundamental to our democracy and the sustained well-being of
our communities.
I look forward to hearing from the panel. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
The chair recognizes the chairman of the Information
Technology Subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman. I would like to thank the
distinguished gentlemen from North Carolina and Virginia for
holding this important hearing today.
Every 10 years the United States Census Bureau administers
a very important survey of the American public. It's vital for
many reasons. We will use the gathered information to ensure
the proper distribution of government funds and the
proportionate number of representatives in government. But in
order to make sure the information collected is as accurate as
possible, the Census Bureau must deploy the best possible
tactics and plans to collect the data.
I want to give credit where credit is due. The Census
Bureau is attempting to go to great lengths to drive down their
costs and the results will be significant. This is atypical of
the culture in Washington where agencies always seem to be
asking for more tax dollars without producing the results that
warrant them. The Census Bureau has accomplished this by
utilizing existing information and new technology, something
that other Federal agencies could learn from.
But like many Federal agencies, the Census Bureau has
serious IT challenges that must be addressed and corrected now.
First, while the Bureau has made some significant progress in
fully staffing its IT department, a number of key leadership
positions remain vacant. These positions need to be filled
immediately, and I'm looking forward to this hearing today on
how the agency plans to address this.
Second, the Census Bureau hasn't addressed all the GAO
recommendations on improving its IT systems. We saw what
happens when agencies ignore IG reports with the massive data
breach at OPM. This is a trend that I continually see as
chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology, Federal
agencies ignoring IG and GAO recommendations. It is vital that
the Census Bureau take action to address all of the remaining
recommendations as soon as possible.
Finally, I agree wholeheartedly with the GAO and our
witness, Ms. Cha, that the Bureau must begin now to make
critical IT decisions. Their deferral of decisions in IT so far
has, in my view, increased the overall risk around the 2020
Census. I look forward to hearing from all our witnesses today
on specific ways we can successfully utilize technology to
complete an accurate and cost-effective Census in 2020. I yield
back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Kelly, the ranking member of
the Subcommittee on Information Technology, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this
important hearing. I would also like to extend my thanks to the
witnesses here today.
The purpose of this oversight hearing is to determine if
the Census Bureau's plans for 2020 Census is sufficient to
ensure complete and accurate counts of the Nation's population.
Getting an accurate count is important. Numerous key decisions
are based on data collected from the decennial Census. Census
data is integral in determining the equitable distribution of
Federal funds, enforcing civil and voting rights legislation,
and determining congressional proportionment, among other
things.
With advances in technology, we have tools available to
help administer the Census more efficiently and accurately. For
instance, in October 2014, the Bureau began an enterprise-wide
IT initiative called the Census Enterprise Data Collection and
Processing Program, which is intended to, ``deliver a system-
of-systems to serve all of the Bureau's survey, data
collection, and processing functions--rather than continuing to
build and maintain unique survey-specific systems with
redundant capabilities.''
CEDCaP will help reengineer fieldwork by implementing an
operational control system to track and manage field
assignments. This will help census takers decide, using real-
time data, which houses to visit on a daily basis.
CEDCaP will also be responsible for the development of a
Web-based survey application in order to maximize Internet
self-response. The 2020 Census will be the first Census with
the option of responding online. The Bureau will rely heavily
on Internet responses as part of its cost-saving initiatives.
The Bureau also decided to use mobile devices for field
data collection purposes. The Bureau estimates it will save
nearly $400 million through the increased use of technology,
which is certainly to be commended.
While technology can help increase efficiency, which yields
significant sayings, I am also concerned about the safety of
the public's personal information. As you may know, the Bureau
experienced a data breach in July. While no sensitive
information was stolen, this incident underscores the
importance of having controls in place to protect sensitive
information.
I applaud the Bureau for responding swiftly to the breach
and recognizing the need for continued monitoring of their
systems. It is our job to ensure that these agencies have the
resources they need to keep our private information safe from
hackers.
Additionally, I share GAO's concern that a number of
important IT decisions have yet to be made for the 2020 Census.
GAO recommends that key IT decisions be made quickly or we'll
find ourselves in the situation we saw in 2010, where a costly
IT project went awry, causing turmoil for the entire Census
operation.
I look forward to hearing from the Bureau regarding its
ability to meet critical milestones as they finalize plans for
2020, and I look forward to a productive discussion on this
vital issue.
I yield back the balance of my time, and thank you.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
member who would like to submit a written statement.
Mr. Meadows. We will now recognize our panel of witnesses.
I'm pleased to welcome the Honorable John Thompson, the
Director of the U.S. Census Bureau; Mr. Steven Cooper, Chief
Information Officer at the U.S. Department of Commerce; Mr.
Robert Goldenkoff, Director of Strategic Issues at the U.S.
Government Accountability Office; and Ms. Carol Cha, Director
of Information Technology Acquisitions Management Issues at the
U.S. Government Accountability Office.
Welcome to you all.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. So if you would please rise and raise your
right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you're
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth? Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
And in order to allow time for discussion, we would
appreciate if you would limit your oral testimony to 5 minutes.
However, your entire written statement will be made part of the
record.
Mr. Thompson, who I would also say looks an awful lot like
Robert De Niro, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOHN H. THOMPSON

Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman Meadows.
Chairman Meadows, Chairman Hurd, Ranking Members Connolly
and Kelly, thank you for the opportunity to testify this
afternoon. I'm also pleased to be testifying with Mr. Steve
Cooper, the Chief Information Officer of the Department of
Commerce, with whom we work very closely.
I am honored to serve as the Director of the Census Bureau
which has the tremendous responsibility of administering an
accurate Census that fairly represents everyone in America. We
have reached a major milestone in our preparations for the 2020
Census. Just last month, we released an operational plan that
allows us to change the way we have conducted the decennial
Census for over 46 years and save $5.2 billion.
For each Census since 1970, the paper-based process has
been the standard, and it has been increasingly challenged by
the growing diversity and complexity of our Nation. We do not
believe that a paper-and-pencil approach to the Census is
sustainable for the 2020 or future Censuses. The Census Bureau
has concentrated on four innovation areas that have the
potential to improve Census operations and save taxpayers
money. I will briefly describe each of these innovation areas.
First, we're building a more accurate address list, and for
2020, we have reengineered the process to incorporate a 100
percent in-office canvassing that will be supplemented with up
to a 25 percent in-field operation. We have already started
this effort, and we expect to realize $900 million in cost
savings from this strategy.
Second, we want to make it easier for people to respond,
and our strategy incorporates not only the Internet as the
primary response option, but also an integrated communication
and partnership strategy and tailored contact strategies. We
will mail an invitation to all housing units encouraging
Internet response.
For 28 percent of the addresses, however, in areas with low
Internet connectivity, we will be including a paper
questionnaire in the first mailing package. We will also
incorporate a Census Questionnaire Assistance program with both
telephone and Web-chat response options. We believe that by
opening up the process and making it easy, we will encourage
participation with respondents who have typically not
responded. These efforts offer the potential of approximately
$400 million in savings.
Third, using existing information already provided to the
government, we can reduce door-to-door visits in what we call
the Nonresponse Followup operation. To reduce this workload, we
are proposing to use administrative records for enumeration in
two ways. We are planning to use administrative records to
remove vacant addresses before sending census takers into the
field, and we are also planning to use administrative records
to enumerate occupied housing units after we have knocked on
each door at least once. Using administrative records in this
way will result in savings of $1.4 billion.
Fourth, we are automating our field operations to save an
estimated $2.5 billion. We will now use mobile technology to
achieve significant efficiencies in the 2020 Census. I should
note that we have successfully developed an innovative
prototype system. We are now able to provide optimized
assignments to our interviewers, including daily route
assignments, the best time of day to attempt contact. We are
also able to provide the supervisors of these enumerators real-
time updates and alerts regarding the progress of the workers
they oversee.
Supporting these efforts is our enterprise approach to
survey and Census data collection and processing through shared
services, which we call CEDCaP. In the past, duplicative
systems were created and used for every survey and Census. We
will now move to a small suite of shared, reusable systems.
Based on my experience in overseeing the 2000 Census and in the
private sector, I am confident we are on course and we have a
schedule for all major decisions.
Finally, we are committed to protecting the privacy and
confidentiality of individual information. The Census Bureau
has implemented a robust, comprehensive, and layered
cybersecurity program that is constantly evaluated by experts.
The last 5 years have provided the groundwork for the 21st
century Census. And now, looking forward, we must turn our
attention to counting every person in America. But still a
significant risk we face is receiving adequate funding. If
adequate funding is not received in fiscal year 2016, we will
prioritize activities to ensure that the 2018 end-to-end test
will take place on time. We are committed to ensuring an
accurate Census that fairly represents all people in America.
If we have to defer activities to later years, the cost of the
Census will increase.
I am confident the Census Bureau can achieve these
objectives given congressional support, and I look forward to
discussing the 2020 Census operational plan and other aspects
of our planning with you today. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you so much.
Mr. Cooper.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN I. COOPER

Mr. Cooper. Chairman Meadows, Chairman Hurd, Ranking
Members Connolly and Kelly, thank you for the opportunity to
testify this afternoon. I am Steve Cooper, Chief Information
Officer for the Department of Commerce. It is my pleasure to
appear before the subcommittees and update you on our work as
we prepare for a successful 2020 Census.
The Census Bureau is working to ensure the necessary
information technology, or IT, is in place to support the 2020
Census. The Census Bureau faces an increasing set of
challenges, including declining survey participation rates,
increased survey costs per household, funding constraints, and
cybersecurity threats. These challenges all create risk for the
2020 Census and the Census Bureau has developed a multifaceted
strategy that will address these challenges, will transform the
business model, and modernize 2020 Census operations.
The 2020 Census requires an IT architecture and
infrastructure that is agile, flexible, scalable, and able to
accommodate innovations and advances being introduced through
IT. As the focus of the 2020 Census shifts from planning to
execution, our collective attention must include IT readiness.
The Census Bureau has made significant progress in process
improvements, IT governance, and closing the skill gaps to
ensure it is ready for the 2020 Census.
One of the major enterprise initiatives supporting the 2020
Census is the Census Enterprise Data Collection and Processing
initiative, what we call CEDCaP. The CEDCaP initiative aims to
create an integrated and standardized suite of systems that
will provide shared data collection and processing solutions
across all Census Bureau operations. As the Census Bureau
proceeds, it is working to ensure that it strikes the right
balance between commercial off-the-shelf solutions and custom-
developed solutions.
In terms of mobile solutions, the Census Bureau is
exploring a mix of Device as a Service and Bring Your Own
Device for the 2016 Census Test. The test results will inform
subsequent decisions on which mobile devices are leveraged in
support of the 2020 Census. In either mobile scenario defined,
Census data will be protected at rest and in motion.
The Census Bureau is also exploring cloud computing
technology. Various tests are underway to explore processing
and storing data in some combination of various cloud
infrastructures. For the 2016 Census Test, the Census Bureau
will deploy the Internet response option in a secure, FedRAMP-
certified, commercially provided private cloud.
The Census Bureauis further exploring how to best employ
features like auto-scaling to meet performance demands of the
2020 Census, particularly for systems such as the Internet
self-response option that must scale to meet the short-term
anticipated demand of millions of users.
In support of this work, the Census Bureau has awarded an
initial cloud computing services contract. This contract will
also allow the Census Bureau to gain essential skills and
knowledge to be applied during all phases of delivering the
2020 Census.
Obviously, securing confidential data is a major concern
for the Census Bureau. The Census Bureau uses an enterprise
layered defense strategy to protect its data and systems. For
example, the Census Bureau relies on the Department of Homeland
Security-managed Einstein program to protect external Internet
traffic, and the Census Bureau's internal network is segmented
to isolate the systems that are Internet accessible.
The Census Bureau has also worked closely with NIST to
implement a risk management framework for all of its systems.
Each system also undergoes continuous monitoring to maintain
its authorization. This monitoring consists of both automated
and manual assessments.
Finally, the Census Bureau continues to work with my office
in their implementation of the Department of Homeland
Security's Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program and
our continuing ongoing cyber sprint effort.
Based on my observations to date, the Census Bureau is well
positioned to take advantage of early planning, testing, and
operational designs. The 2020 Census program is also poised to
leverage enterprise initiatives to realize significant
efficiencies. However, to adequately implement these strategies
and meet the challenges will require the best efforts of the
Census Bureau and continued congressional support.
I am deeply grateful for this opportunity to testify before
this committee and share these observations, and I'm pleased to
answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Goldenkoff.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT GOLDENKOFF

Mr. Goldenkoff. Chairmen Meadows and Hurd, Ranking Members
Connolly and Kelly, and members of the Government Operations
and IT Subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today to discuss the progress the Census Bureau is making in
controlling the cost of the 2020 enumeration.
The Bureau's goal is to conduct the Census at a lower cost
per household than the 2010 Census, adjusted for inflation,
while maintaining accuracy. This would mean less than around
$94 per household. It's an extremely difficult task as the
population is growing steadily larger, more diverse,
increasingly difficult to find, and less willing to participate
in the head count. Moreover, the Census is conducted on a tight
schedule with little room, if any, for slippage.
The Bureau plans to hold down costs in part by expanding
its use of data that has already been collected by other
government agencies in the course of administering their
programs. Known as administrative records, such information can
help improve accuracy and reduce the need for labor-intensive
field operations, especially during one of the most expensive
of all Census activities, Nonresponse Followup. The Bureau has
used administrative records in previous decennials, but not to
the same extent as that planned for 2020.
In my remarks today, which are based on a report we issued
last month, I will describe the opportunities and challenges
the Bureau faces in using administrative records and the steps
it needs to take going forward to help ensure they produce the
desired results.
The Bureau estimates it can save up to $1.4 billion
compared to traditional census-taking methods by using
administrative records for three purposes during Nonresponse
Followup. They include identifying and removing vacant and
nonexisting housing units from the follow-up workload before
Census workers start knocking on doors. Second, enumerating non
responding occupied housing units if the information meets a
certain quality threshold. And third, predicting the best times
to visit a household.
Using administrative records for these activities can
greatly improve productivity. For example, in a test conducted
in Arizona's Maricopa County earlier this year, the Bureau
reduced the follow-up workload by 11 percent by removing vacant
and nonexistent households.
The Bureau is also exploring nine additional applications
of administrative records that may help reduce cost or improve
quality still further. The Bureau currently has access to data
held by the U.S. Postal Service, IRS, and Selective Service
System, among other agencies. It's also considering other data
sets, such as the National Directory of New Hires. The Bureau
believes the NDNH and other records could improve its ability
to find historically hard-to-count populations, such as certain
minority groups and young children. However, the Bureau still
needs to secure statutory access to the NDNH.
The Bureau's planned use of administrative records is
commendable, but much work remains. For example, in our October
report we recommended that the Bureau set deadlines to decide
which, if any, of the nine additional uses of administrative
records still under consideration will be used in 2020. This
will help ensure the Bureau has sufficient time to review the
data sets, determine their fitness for use, and fully test
them.
Final decisions are needed by the end of fiscal year 2017
in order to be included in the Bureau's full end-to-end test in
2018. However, these deadlines do not appear in schedule
documents.
The Bureau must also continue to address challenges to
using administrative records, such as protecting confidential
information and ensuring congressional and public acceptance of
the Bureau's plan to share personal data across government
agencies. Fully implementing our prior recommendations to
strengthen the security of its information systems and
developing a congressional outreach strategy could help address
these challenges.
In summary, the bureau has made noteworthy progress in
expanding its use of administrative records. Going forward,
though, perhaps one of the biggest risks the Bureau faces is
the ticking clock. Any delays could have serious implications
for downstream activities. As a result, continued congressional
attention will be needed to help ensure that the Bureau, one,
stays on schedule; two, sets deadlines for key go/no-go
decisions on additional uses of administrative data; and three,
fully implements our prior recommendations.
This concludes my remarks, I'll be happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Goldenkoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you.
Ms. Cha.

STATEMENT OF CAROL R. CHA

Ms. Cha. Chairmen Meadows and Hurd, Ranking Members
Connolly and Kelly, and members of the subcommittees, I would
like to thank you for inviting me to testify today. It's your
continued oversight in hearings like these that are vital to
ensuring that the 2020 Census is effectively managed.
The Bureau will rely on an enterprise-wide IT initiative
called CEDCAP to deliver the systems and infrastructure needed
to carry out its redesigned operations. For example, CEDCAP is
planning to deliver an online survey instrument and a cloud
computing solution to support an Internet response option. For
field reengineering, the program is planning to implement a new
system to track and manage fieldwork, as well as test the use
of mobile devices for field data collection.
Based on our work to date, I'd like to highlight two key
challenges regarding the Bureau's plans for 2020. First, the
deferral of key IT decisions in the face of time constraints.
By August of 2017, the Bureau intends to begin preparations for
end-to-end testing to validate that CEDCaP systems are ready to
go live on Census Day. This gives the Bureau less than 2 years
to develop and integrate planned systems.
While the Bureau has made many key decisions about its
redesigned Census as described in its October plan, there are
critical IT decisions that have not yet been made, including
whether the Bureau will build or buy the needed systems.
This lack of prioritization of IT decisions has been a
continuing trend, which we have reported on over the past few
years. Most recently, in February we reported that the Bureau
had not determined how key research questions would be
answered, such as the expected rate of respondents using the
Internet survey or the IT infrastructure needed to support this
option. As such, we made recommendations to improve the
Bureau's ability to answer these questions in time to make
those decisions in October. However, this has not happened yet.
Furthermore, the Bureau does not intend to make these
decisions and other key ones until 2016 through 2018. Among
other things, the build-or-buy decisions won't be made until
next June at the earliest. Based on the current sequencing of
planned decisions, the Bureau will have about a year to develop
and then integrate these systems and then have them ready for
end-to-end testing. Further, the mobile device strategy for
fieldwork is not expected until 2 months after the start of
this testing.
Unless the Bureau makes these key decisions soon, it will
likely run out of time to put CEDCaP systems in place. And I
can refer you to the screen shot above, which shows examples of
deferred 2020 decisions overlaid on top of the Census schedule.
[Slide.]
Ms. Cha. And, again, if you look from left to right, the
first one, the build-or-buy decisions, June 2016 at the
earliest, and then we come up on Census end-to-end testing,
which preparations begin in August of 2017. So, again, there's
very limited time to integrate and implement these systems in
time for those tests.
The second challenge is the Bureau's current IT posture. To
its credit, important progress has been made to strengthen and
institutionalize selected IT management areas, such as
governance and requirements management. However, critical IT
leadership gaps exist. Most notably, the Bureau is without a
permanent chief information officer. Other key vacancies
include the chief of the Office Information Security and chief
cloud architect. The Bureau is aggressively working to close
these gaps. But if they do remain open, its ability to
effectively deliver CEDCaP will be hampered.
In addition, the Bureau still has work remaining to fully
address our recommendations to improve information security. In
January 2013, we made 115 recommendations to address control
deficiencies, such as access control to protect its systems
from intrusion. As of today, the Bureau has fully addressed 66
of them. The remaining open recommendations, of those, 30
require additional actions by the Bureau and the other 19 are
under review. Continued focus on completing this effort must be
a high priority to ensure that sensitive information collected
during the Census is adequately secure.
In summary, with the deferral of key IT decisions, the
Bureau is running out of time to implement the systems needed
to support the redesign and achieve its projected $5.2 billion
in cost savings. Moving forward, swift actions to fully
implement our open recommendations must be taken. Doing so will
improve the Bureau's ability to deliver on its IT plan and
realize savings.
That concludes my statement. I look forward to addressing
your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Cha follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you so much.
The chair recognizes the chairman of the Subcommittee on
Information Technology, Mr. Hurd, for 5 minutes for a series of
questions.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Chairman.
And thank you all for your testimony today.
And, Ms. Cha, I want to thank you for your written
statement. It was very good in helping to explain some of the
unique challenges that we're having to provide oversight on.
My first question, I guess, is first to you, Director
Thompson. We've talked about the lack of a permanent CIO. We
talked about the lack of a chief of the business integration,
which is managing the CEDCaP program. What are the plans to
fill those spots? What are the challenges that you're facing in
getting people there? And who is filling that role as a
temporary basis?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Congressman.
So the job announcement for the CIO is out and available
now. CIO Cooper and I have been widely circulating it so that
we can be sure that we get a good number of applicants. Harry
Lee, sitting behind me, has done an excellent job in the
interim. He's the deputy CIO. And he's been doing a great job
filling the vacancy in the absence, and we've made a number of
accomplishments in the IT area.
Mr. Hurd. How long have these spots been open?
Mr. Thompson. It became open in July.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. And we have applicants putting information
in or submitting resumes or whatever the process is?
Mr. Thompson. So I don't know that I can talk about the
applicants at this point in the process.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Cooper, did you have something to add?
Mr. Cooper. Yes. With the position open, it will remain
open for 30 days. Our human resources group will do the initial
processing of those applicants and those who are well qualified
will be passed to the appropriate review panel. We'll then make
that ultimate decision about selecting a CIO.
Mr. Hurd. Because my concern is----
Mr. Cooper. So we have not yet seen any of the responses. I
don't have any information on that.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. My concern is with the lack of an
identified leader in managing this process, if CEDCaP is going
to be the process, and we have less than 2 years, we need to
make sure that that person is in place.
My next set of questions is there was 115 recommendations,
as Ms. Cha pointed out in her written and verbal testimony. We
have information that 19 of those 115 have been addressed and
work has started on 66, or 66 of those have been addressed. Can
you give me an update?
Mr. Thompson. Certainly. So last April, when we received--
well, last April we responded to all 115 recommendations that
the GAO made, and we've been working with the GAO since that
point. To date, we believe that they have closed 65 of them. We
believe that they referred 19 back to us. And based on our
discussions, we're still waiting to hear from them on about 30
more. So that's the current status from our records.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Cha, do you have any insights or comments on
that?
Ms. Cha. Sure. So as of today, 66 have been closed out. But
I believe Director Thompson has those numbers transposed. There
are 19 that are currently under review and there are 30
remaining recommendations that still require additional actions
by the Bureau.
Mr. Hurd. What's the biggest priority one of those 30 that
require action?
Ms. Cha. Sure. So in terms of the open recommendations,
they relate to the identification and authentication types of
controls. So that would be like password controls, unsecured
system accounts and access, as well as configuration
management. So that would be like----
Mr. Hurd. All the things that have led to a number of
breaches not only in the private sector, but in the Federal
Government.
Ms. Cha. That's correct.
Mr. Hurd. And I'm going to address this to you, Mr. Cooper,
since this falls in your bailiwick. What's being done to
address that, on the authentication and the patch management
programs?
Mr. Cooper. Okay. We've taken a couple steps proactively
following the recent OMB 30-day cyber----
Mr. Hurd. Let me rephrase the question. When is this going
to be completed?
Mr. Cooper. I wish I could give you an exact date. We have
initiated a whole series of activities that are targeted for
completion by 31 December of this fiscal year--I'm sorry, this
calendar year. That does include the open actions from the GAO
report.
We've also taken an additional step, and that is that we've
created internal cross-bureau teams of our cyber experts, and
we are bringing those to bear to assist all of our bureaus but,
in this case the Census Bureau, in helping close these actions.
So in addition to the Census Bureau's cyber experts, we've
brought additional expertise from within the Department. We
believe that that will help us both meet our target deadline
and bring additional skills and expertise objectively to bear
on these open items.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And my last question to you, Director Thompson, and I'm
running out of time, I've run out of time, if you realize
savings from using new technology or a different process, are
you able to use that savings within the calendar or the fiscal
year on other projects?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman----
Mr. Hurd. And that's not a trick question.
Mr. Thompson. No, no, I know----
Mr. Hurd. Because I'm trying to figure out, if you're doing
things, you're realizing savings, I want you to be able to use
those savings to go back in to do your work.
Mr. Thompson. So we are not going to be asking for anything
more than the money we need to do the Census, and we believe
that we are going to avoid $5.2 billion in costs. In saying
that, we also plan to make sure that we have the right
resources in the right areas to make sure we count everyone as
well.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Chairman, I apologize, I yield back the time
that I do not have.
Mr. Meadows. No, I thank the gentleman for his insightful
questions.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from the 11th District
of Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to point
out I think three of our witnesses are Virginians and all three
confirmed under oath that they voted.
Now, Mr. Thompson, where are you from.
Mr. Thompson. I'm from Old Town Alexandria.
Mr. Connolly. All right. So you're a Virginian. All right.
All four. Bless them. Wonderful people doing wonderful work,
let's just be honest.
Anyway, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to say to all of you on the panel,
you've got four people up here who actually care about the
mission and are focused on it and not allowing a lot of
extraneous issues to get in our way of trying to be supportive
in a rational way.
And I would just note that, because I really appreciate my
friends, Ms. Kelly and Mr. Meadows and Mr. Hurd, for really
being in a collaborative spirit, and we're collaborating on
especially a lot of other IT issues too. I just want to say
that because it doesn't happen as often as we'd like up here
and it hardly ever gets recognized when it does. And so I hope
we can take this as a magic moment and try to work together
with the executive branch on the Census.
Yeah, that's right.
Director Thompson, help us understand, how much money do
you believe the Census requires to undertake its mission this
next time? We're trying to follow the numbers.
Mr. Thompson. So we estimate that we're going to, for the
full cycle cost of the Census' interoperational plan, we're
going to require $12.3 billion.
Mr. Connolly. $12.3. And is that what you requested in the
budget?
Mr. Thompson. Well, we request the budget on a yearly
basis.
Mr. Connolly. I know.
Mr. Thompson. We are moving towards that with our request
for fiscal year 2016.
Mr. Connolly. And what do you project right now the
shortfall between the request--I think I cited $375 million,
but that's probably just for 1 year--what is the shortfall
between what you need and so far what has been appropriated or
what you project to be appropriated?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, I think you hit the number on
the head when you mentioned the shortfall that we initially saw
for fiscal year 2016. However, we haven't seen the final
appropriation----
Mr. Connolly. We haven't either.
Mr. Thompson. --for fiscal year 2016.
Mr. Connolly. We haven't either.
Are you able to disaggregate for the purposes of funding
the Census what you think you would get appropriated pursuant
to the new budget agreement we passed last week? We increased
domestic discretionary investments by roughly $25 billion for
this next fiscal year in that budget agreement, 25 for defense,
25 for domestic. Any idea how much of your projected shortfall,
in an ideal world, I know it's hard because we haven't
appropriated it yet, but any sense of whether that would help
the funding shortfall?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, the only numbers I'm familiar
with are the President's budget and the actions that have taken
place.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Well, I think it's going to be really
important to follow that and have better answers. I can't ask
you to have a better answer yet. We don't either. But if the
four of us are going to be helpful and supportive----
Mr. Thompson. Right. But we are preparing to work with the
Congress to explain exactly how we'll spend every dollar that
we get----
Mr. Connolly. There was a method to my madness in telling
you you've got four people here who actually want to get
something done and be productive. And part of that is the
budget. But we got to know--we've all got to be on the same
page in terms of those projected numbers.
Mr. Cooper, thank you for your leadership as CIO. Would
that we could replicate you in lots of other Federal agencies.
Help us have confidence. In 2010, we had a handheld device
meltdown. We're doubling down on those devices for this next
go-round. What makes us confident that we're, in fact, going to
make it work and save money, as opposed to another meltdown,
only double?
Mr. Cooper. Okay. The first observation would be that in
2010--and I was not part of the Department in 2010, so the
information I'm sharing is information I've gained since coming
onboard. If I don't get something exactly right or if you need
more detail, I'm more than happy to come back up, set up
briefings, fill in the details. But based upon what I've
investigated and what I've kind of been involved and learned,
the first important difference, the technology that was used or
attempted to be used in 2010 was very specific, specialized,
proprietary technology.
Now, compare and contrast that. In 2020, we're using
commercially available solutions. They're off the shelf.
They've been proven in industry. We're talking about
smartphones, old devices. I think probably every one of us in
this room carry some type of phone, smartphone type of device.
We may carry a tablet, that type of thing. So a huge
difference. This is not unproven, single-use, proprietary
technology.
What also comes with that? Industry itself, all of the
carriers, major telecom carriers, as well as the device
providers, have invested significant amounts of expertise,
research and development dollars into helping secure those
devices.
So, again, this is not something where the Census Bureau by
itself takes the lead responsibility along with its industry
partners. That's a huge, important, significant difference in
my ability to say to you with confidence we're not repeating a
similar type of scenario. We're using proven technology, well
understood, well proven in the marketplace. We are then,
additionally, applying our own NIST-driven security protocols,
risk framework, cybersecurity framework, GAO recommendations,
IG recommendations all come into play, so that we have a
significantly higher degree of confidence in being able to use
those platforms in field operations.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Iowa,
Mr. Blum, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Meadows.
Thank you to the panel today for sharing your insights with
us.
They say that genius is the ability to reduce the
complicated to the simple. And it would be great to have a
little genius in the Federal Government. So toward that end,
Mr. Cooper, do we have a database of all the addresses in the
United States of America.
Mr. Cooper. My understanding is the closest we have to that
in the Census Bureau is the Master Address File. I believe that
in addition to that there are supplemental databases, also
administrative records that the Director has talked about in
some of the earlier GAO testimony. Therefore, I'm going to say,
but I'm going to ask for help from my fellow panelists, I don't
believe that there's a single master file of every housing unit
in the United States.
But is that in the Master Address File?
Mr. Blum. Would the Postal Service have that?
Mr. Thompson. Can I respond?
Mr. Blum. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. We maintain a master address list that we try
to make as accurate as possible, that contains every address in
the United States, both mailable addresses and those that
aren't mailable. And we are in the process now of continuously
updating it. So we work with the States and localities that
want to participate and take their lists and put into it. Twice
a year at least we get a feed from the post office and they
give us updates to their delivery sequence file. So we try to
maintain this address list and make it as accurate as possible
so that when we take the Census we have every housing unit in
there.
Mr. Blum. Safe to say we have 99 percent of the addresses
in the country in the Postal System's database? Ninety-eight
percent? High percentage?
Mr. Thompson. So we actually believe that we have an
address list that is a little more complete than the post
office's list because we actually go into structures that don't
receive mail and list the addresses. And part of what we're
going to do before the next Census in about 25 percent of the
country is actually go knock on doors, ask if there are hidden
addresses, to make sure that we get every address in the
country where someone can reside, whether or not they get mail
at that address.
Mr. Blum. And your job is to count the number of people
living at each address, correct, simply put?
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Blum. I just want to make sure. Maybe I'll ask Mr.
Cooper this. Do you think we're unnecessarily complicating
this? I come from the high-tech industry, the private sector. I
know how this can go.
Mr. Cooper. My direct answer would be no, sir, I don't
believe that we are overly complicating it. But here is what's
going on. We're moving from pencil-and-paper processing to
leveraging technology in a more fully automated way. So the
transition is complicated, complex, and we need to manage that
extremely well and extremely rigorously and thoroughly. But I
do not believe that we are making it more complicated than it
needs to be.
Mr. Blum. Mr. Cooper, I think it's called CEDCaP?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir.
Mr. Blum. I read there was a mention of the last Census, I
believe we had over 100 duplicative systems? To me, that's, A,
amazing, and, B, a recipe for disaster. How are we changing
that this Census?
Mr. Cooper. CEDCaP, I admit, Congressman, I don't know the
exact numbers. So I accept the numbers that you're saying on
what did exist and the number of duplicative systems.
Here's the really good news. CEDCaP, in fact, is being
architected, engineered, and it is well on the way to replace
all of those, at least as many as are appropriate to the 2020
decennial and the concomitant operations, to replace that with
a single architected, well understood, not complicated
environment ecosystem, if you will, that will serve all data
collection and all operational processing of that data in the
conduct of the 2020 decennial.
Mr. Blum. The last thing, my time is running short, as I
was reading, it seems to me the largest savings is in the
Nonresponse Followup organization, $2.5 billion in savings,
which would be fantastic. The wording in there said that we've
developed or are developing a prototype system that
incorporates commercial off-the-shelf technology, which I think
is great, rather than developing it custom. Can you talk to me
about that?
Mr. Cooper. As much as I have been fully briefed and I
understand what I've been told, which are two different things,
the fact that we are using commercial off-the-shelf solutions
is certainly something that I, in my CIO role, are fully
supportive of. Based on your reflection on your background, I
fully concur with you.
By using commercially proven off-the-shelf software, same
thing that I testified just briefly about, the mobile devices,
mobile technology, that type of thing, those same benefits
apply, okay? We have proven technology. We've got a lot of
additional expertise that has been brought to bear. It usually
incorporates architected security features that we then can
take advantage of. They're well known, well proven across the
industry.
Wherever we can, and it's in the operational plan that was
recently shared with Congress and released publicly, we are
leveraging commercial off-the-shelf software and solutions.
Mr. Blum. Excellent.
And I'll yield back the time I do not have, Chairman
Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The CEDCaP program is intended to help the cost-saving
efforts for 2020. Mr. Cooper, your written testimony for today
notes that CEDCaP, ``aims to create an integrated and
standardized system-of-systems that will offer shared data
collection and processing across all Census Bureau
operations,'' and you seem very positive about the program.
Ms. Cha, what steps should the Bureau take to ensure that
CEDCaP systems are ready for planned end-to-end testing.
Ms. Cha. Sure. So with CEDCaP, the system-of-systems
approach, there are 12 projects underneath it. And what we find
across the Federal Government with these troubled or failed IT
projects, the common thread behind all of these is that they're
simply too large in scope. And so, obviously, with FITARA and
the best practices that GAO endorses, going incremental is the
right approach. You want to chunk out these large scope efforts
into these smaller pieces that are more manageable in nature.
So in looking at the scope of CEDCaP itself, it's simply
too large given the time remaining. And the concern that we
have from GAO's perspective is we're getting to a point where
time is going to drive the technology that can be delivered for
2020, as opposed to business requirements. So the absolute
first thing that the Bureau should be doing is to make these
key IT decisions as soon as possible.
Ms. Kelly. And what would be the effect if the Bureau does
not have that CEDCaP systems in place before end-to-end testing
begins?
Ms. Cha. Right. Well, the end-to-end testing is absolutely
critical ensuring that--in terms of an effect, you know, most
recently the most high profile effect that we have seen is
healthcare.gov, where they gave short shrift to that end-to-end
testing. And so if the schedules keep compressing and move to
the right, then we very could well could have another
healthcare.gov on our hands.
Ms. Kelly. Mr. Thompson, do you disagree with that?
Mr. Cooper. First, overall, we absolutely concur with our
GAO colleagues. We are doing some very specific things,
including applying learning from healthcare.gov. I would agree
with Ms. Cha that a significant failure was the lack of
comprehensive end-to-end testing.
We are doing, I think, exactly the right type of approach
and it does accommodate the recommendations coming from GAO.
First, one way to think about how we are going at CEDCaP is
it's a building block approach. I mean, playfully think Legos.
We're creating modules and we are thoroughly both planning the
integration, rigorous architecture around each of those
modules. Those modules or building blocks are then being
brought together. But we know where the integration of these
building blocks occurs, we have both unit testing and system
testing for each of these building blocks, and they are being
tested again.
So we have full-time. I admit we have to stay on schedule.
If we slip schedule, that's a risk. And I can share what we're
doing to prevent that and to accommodate it if it should occur.
But most important, we've built into our plan a very aggressive
and rigorous iterative approach, agile approach, so that we're
not building out the entire solution before we test anything.
We're testing as we go. The likelihood that we will miss any
fatal error becomes significantly reduced by this approach.
Then, when we kind of add and test, add and test, add and
test--and when I say add, it's additional functionality,
additional capability--what we end up with is significantly
reduced risk as we move toward our end-to-end testing.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Mr. Thompson, any other comments?
Mr. Thompson. No, I agree with Mr. Cooper. We enjoy the
relationship we have with the Department of Commerce and the
governance process that we have in place.
I would say one thing, that I was fortunate enough to have
been the career person in charge of the 2000 Census. And we
successfully delivered a number of very, very complicated IT
systems that were state of the art at the time.
When I went to NORC in Chicago we also put in place some
very, very sophisticated IT systems. So I have a lot of
experience in working with creating IT systems that work. And
that's one of the reasons I came back to the Bureau, because I
saw an opportunity to realize technology to save the government
a significant amount of money and improve accuracy.
Ms. Kelly. According to the operational plans, the Bureau
will begin preparations for end-to-end testing of all systems
and operations August 17. Is that accurate? 2017.
Mr. Thompson. That's accurate. We refer to it as the 2018
test because the Census Day is April 1, 2018, but we have to
start in preparations in 2017.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. I yield back also the time I don't have.
Mr. Meadows. I thank you.
Mr. Cooper, let me follow up on you indicated that one of
your concerns was that it was a proprietary technology, the
handheld technology of our previous fiasco, I guess is how I
would characterize it, and that somehow because we now have
smartphones that that's going to fix the problem.
We had smartphones in 2008, at least we did in North
Carolina. I assume you did here in Virginia. So if that's the
case, it's not really a hardware problem, it's something a lot
more significant than that.
Mr. Cooper. I would agree with you. What I meant by a
proprietary solution was is that we were building an integrated
hardware platform that was----
Mr. Meadows. Who was building it?
Mr. Cooper. Census Bureau and----
Mr. Thompson. Harris.
Mr. Cooper. Harris Corporation was the prime contractor on
that integrated solution.
Mr. Meadows. So when it failed, who pointed the finger at
whom?
Mr. Cooper. I would have to defer to my colleagues. I was
not present in the Department of Commerce at the time and I
don't know the answer.
Mr. Meadows. If I see somebody smiling behind you maybe you
can ask him.
Oh, you've got that Director Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. So I actually was involved in the issue. I
was called by Secretary Gutierrez to be on the special panel
that give him recommendations, so I did look at it. And it
seemed like that there was a lot going on on both sides in
terms of defining and agreeing on what the specifications
should have been. But the big problem was they were trying to
invent a software--a hardware technology that just didn't
exist.
Mr. Meadows. But aren't we trying to do--we're trying to
develop an app now for an iPhone? I don't want to say iPhone.
Android. Whatever it is. I mean, I can see that the endorsement
comes. Is that what we're trying to do, is develop an app?
Mr. Cooper. Yeah, the difference----
Mr. Meadows. Because here's my concern. We're talking about
all this testing that's going on. How do we test something that
we haven't even decided what the design is all about. I mean, I
don't buy that, that we're testing.
Mr. Cooper. That's fair. In this case what we are already
operationally field testing is the following: We are using a
well-proven--my remarks--a well-proven platform. Think of
this----
Mr. Meadows. So we're using the smartphone.
Mr. Cooper. All right. We have developed, it's already
developed, we have a developed application----
Mr. Meadows. You've got an app.
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So I could download the app on my phone today.
Mr. Cooper. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
So the field testing, most recently in Scottsdale, Arizona,
and it's planned now for several additional broader locations,
the application rides on a proven platform rather than that
integrated, single hardware integrated with proprietary
software that we did in 2010. A very different approach,
architected very different.
It allows us to do a couple very important things. First of
all, with a proven technology platform, what we are really
focused on is, as best we are able to, industry plus best
practice, industry best practice, our best practices, secure
the platform itself. More importantly, the application is about
collecting the data. We now have the ability to separately go
after securing the application, access to the application----
Mr. Meadows. And I get all that. Let me cut to the chase.
Mr. Cooper. Please.
Mr. Meadows. Here is my concern. Looking at your time frame
and how it's already moved to the right, and looking at when we
will be testing it and when you will go out with your RFP for
whether you build it or somebody else builds it, we're running
out of time. And if we're sitting there worried about how a
handheld device is collecting the very simplest of data, and I
come from where Google headquarters, all your data is stored in
my district, and so if that's what we are working on at this
point, you know, that's like saying we're working on the
steering mechanism for a car, believing that the car is going
to work okay. It may steer okay, but it may not run.
And so that may be a crude analogy, but we have to be a lot
more end to end in terms of what we're trying to do. And my
concern is from a technology standpoint, we are nowhere near
close, other than conceptual. And I see some heads shaking no,
so they're saying that that's inaccurate.
So go ahead, I'll give you this chance to--I'm sorry, I
keep reading body language behind you. But go ahead.
Mr. Cooper. We don't have the advantage of seeing behind,
but I can see it in the reflection of my glasses.
Mr. Meadows. You must not be a parent. We have eyes in the
back of our heads.
Mr. Thompson. I'm a parent, but my youngest kid is 30 years
old.
Mr. Meadows. Go ahead.
Mr. Thompson. So we have already built a prototype system
and tested it in the field and we are----
Mr. Meadows. For the data collection?
Mr. Thompson. For the data collection and for the control.
And we built that system using basically existing technology
and existing software from vendors. We only put our parameters
into it. We didn't invent new software.
The big decision we have to make is do we scale up this
prototype to do the whole Census or do we buy a solution to
scale it up. But we already have defined requirements for what
we need, that's the beauty of this prototype. So we have the
requirements for what the device has to do, and we have engaged
the Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute to help us
make the right build-or-buy decision and put that----
Mr. Meadows. But, Director, how is that different than what
we had in 2008? Because we had a defined technology. It was
proprietary given that, so maybe it was not proven. But how is
it different than that?
Mr. Thompson. So in 2008 they didn't have the
specifications.
Mr. Meadows. So we designed something with not knowing?
You've got to be kidding.
Mr. Thompson. They were still trying to design the
specifications.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. All right.
Ms. Cha, let me come to you. What am I missing here in
terms of do you have concerns?
Ms. Cha. We do have concerns. And, Chairman Meadows, to be
clear, the systems that they're talking about at this time are
the applications. These are prototype systems. And, again, in
terms of scaling it to the production needs for 2020, we do
have concerns that given the available time remaining, that
hardening those prototypes so that they meet 2020, that's not
an assumption--I think that's a dangerous assumption to make,
that these prototype systems will be in place.
But I think for the key lesson learned from 2010, coming
out of that, it's that the Bureau underestimated the technical
complexity associated with those handhelds. And so even though
they are not developing new devices, that lesson is still
important in looking at the total magnitude of what they are
intending to do with the operational control system to manage
the field work with the Internet response option, with the
devices that ultimately will be deployed.
When you look at this collectively in the remaining time, I
think it's fair for the Bureau to again make decisions now,
take steps to reduce scope, take things off of the table so
that they are positioned for success.
Mr. Meadows. I'm out of time. Let me just share this. We
want you to succeed. But the other thing that Mr. Connolly and
I and Mr. Hurd and Ms. Kelly, we don't want egg on our face.
And there is no way I'm going to allow this to continue to
progress without certainty.
Mr. Cooper, one of the problems I see is the lack of
specificity in terms of deadlines and what is to be
accomplished by those deadlines. So I'd ask that you work with
the committee on providing that.
And ultimately you're going to have four people, as Mr.
Connolly said, willing to go and fight for appropriations and
get you the tools, but lack of planning and lack of strategic
implementation is something that we don't want to find 6
months, 12 months from now where we are spending a lot of money
going the other way.
I'm going to recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Clay, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And hopefully I can take
some liberties with the time just to share with you and the
rest of the committee that for the 2010 Census I was sitting in
your chair, I chaired the Oversight Committee. And when we ran
into the issue with the handheld, it cost the taxpayers quite a
bit. It doubled the cost of the 2010 Census compared to the
2000 Census. And it was a mistake that should have been
avoided, but wasn't. And so hopefully we have learned from that
mistake.
And according to GAO, fundamental weaknesses in key IT
management practices contributed to the Bureau not being able
to successfully deploy custom-developed handheld enumeration
devices for Nonresponse Followup, which increased the cost of
the Census by up to $3 billion.
GAO has reported that the Bureau faces a number of
challenges with, ``developing and deploying the information
technology systems and infrastructure it plans to rely on to
conduct the significantly redesigned 2020 Census.''
Ms. Cha, is that correct?
Ms. Cha. That's correct.
Mr. Clay. Mr. Cooper, what is your response to that
assessment?
Mr. Cooper. I think, as we have stated, first, we agree
with the GAO recommendations. We are working diligently to
respond to all of those recommendations. We've shared some of
the numbers and the status with you. We'll continue, you have
my commitment, we'll continue to keep all of you informed of
this status as we move forward.
I heard Chairman Meadows loud and clear over addressing the
concern over lack of decision deadlines; same point made by
GAO. I hear it. I will certainly personally take the commitment
to address it, working with my Census Bureau colleagues.
I think that's the quick summary of the approach, and I'm
more than happy to come back, dive into detail, and add any
additional information that would be helpful.
Mr. Clay. All right, okay.
Now, let me address the next one to Mr. Cooper. And let me
preface this by saying this is 2015, and if I'm correct, this
is the time to ramp up, to get ready for the 2020 Census. And,
Mr. Thompson, I heard you loud and clear that this is not the
time for Congress to be playing tricks and using smoke and
mirrors with the Census Bureau's budget because this is ramp-up
time, this is time for you to be prepared to eventually get to
2020 and conduct the Census successfully and to eliminate the
undercounts and the overcounts.
But, Mr. Thompson, in April 2014, GAO reported that the
Bureau had not prioritized key IT research and testing needed
for its design decisions. How do you respond to that?
Mr. Thompson. So what we have done is we have been working
very diligently to do research and testing. We started in 2013
when the Bureau--that's before I got there, the Bureau had some
budget cuts, and they reprioritized their whole, entire
research program. And importantly, they established the key
milestone, which was for the beginning of fiscal year 2016,
this past September, that they would release an operational
plan that did two things. It laid out as many key decisions as
could be made and, importantly, laid out a process for making
the remaining decisions.
And we have at the Bureau done that. We released an
operational plan. It lays out a schedule. It lays out a
schedule for making our key decisions, leading up to an
integrated end-to-end task in 2018--well, Census Day is 2018,
it starts in 2017.
Mr. Clay. Sure.
Mr. Chairman, may I talk to Mr. Goldenkoff, because he and
I were involved in the 2010 Census.
Do you see anything we need to be watching out for going
from this time line forward that are similar to what we
experienced in the 2010 Census?
Mr. Goldenkoff. Yes. I think that both the Census Bureau,
the Department of Commerce, and both subcommittees need to be
extremely sensitive to the early warning signs. And I think
that some of those early warning sides were not heeded back in
the lead-up to the 2010 Census. For example, GAO had pointed
out a number of issues with the handheld device beginning, I
believe, in 2006. There were yellow flags being raised all over
the place. And there was just a tendency, I think, for the
Census Bureau to perhaps discount some of those concerns.
I think the environment is much better now, the Census
Bureau is much more responsive to recommendations from us, to
your oversight, from the IG's office, but we just need to be
sensitive to those early warning signs. Delays, you know,
concerns about the lack of time, they're starting to crop up.
So funding issues, need to make sure that the Census Bureau has
reliable funding throughout the course of the decade. It is not
only the actual amount of the money that they get, obviously
that's important, but uncertainty is also an issue too.
So those are some things that right now, while there's
still time, we all need to be sensitive to.
Mr. Clay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman for his insightful
questions.
And the chair recognizes Mr. Grothman, the gentleman from
Wisconsin.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I have a couple of questions here.
Over time I think, you know, insofar as a garden variety
legislator who calls about the Census, it's about some of the
questions that are asked. Not about the Census every 10 years,
but, I don't know what you call them, these more broad
questionnaires that get sent out, correct? What do they call
them, the broader----
Mr. Thompson. Are you referring to the American Community
Survey?
Mr. Grothman. Yeah. How long do you retain the information
on those surveys?
Mr. Thompson. Since they are part of the decennial Census,
we retain a permanent record of them. And 72 years after
they're collected then they can be made available to the
American public.
Mr. Grothman. You mean, you're even going to make those
available sometime, even 72 years?
Mr. Thompson. In 72 years, yes, sir.
Mr. Grothman. What are we doing to make sure? I mean, some
of those things when I get questions they wonder why is it any
of the government's business. And while it hasn't necessarily
been your organization, certainly other government
organizations have not been able to protect their data. Maybe
that's an impossible thing to do, but I am just saying you've
got to realize that when you fill out a government form there's
a possibility that someday the whole country will know what's
on it.
Are you doing anything--I'll put it this way. On those
community surveys, is there any reason why that stuff has to be
held more than 3 or 4 years?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, sir, it's part of our national records
program. And so as being part of the decennial Census we're
mandated to make those records available to the public for a
number of important reasons, so people can look at--can do
ancestor research, so people can understand how their ancestors
were working.
Mr. Grothman. I understand it's kind of cool that I can
look up and find my, whatever, great-grandfather was living
wherever in 1880. But beyond that, there's stuff here that
people don't want to have let out. So I'll ask you again, why--
given that I would assume sooner or later you're going have a
breach of your database, every other government agency seems
to--is there any reason why you personally feel that if I fill
out a form some information of which may be considered somewhat
personal or at least they don't want everybody to know, any
philosophical reason why that stuff has to be kept around?
Mr. Thompson. As I said, we at the Census Bureau believe
it's very important that we maintain a record of the Census and
make that available in 72 years.
Now, the Census Bureau takes security and privacy of our
information very, very seriously, and we could go into great
lengths about how we go about protecting the PII of our
respondents and how we have a number of layers between that and
any way to get to it. And so that's job one. Plus, we have some
really severe penalties in place if there is willful disclosure
of any kind of information.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I'm sure that the IRS takes their
responsibility seriously and whatever our equivalent of human
resources is takes their responsibility seriously. And I
realize we want to keep the bare bones minimum of the Census
available out there. Like I said, we should maybe always know
that Glenn Grothman in 2020 is living in Glenbeulah, Wisconsin.
But why are we keeping all this more personal stuff? What is
the sense of keeping that available for either some hacker to
get ahold of it or even some busybody to look at it in 70
years?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, we are actually mandated by
law--and don't ask me the specific cite, I'll be happy to get
it to you--to maintain those records as part of the decennial
Census.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. But you don't have an opinion on it
personally?
Mr. Thompson. My opinion is to do the Census as the
Congress shall direct. So that's basically my opinion.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I'll give you one more question here,
which is kind of the parting question. We still don't know
whether you're going to use the NDNH or the kids link sources.
When are you going to decide whether you're going to use those
or not, or what is going to determine whether or not you're
going to use them, have access to them?
Mr. Thompson. So we're going to make our final decision on
the exact administrative records we'll use, which will be in
2018, and that would include whatever we've been able to put
together, and that's what we're going to go forward with. We're
not going to change after that point.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the gentlemen and ranking member for
calling this important hearing and all of the participants
today. The Census is mandated in the United States
Constitution. It's a requirement illustrated right in the
Constitution. And historians constantly refer to it, documents
refer to in it ways that help us understand our history and
understand our country. And I'm glad that we're focusing on it,
because if we don't have good data, if we don't have a good
Census, then we don't have good policy.
I would also say the Census is relied on more and more by
businesses and others to understand our country, where we are,
where we're going, what our needs are. And I would say the
allocation of Federal funds is dependent on Census data, as is
oftentimes public policy in general, and it's incredibly
important.
But that said, I want to really associate myself with the
comments of the prior speaker on the importance of keeping it
confidential, that this is a critical trust that this be kept
confidential until 70 years later. And I do want to cite that
there happens to be a Broadway play playing right now in New
York on a violation of the Census data during World War II,
where the Census data was used to round up Japanese Americans
and place them in detention camps. It's probably the worst
chapter of the Census in the history of our country, that our
sacred data that we pledge will be confidential was violated.
So that was a bad, bad, bad era.
But I do want to go back to cybersecurity and that we have
to take the cybersecurity seriously. And I want to say that in
light of a recent cyber incident at the Bureau, I want to
better understand the data controls currently in place. I don't
believe that the Census would ever give up data in this day and
time, you know, willingly. I don't believe that at all. I think
it's totally confidential. But I am concerned about a cyber
incident.
And I'd like to ask Mr. Thompson, the Director, on July 24
you issued a statement confirming that the Bureau, and I am
quoting from you, ``experienced an attack to gain access to the
Federal Audit Clearinghouse.'' And can you first explain to us
what is the Federal Audit Clearinghouse? And your statement
went on to say, ``While our IT forensics investigation
continues, I want to assure you that at this time every
indication is that the breach was limited to the this database
and that it did not include personally identifiable information
provided by people responding to our Census and surveys.''
So your comment please on that.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. So that is a database--what we
call a Web-facing database that we maintain that sits between
our firewall and the outside. And so that database was
maintained for people to put certain types of information in
which is nonsensitive information and that's the database that,
unfortunately, got breached. We've taken steps since then,
which Mr. Cooper could explain better than I can because he's
more of an IT person, to rectify that problem.
But importantly, we also have safeguards that will not let
anything past our firewall which will get to the personally
identified information at the Census Bureau, and that was not
breached in that circumstance.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Can you share with us the results from
the forensic investigation, Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, ma'am, I can.
Mrs. Maloney. And what steps have you taken to prevent a
similar cyber incident in the future?
Mr. Cooper. Okay. First what our forensic analysis has
shown to date is that gives us the time line of the attack and
the source addresses from which the attack was launched, both--
--
Mrs. Maloney. Where do you think it came from? Where do you
think the attack came from?
Mr. Cooper. In this environment, could I maybe follow up
and get with you all in a different physical environment to
discuss that with you please?
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper. If you'd allow me to do that.
Now, we've also worked very, very closely with our
colleagues at the FBI and with the Department of Homeland
Security, so that that becomes part of the intelligence
community environment, that helps us at the Census Bureau, it
helps our colleagues across the Federal Government. So there's
the first part that I can answer in this setting today.
Second part. We have indeed installed new security
measures, and let me give you a quick summary of those.
First of all, we have--we're in the process of implementing
Web application scanning capability that we did not have
broadly in place at the time of that breach. We've also
included funding in our fiscal year 2016 budget to bring the
cybersecurity company we used in fiscal year 2015, ``we'' in
this case being the Census Bureau, back to do another scan.
And I have instituted as the CIO regular scanning. We have
reached out to some other Federal departments to assist us with
what's called blue team assessments, blue team attacks, which
are friendly attacks against our environment to help identify
threats and vulnerabilities that we may not have uncovered
ourselves.
We're also actively engaged with our colleagues at the
Department of Homeland Security. We have fully implemented all
available Einstein precautions to enhance and strengthen our
cyber scanning capability to identify threats and critical
vulnerabilities. We're working very closely with the
Department, Department of Homeland Security, to implement as
part of what's known as phase two of the Continuing Diagnostics
and Mitigation program of DHS. We are now working and we will
be deploying additional CDM capability, more scanning and
software tools, sensors, in our networks.
All of this strengthens our environment and enhances our
capability from the time of the breach even till now, and will
continue to do that going forward.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, my time has expired, but possibly you
could get back to us in writing the controls the Census Bureau
has in place to protect this collected data.
Mrs. Maloney. I think it's very important. And people want
to know that their data is protected, as the gentleman
mentioned earlier.
I thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
Just for planning purposes, we're going to have a very
brief second round of questions, and by very brief only a few
members, I think, are going to participate in that.
So the chair will recognize the chairman of the
subcommittee, Mr. Hurd, for a series of questions.
Mr. Hurd. Gene Dadaro is going to get mad at me for asking
this question, but, Ms. Cha, I hear there is a position
available at the Bureau, the Census Bureau, for chief of
business integration. Would you be interested in taking a
sabbatical to take that position? I think you would be well-
positioned for that.
But, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Thompson, if I understand this
correctly, you're basically crowdsourcing people to answer
some--you know, to get better information, have them get that
information into you. We didn't even get to ask many questions.
Not knowing how many people you expect to respond to that,
that's going to drive your technology decisions and the
infrastructure. Two years out, that's difficult.
But let me understand this bring your own device or buying
a new device. Are we talking about having--buying actual
smartphones that have the app already on there with the
security systems established or are we talking about a new
designed device that's not a smartphone but it's used
specifically for you all? I'm confused.
Mr. Cooper. Okay. In this case it would be the former of
your two scenarios.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. So it's a smartphone that everyone is going
to use. And when are you going to make the decision----
Mr. Cooper. That would be option one, and that would be a
government-furnished device. Options two would be bring your
own device and we will then load the----
Mr. Hurd. And when are you making this decision on which?
Mr. Cooper. September 2016.
Mr. Hurd. September--how many months is that?
Mr. Cooper. It's about not quite a year from now.
Mr. Hurd. Why 12 months, why that long to make a simple
decision that's going to base--that's going to drive your
entire plan?
Mr. Cooper. That allows us to complete the planned and
already in motion, in process set of field operation tests so
that we can make both an economic-based determination as well
as a security-based determination and include privacy and
functionality.
Mr. Hurd. I recognize the privacy and security concerns of
having people bringing their own device and uploading that
information onto some system or server that touches all of your
databases. But this is not a new technology, right? Everybody
on this platform have probably block walked at some point in
time and this is just block walking on steroids.
And I represent a very rural part of Texas that doesn't
have cell phone service and we would still be able to do that.
So the necessity to have a year of testing a technology and a
process that is used pretty significantly is shocking to me.
And that's something that I'd love to continue to talk about
another time.
I have two final questions, a separate issue. It is my
understanding that missionaries and other individuals
temporarily overseas with a clear intent to return would not be
included in the Census. Is this correct?
Mr. Thompson. Congressman, we are in the process right now
of determining the residence rules that we will use for the
2020 Census. Recently we sent out the rules that we use for
where to count people, who to count in 2010 for public comment.
We received a number of comments, and we are now in the process
of responding to those comments, and we will then issue our
plan for 2020. In the last Census, if someone was permanently
away from the United States we did not count them in the United
States.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. We would welcome your documentation in
writing on this process, it is important to a number of
members.
Mr. Hurd. And also, in the 112th Congress, Senator Hatch
and Representative Bishop introduced companion bills requiring
that all citizens of the United States temporarily living
abroad at the time of the Census be counted and attributed to
the State they had most recently lived in. This legislation
also provided for the use of administrative records to assist
in the count. Can you describe any concerns you have with this
legislation? And we would love to see that in writing if you
all haven't done the analysis of that.
Mr. Thompson. At this point I'd have to respond to you in
writing.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Connolly, for
a series of questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper, these are, I hope, brief answers to brief
questions. Following up on Mrs. Maloney's questioning, you
mentioned Einstein. Part of the problem with the breach at OPM
was Einstein 3, I believe, was not yet fully implemented. Are
we at Einstein 3 for the Census?
Mr. Cooper. We are where our telecom providers have already
put the Einstein 3 capabilities in place.
Mr. Connolly. Good.
Mr. Cooper. There is one telecom provider that is not quite
at Einstein 3.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Good to know.
Mr. Cooper. The answer is yes.
Mr. Connolly. Secondly, in response to, I think, Mr. Blum's
questioning, I think you acknowledged that there could be
roughly 100 different systems--I guess at Census or Commerce?
Mr. Cooper. That would be Census.
Mr. Connolly. Census. Presumably some of these are legacy
systems.
Mr. Cooper. Absolutely, yes. I don't know the quantitative
breakout. I can follow up and----
Mr. Connolly. Some of those systems do not lend themselves
as a result to encryption. Is that correct?
Mr. Cooper. That is correct, in some cases.
Mr. Connolly. So that makes them more vulnerable, not less
vulnerable to hacking.
Mr. Cooper. It's my understanding--and I'm going to defer,
I'm going to ask over my shoulder to kind of make sure I don't
misstate this--it is my understanding that while we do have
legacy systems involved somewhere in that 112, it's my
understanding that we don't have a situation where a legacy
system that's directly involved in supporting Census operations
leading to the 2020 decennial is not able to be encrypted.
Is that a valid statement?
Okay. Yes. So that would not be a situation we would run
into in support of the 2020 Census.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Thank you.
I think that's it for now, thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I want to close by thanking each of the
witnesses here. I guess the most important thing, I was talking
to the ranking member, what we would like to do is not in a
hearing setting, but necessarily in a briefing setting is set
some regular updates of which actually all four of you would be
welcome for those regular updates. I think over the next 12
months I see that as a critical window. And as much as we want
to talk about 2020, I think the next 12 to 18 months is our go-
or-no-go timeframe. And so in doing that, to have quarterly
briefings as to where we're making progress and where we're
not.
Is everybody okay with doing that?
I see--let the record show everybody nodded in the
affirmative.
And, Director Thompson, Mr. Cooper, thank you, thank your
staff for the work. I mean, sometimes it is only thought about
when we get the results or when we have someone knocking at our
door. There is obviously years of planning that go ahead of
that time to make sure that it's done seamlessly. And we're
going to count on 2020 being done seamlessly. And so I would do
that.
I would also be remiss in saying that many of the
recommendations that the GAO are making are raising concerns.
If they're not happy, I'm probably not going to be happy. And
so I just want to stress that, that it is critical that we work
hand in glove together, because failure is not an option.
And with that, thank each you for your testimony here
today.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:16 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
