- EXAMINING LAW ENFORCEMENT USE OF CELL PHONE TRACKING DEVICES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING LAW ENFORCEMENT USE OF CELL PHONE TRACKING DEVICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-69

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

21-433 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK, MULVANEY, South Carolina       BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Troy D. Stock, IT Subcommittee Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
Subcommittee on Information Technology

WILL HURD, Texas, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice Chair  ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Ranking
MARK WALKER, North Carolina              Member
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
TED LIEU, California

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on October 21, 2015.................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Elana Tyrangiel, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General,
Office of Legal Policy, U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. Seth Stodder, Assistant Secretary, Threat Prevention and
Security Policy, U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14

APPENDIX

Questions for the Record.........................................    32

EXAMINING LAW ENFORCEMENT USE OF CELL PHONE TRACKING DEVICES

----------

Wednesday, October 21, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:52 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hurd, Walker, Blum, Chaffetz,
Connolly, and Lieu.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology will
come to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
Today's hearing has a narrow but very important focus,
Federal law enforcement agencies' use of cell site simulator
devices, otherwise known as IMSI-catchers or stingrays.
Today's hearing also touches on fundamental questions of
privacy that we have grappled with since the founding of this
country. When and how, can or should the government use
technology to locate people? What notice or information, if
any, must people be given about the technology used to locate
them? To what extent must the government take into account the
rights of innocent people who may be swept into a law
enforcement dragnet? And how can we protect our civil liberties
and defend the homeland at the same time? These are essential
questions.
Today's hearing won't give us a definitive answer to all
these questions, but I hope that representatives from DHS, and
DOJ, will be able to shed light on some of them and that this
conversation will begin to reveal answers on others.
Tracking a person's movements for an extended period of
time can reveal almost anything and everything about them. What
establishments they frequent, whether or not they are church
goers, who their friends are, and their day-to-day hobbies.
Geolocation is more than a record of where you are or were,
it's a window into who we are.
The Founders considered the ability of average citizens to
keep things private from the government of such importance,
that they built it into the Constitution. Thanks to the Fourth
Amendment, we have the right to be secure in our persons,
houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and
seizures. Simply put, unless, and until law enforcement can
convince a judge to issue a probable cause warrant, they don't
get to disrupt that security.
Cell site simulator devices work by impersonating a cell
phone tower and forcing all mobile phones within range into
connecting with the device. Once a stingray connects with a
cellular phone, it is able to identify that cell phone's unique
identifying number and to identify the approximate location of
the phone.
There are also collateral consequences for the owners of
non-targeted phones in the area. While searching for the target
phone, the device will also make contact with other non-target
cell phones that happen to be within range of the simulator
device, even if those phones' owners are not suspected of
criminal wrongdoing.
After considerable congressional, public, and media
interest, both DOJ and DHS decided to create agency-wide
policies governing the use of these devices. While there may be
some lingering concerns about the substance of the policies,
which we will discuss here today, in balance the policies are a
big step forward for DOJ and DHS, and a win for transparency
and privacy advocates everywhere, as well as this is a win for
the American people. What does worry me, however, is that it
took the extra scrutiny to convince DOJ and DHS to make these
changes, and I remain troubled that Federal law enforcement is
still not embracing transparency the way they need to in 2015.
I know, and I think, better than most, the need for the
government to keep certain things secret from the public.
Secrets in the wrong hands get people killed, but secrecy is a
double-edged sword. Right now only about one in four Americans
trust the Federal Government. If you do not have the trust of
the people you are fighting for and with, you have nothing.
I commend DOJ and DHS for their efforts here, but this
can't be the exception. Law enforcement must continually strive
to appropriately balance privacy and security issues in the
digital age and they must continue to be transparent with
Congress, and the public, about the choices and trade-offs we
face.
I hope today's hearing is a small step in beginning to
bridge the gulf that has developed between our Nation's
policies and the citizens they are meant to protect.
Our witnesses today are Elana Tyrangiel, the Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Office of Legal Policy at
the U.S. Department of Justice, and Seth Stodder, the Assistant
Secretary of Threat Prevention and Security Policy at the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security. I thank the witnesses for
being here today and look forward to their testimony.
And now it's a pleasure to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Lieu, for 5 minutes for your opening statement.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Hurd, for holding today's
hearing to examine law enforcement's use of cell phone tracking
devices.
In September of this year, the Department of Justice
announced its new policy on cell site simulators, commonly
known as stingrays, aimed at enhancing privacy protections and
establishing a consistent legal standard for obtaining
authority to use a simulator. Most Federal law enforcement will
now be required to obtain a search warrant supported by
probably cause, consistent with the protections of the Fourth
Amendment.
Earlier this week the Department of Homeland Security
announced its Department-wide policy, which similarly
establishes a higher and more consistent legal standard of a
search warrant requirement. At the time of the DOJ
announcement, I released a statement calling the policy change
a welcome first step and suggested we need committee hearings
on this issue, and I am pleased Chairman Hurd is holding this
hearing today.
As new technology empowered law enforcement with unique
capabilities, stringent rules are needed to safeguard against
abuse of our civil liberties. The search warrant requirement
establishes a consistent legal standard for Federal authorities
and will allow increased oversight of the use of cell site
simulators. Even those limited circumstances when a warrant is
not required for use of such a cell site simulator, there are
controls in place that help ensure that the exceptions are not
abused. I look forward to the witnesses today providing more
details on what those exceptions are and the safeguards that
are put in place.
These further policies are needed to guard against abuse of
individuals' privacy and civil liberties. Their data collection
retention practices, and new policy are intended to enhance
privacy protections, and hopefully they do so without
undermining a law enforcement tool.
I believe that these policy changes by DOJ and DHS, while a
good step forward, could, and should go further. As the ACLU
has noted, the policy guidance contains significant gaps,
including overbroad exceptions to warrant requirement, lack of
notice to individuals impacted by stingrays, and lack of
transparency reporting. These agency policy changes also do not
meaningfully restrict State and local officials who use
stingrays and the majority of U.S. States that do not regulate
them. I hope that State and local law enforcement agencies
follow the lead of these Federal policies and implement
stringent privacy protections and legal standards.
In my home State of California, for example, Governor Jerry
Brown recently signed into law the California Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, joining nine other States with laws
that require State law enforcement to get a warrant before
using cell site simulators. The California law also requires a
warrant before law enforcement can search metadata or other
electronic communications.
I also note that the Federal policy changes discussed today
here are reversible, and they do not apply to all Federal
agencies. As we have seen in the past, not all administrations
or agencies have had respect for the Fourth Amendment or our
civil liberties. We should follow the lead of multiple States,
including my own, and enshrine these policies into law across
all agencies to make clear that the Fourth Amendment needs to
be respected and persons have the right to be free from
unreasonable search and seizure by the government.
I would like to commend Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, Subcommittee Chair Hurd, and Ranking Member Kelly,
for the oversight work related to cell site simulators. In
April of this year, the committee sent letters to DOJ and DHS
requesting information and briefings on policies surrounding
cell site simulators, which increased the committee's
visibility into the policies governing the use of this law
enforcement tool.
I also want to thank the agencies appearing today for
taking the time to testify about these important policy
changes, and thank the witnesses especially for being here.
As with other policies regulating government use of
technology for law enforcement and surveillance purposes, it is
vital that we closely examine the rules to ensure we fully
understand what is permitted. I look forward to reviewing
policies related to the collection of geolocation and other
electronic data to ensure that law enforcement tools are being
employed consistently and with respect for privacy and civil
liberties.
And I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Congressman Lieu.
Mr. Hurd. And thank you and Ranking Member Kelly.
Mr. Lieu. Sure.
Mr. Hurd. I yield back.
Mr. Lieu. One more thing before I conclude. I would like to
enter the ACLU letter for the record, if that's okay.
Mr. Hurd. So moved.
Mr. Lieu. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. I will hold the record open for 5 legislative
days for any members who would like to submit a written
statement.
Mr. Hurd. And now we will recognize our panel of witnesses.
I'm pleased to welcome Ms. Elana Tyrangiel, Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General at the Office of Legal Policy at the
Department of Justice. Thanks for being here. And, again, Mr.
Seth Stodder, Assistant Secretary of Threat Prevention and
Security Policy at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome to you both.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. So please rise and raise your
right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit you
all's testimony for 5 minutes, and your entire written
statement will be made part of the record.
Ms. Tyrangiel, we will start with you. You are recognized
now for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF ELANA TYRANGIEL

Ms. Tyrangiel. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Lieu, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify on behalf of the Department of Justice regarding the
Department's policy guidance on the use of cell site simulator
technology. We appreciate the opportunity to engage with the
subcommittee on this important topic.
Cell site simulators are critical tools that play an
essential role in the Department's law enforcement and public
safety missions. The Department has deployed this technology,
for example, in efforts to locate and recover kidnapping
victims, in operations to apprehend dangerous and violent
fugitives, and in complex drug trafficking investigations. The
Department uses cell site simulators only in the fraction of
cases in which the tool is the most effective means of
achieving a particular public safety objective, and as with any
law enforcement capability, Department personnel must use cell
site simulators consistent with constitutional and statutory
requirements.
As you know, in September the Department announced a new
policy governing its use of cell site simulators. The policy
applies Department-wide, establishing common principles for the
use of cell site simulators in support of criminal
investigations in the United States. It applies when Department
personnel are working in cooperation with State and local law
enforcement and it makes clear that cell site simulators may
not be used to collect the content of any communication.
The policy seeks to accomplish four basic objectives:
first, to improve training and supervision, second, to
establish a higher and more consistent legal standard, third,
to enhance transparency and accountability, and finally, to
increase privacy protections. I'd like to briefly discuss each
of these.
First, the policy sets forth a number of measures to ensure
that law enforcement officers using cell site simulators are
trained and supervised appropriately. Each law enforcement
agency must establish training protocols, which must include
training on privacy and civil liberties. Each agency must also
name an executive level point of contact, who will be
responsible for ensuring implementation of, and compliance
with, the policy in each jurisdiction. Finally, any use of a
cell site simulator must be approved in advance by appropriate
personnel. The required level of seniority for the approval
depends on the type of use involved.
Second, the policy generally requires law enforcement
agents to obtain a search warrant supported by probable cause
before using a cell site simulator. There are two limited
exceptions to the warrant requirement. The first is an exigent
circumstances, a well established exception under Fourth
Amendment law, where the needs of law enforcement are so
compelling that they render a warrantless search objectively
reasonable. Even in these circumstances, agents still must
comply with the Pen Register statute. The second limited
exception is for cases in which the Fourth Amendment does not
require a warrant, and circumstances make obtaining a search
warrant impracticable. Again, in these circumstances agents
still would need to comply with the Pen Register statute.
Third, the policy enhances transparency to courts by
requiring law enforcement agents to make clear in their warrant
applications that a cell site simulator may be used. Finally,
the policy protects individuals' privacy interests by
establishing consistent practices for handling the data
obtained by these devices.
As I have noted, the policy prohibits the use of cell site
simulators to obtain the contents of any communication, nor do
the devices obtain subscriber information. Even so, the policy
establishes deletion requirements for the types of information
that they do collect. Auditing programs in each agency will
ensure that these requirements are followed.
In sum, cell site simulators offer critical support of the
Department's public safety and law enforcement missions, but as
with other capabilities, the Department is committed to using
the technology in a manner that is consistent with the
Constitution and all other legal authorities while respecting
individuals' privacy and civil liberties. We hope and believe
the policy properly accomplishes these objectives while
clearing up any misperceptions.
The Department of Justice appreciates the opportunity to
discuss our policy with the committee, and I look forward to
your questions here today.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Tyrangiel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Mr. Stodder, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SETH STODDER

Mr. Stodder. Thank you. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Lieu,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to talk with you today about the Department of
Homeland Security's policy for how our officers use cell site
simulator technology in support of criminal investigations to
protect the American public, and in some cases to locate and
rescue victims of human trafficking, child exploitation, and
kidnapping.
In fact, in one recent case, ICE officers used the
technology to rescue a 6-year-old girl who was held hostage by
human smugglers in Arizona. And this technology is also used by
the Secret Service to protect the President and other
dignitaries under the service's protective umbrella.
Needless to say, this is an important tool, but it's also a
technology that must be used responsibly and consistent with
our duty to protect the constitutional rights of the American
people. In that spirit, DHS issued a new policy this week on
the use of this technology by our officers. I believe the new
DHS policy draws the right balance between enabling our
officers to use this important tool and protecting the privacy
and civil liberties of Americans.
Cell site simulators allow DHS officers to identify and
generally locate the mobile devices of the subjects and victims
of active criminal investigations. They work by collecting
signals from cellular devices within the cell site simulator's
vicinity, usually within under 1,000 feet, and providing the
operator the relative signal strength in the general direction
of a subject's cellular device. A cell site simulator, though,
is not a GPS locator. It does not provide precise geolocation.
And a few other things worth highlighting here as well in
terms of what cell site simulators can't do. They don't provide
sending subscriber account information or any other personal
information. And the cell site simulators used by DHS do not
collect the content of any communications, no data, no emails,
no text messages, no voice communications. No content.
The new policy issued this week supports the continued use
of cell site simulators by our officers, but it also
strengthens management controls over the use of this
technology. Let me highlight a few provisions that are similar
to the DOJ policy.
First, the new policy clarifies that before using cell site
simulator technology, our officers generally must obtain a
warrant from a court founded upon probable cause. There's no
Supreme Court authority on this issue, but as a matter of DHS
policy, we've concluded that requiring our officers to obtain a
warrant, founded on probable cause, is the appropriate standard
here. It draws the right balance between protecting the public
and preserving the privacy and civil liberties of Americans.
There are two narrow exceptions to this general rule.
First, exigent circumstances, as my compatriot here
discussed, the well-established exception under the Fourth
Amendment in emergency cases. And, again, as with the DOJ
policy, we require these circumstances, a showing of probable
cause, but also the use of the Pen Register statute.
Second, under the DHS policy, there is an exception for
exceptional circumstances. It's another very specific
exception, and in practice, really only applies to the Secret
Service's protective mission. The Secret Service's duty is to
investigate potential threats to the President or other
protected persons, and often this involves very limited
information in immediate timeframes. And sometimes the
information's cryptic, it may not meet the probable cause
standard that is required under exigent circumstances.
But the threat is imminent, the President's nearby, the
consequences of attack obviously are significant and high. In
these circumstances, the Secret Service needs to locate an
individual immediately in order to ensure the President's
safety. This is a very limited and narrow exception to the
general rule, and in these circumstances, DHS policy does not
require probable cause or a warrant, but does require approval
of both an executive within the Secret Service as well as the
local U.S. attorney. The policy also requires a court order
under the Pen Register statute or an emergency Pen Register.
The policy also establishes several other key management
controls that we believe also draw the right balance between
protecting the public and protecting civil liberties and
privacy rights. First, the DHS policy requires that
applications for search warrants must include an affidavit
explaining to the court what a cell site simulator is, how it
works, why it will be used in a particular case, and the minor
impact it might have on cellular devices in the area; no hiding
the ball from the court.
Second, the DHS policy draws a strong line on data
retention. Bottom line, after a mission is done and the target
is identified or located, the operator of a cell site simulator
must delete all data from the device.
Third, the DHS policy requires components to train and
supervise their officers using the cell site simulators.
In sum, we believe that the new DHS policy draws the right
balance here between enabling our officers to use cell site
simulator technology to keep dangerous criminals off the street
and protect the public, and also making sure that we protect
the civil liberties and privacy rights of the American people.
Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Lieu, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you again for the
opportunity to testify today. Look forward to answering any
questions you might have.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you for your opening remarks.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Stodder follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. And now it's a pleasure to recognize my friend
and colleague from the great State of North Carolina, Mr.
Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Tyrangiel, Mr. Stodder, thank you for being here.
Mr. Stodder. Thank you.
Mr. Walker. I commend both your Departments for requiring
warrants for the use of these cell site simulators.
Ms. Tyrangiel, you mentioned that these are now only used
on a fraction of cases. Numeric-wise, statistics, do you have
any data, when you say fraction of cases, what percentage are
we looking at?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So as I mentioned, these are critical
technologies that are deployed in things like kidnappings and
complex narcotics investigations and fugitive apprehensions.
Those things do occur every day. But, the fraction of those
cases in which a cell site simulator is deployed is small. I
don't have numbers for you today, but I'm happy to get back
with you.
Mr. Walker. If you would get those numbers to us, because a
fraction, may be broad definitions there.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Stodder, do you have anything to add to
that?
Mr. Stodder. I have a similar response, in the sense that,
I mean, they are a very important tool that's used by both
Homeland Security investigations within ICE, as well as the
Secret Service, and they are used in a very small fraction of
cases, but I don't have the numbers with me here, but we can
get those.
Mr. Walker. Fair enough.
Mr. Walker. Several of you mentioned--both of you mentioned
as far as new policy, Mr. Stodder, and some things that changed
September the 1st. Before that timeline, were you allowed to
retain, or ascertain communication before the new policy was
instituted? Ms. Tyrangiel?
Ms. Tyrangiel. This policy makes clear that devices must be
configured not to collect content.
Mr. Walker. Before September 1, did you collect other
content?
Ms. Tyrangiel. I will have to get back to you about what
the policy said, but--I'll have to take that back.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Mr. Stodder?
Mr. Stodder. Well, this is the first overarching DHS policy
on the use of cell site simulators, but the components before
this policy certainly used cell site simulators but did not use
them to collect content at all. I mean, literally the
technology is not configured to collect content, at least the
technology that DHS----
Mr. Walker. Well, I'm glad to hear that we have new
policies. I do have some trepidation about what we were
collecting before then. I hope that we can get that information
back as well.
Mr. Stodder. Sure.
Mr. Walker. It leads me to the question, would it be better
to enact legislation to make sure these policies are clear,
because my concern is if you have new agency department heads,
who makes the standard, who makes the rules there? Ms.
Tyrangiel, would you like to comment on that?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Sure. Because we have just implemented these
policies and because we are about to see how they are
implemented and how they work, we would recommend that we
evaluate how they are going in practice before anything is
codified. On the other hand, anything you wish to work on, we
would be happy to work on you with.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Stodder, would you----
Mr. Stodder. I'd have a similar response, in the sense
that, I mean, we obviously just issued our policy this week. We
feel very good about the policy and strong about the policy.
Our operating components definitely believe that the policy
draws the right balance between enabling the use of these
important technologies and privacy, but certainly if this
committee were to walk down the road of considering
legislation, we would obviously work with the committee on it.
Mr. Walker. If the warrant requirements for these cell site
catchers, if you will, both the DOJ created--the DOJ created an
exception for circumstances, okay, where the law does not
require a search warrant and circumstances make obtaining a
search warrant impracticable. Can you talk a little bit about
what those impracticable circumstances--I mean, that's a kind
of a broad definition. Would you mind expounding on that, Ms.
Tyrangiel?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Yeah. This exception is intended to be
deployed very rarely, very rare circumstances. And, in fact,
from the Department's perspective, this is more like a safety
valve in the policy, in the event there are circumstances that
we could not foresee when we went to a flat warrant
requirement.
So in order to use that exception even now, there would
need to be no problem under the Fourth Amendment, and it would
need to be impracticable to get a warrant, and there would need
to be a series of high level sign-offs in order to use that
exception, including a high level agency official, the U.S.
attorney in a jurisdiction, and a deputy attorney general in
the criminal division.
And any exceptions that are granted under this provision
will be tracked by the criminal division, so that if there is a
set of circumstances that is emerging and the policy needs to
be tweaked or adjusted, we can do that.
Mr. Walker. Sure. So each one of those circumstances,
you're telling me that there's a consistency there that all
high levels sign off no matter what the situation might be?
Ms. Tyrangiel. That's correct. In order to be able to use
that exception, all of those people would need to sign off.
Mr. Walker. I'm concerned about this exception and maybe
the augmentation of it or the growth of it where--good
intentions here, but I would assert if we are not able to put
some teeth into this, that it could be a very broad definition.
Mr. Stodder, I've got about 15 seconds. Did you want to add
anything to that?
Mr. Stodder. Well, I mean, the analogous exception of the
DHS policy is the exceptional circumstances exception, which as
I think I've discussed, it's--I mean, the main focus of that
exception, at least within DHS, I mean, without putting any
conceivable other option, is the Secret Service protective
mission, in the sense of where it is an exceptional
circumstance where probable cause may not necessarily make
sense in that context, so the Pen Register applies.
Mr. Walker. Okay. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Walker.
I'd now like to recognize Ranking Member Lieu for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
I have a question about the capabilities of these
stingrays, not how they can be configured. Just in terms of
capability, can they collect content or they cannot?
Ms. Tyrangiel. As I said, our policy requires that they be
configured not to collect content. The kind of configuration
we're talking about, and understanding that I am a lawyer, not
a technologist, is the software configuration, not an on and
off switch where someone could switch it on and off.
Mr. Stodder. I'm similarly hampered by being a lawyer, not
a technologist, but, I will say the DHS--I mean, the cell site
simulators that DHS agencies use, both HSI as well as Secret
Service, are absolutely configured by the vendor not to collect
content. I mean, I couldn't tell you one way or the other as to
whether they could be, theoretically could be configured to
collect content, but I know for a fact that the cell site
simulators that DHS uses do not collect content and cannot
collect content.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. If you could get an answer back as to
whether they have the capability to----
Mr. Stodder. Sure.
Mr. Lieu. --not just----
Mr. Stodder. We can get back to you on that in terms of
whether there are cell site simulators on the market that
could, but DHS does not as a matter of policy.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. I share some of the same concerns of Mr.
Walker regarding the exigent circumstances exception, but
specifically I had one about the Secret Service.
Mr. Stodder. Yep.
Mr. Lieu. Is it a blanket exception for the entire Secret
Service?
Mr. Stodder. Well, no. I mean, it's an exception within the
DHS policy that--I mean, and the key exception that we can
envision is the Secret Service's protective mission. So it's
not an exception for the Secret Service, but in certain
circumstances where you could have an immediate threat to the
President and you have cryptic information. Our conclusion in
terms of drawing the right balance between security and privacy
here, is to err on the side here of protection.
Mr. Lieu. But why wouldn't they just fall under exigent
circumstances?
Mr. Stodder. Well, because you could have a circumstance
where--because the issue with the exigent circumstances
exception is that the exigent circumstances exception still
requires probable cause. And so you could have a circumstance
with the Secret Service where--I mean, I'm trying to think of a
fact situation where it could arise, but where you might have a
cryptic email or something like that, or something that
indicates there's a threat to the President or to a
distinguished person within the Secret Service protective
umbrella where the Secret Service would not have the
capability, or the time, or enough information to determine
whether there's probable cause, but you need to locate that
person before there's an attack on the President.
Mr. Lieu. I see. So let's say it's dealing with the Secret
Service in a counterfeiting case. That exception would not
apply?
Mr. Stodder. No, that would not apply. In a criminal
investigative case, like a counterfeiting case, absolutely not,
it would not apply. I mean, in a normal, I can't imagine a
circumstance where this exception would apply in a
counterfeiting case.
Mr. Lieu. Now, it looks like there's also an exception for
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, is that correct,
in the policy?
Ms. Tyrangiel. The Department's policy applies to the use
of cell site simulators in furtherance of criminal
investigations inside the United States. There is a note, a
footnote in the policy that discusses national security
investigations that says, when working under FISA, the
Department will make probable cause-based showings and make
appropriate disclosures to the court in a manner that is
consistent with the policy.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. What does that mean in terms of----
Ms. Tyrangiel. Well, of course FISA and national security
authorities are different than criminal authorities, but the
policy does indicate via footnote that attorneys will make
probable cause-based showings to the court and that they will
make appropriate disclosures. And, of course, there is a whole
section in the policy about transparency and the importance of
transparency and letting the court know of the technology to be
used. But because those authorities are different, different
protocols, different structure, and statutes, they are not
further defined.
Mr. Lieu. Could the Department just apply it the same way
with the FISA court? Why would it have to be applied
differently?
Ms. Tyrangiel. That is a function of a different court and
a different procedural setup based on FISA and that authority
particularly, and so it's not the same system or the same
authorities, and therefore, they're just slightly differently
oriented.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. In non-FISA courts if there's a case that
is brought, the ACLU letter references information where
prosecutors will not disclose a stingray was used, in fact,
they will say it was a confidential source. Do you have any
thoughts on that or can your policy say that ought to be
disclosed rather than using the, quote-unquote, confidential
source phrase?
Ms. Tyrangiel. I'm not familiar with the ACLU letter. I can
tell you that the policy has a detailed section on transparency
that the prosecutor must let the court know about the
technology to be used, how it will be used, the disruption it
might cause, to ensure that--should the court have questions or
that the court knows in advance about this technology.
Mr. Lieu. So I've entered the ACLU letter in the record.
I'll also send it to you. If you don't mind, if you could
respond to the issues they raised, that would be terrific.
And then if I could take one more question. In terms of how
you think this is going to be applied, how are you training
your folks on this?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Implementation is ongoing and the components
are actively working on ensuring that all the pieces of this
are falling into place.
Mr. Lieu. And what about local and State law enforcement?
Do you do any guidance, any training?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So I can tell you that a couple of--
anecdotally, that a couple of State and local agencies have
asked about this policy. We are hopeful that it will serve as a
model. Beyond that at this time, that's all the information
that I have.
Mr. Lieu. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. I'll recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Let's pick up on Congressman Lieu's line. So when local law
enforcement, they can attain these devices without DOJ's
permission? Is that correct?
Ms. Tyrangiel. They can buy and operate this equipment on
their own, yes.
Mr. Hurd. Is DOJ planning to require State and local law
enforcement agencies to adhere to DOJ's policy or have similar
policies of their own?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So this policy, the Department's policy,
will apply to State and locals when we are working together and
when we are assisting State and locals. It is complicated and
difficult beyond that for us to oversee the State and locals,
but as I said, we are really hopeful that this will serve as a
model for State and locals as they think about their own
policies.
Mr. Hurd. Does DOJ provide any of these stingrays to local
law enforcement?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Not that I'm aware of, but I would want to
double-check and get back to you.
Mr. Hurd. Yeah. My question there is, if DOJ is providing
the equipment to local law enforcement, then can they be bound
by the rules of DOJ in the operation of this? That would be my
question.
Ms. Tyrangiel. I'd be happy to take it back.
Mr. Hurd. Great.
Mr. Hurd. And, Mr. Stodder, can people apply for this
within DHS?
Mr. Stodder. Well, I mean, you're asking in terms of the
State and locals. I mean, similarly the DHS policy says that if
DHS officers are working on a case with State and local
governments, I mean, certainly the DHS policy applies in that
circumstance to the DHS officers in that task force sort of
environment.
DHS does not actually give or loan this equipment to State
and local law enforcement. DHS does not do that. And the State
and local governments can purchase this equipment on their own
using their State funds, and consistent with their own State
laws and the Federal Constitution, under their own police
powers under the Constitution.
The issue here I think you're getting at perhaps is
certainly State and local governments can apply for Federal
grant funds from FEMA. And the Federal Government under FEMA,
and I believe the Justice Department as well, I mean, we give
grant monies to the States, and then the States, and then
subgrantees to local governments can purchase equipment that is
on an authorized equipment list, and certainly some States
could conceivably purchase cell site simulator technology.
And our position on that essentially is--I mean, our
standard terms and conditions in grant funding to the States
and local governments is essentially to--you know, they have to
apply--they have to use the technologies that they buy
consistent with the law and consistent with the Constitution,
but we haven't imposed essentially our internal DHS policies in
that context or other contexts on the State and local
governments with regard to the grant dollar--with regard to the
equipment that they buy using Federal grant dollars.
Mr. Hurd. So, just so I'm clear, I'm a local law
enforcement, let's say I'm a county sheriff----
Mr. Stodder. Yep.
Mr. Hurd. --I apply for Stonegarden funds, I get them, I
buy an IMSI-catcher, and I would not be bound by DHS policy on
the use of said IMSI-catchers?
Mr. Stodder. Yeah, correct. You would not be bound by DHS
policy with regard to the use of cell site simulators yourself.
And essentially, that's correct.
Mr. Hurd. So is there any effort on the way to have folks
using Federal funds, using DHS funds or DOJ funds, to adhere to
the rules and regulations? Because aren't there some
significant nondisclosure agreements that are signed by local
law enforcement? Is it with you all or with the companies when
it comes to this issue?
Mr. Stodder. Not with the Department of Homeland Security.
We do not require those kinds of nondisclosure agreements when
the State and local governments, say, were to use something
like that. And the question of whether the Department of
Homeland Security would essentially require the use--
essentially State and local governments using of Federal funds
to, you know, the City of Bakersfield or whatever else, to
apply internal DHS policies, we have not sort of determined
that that would be the right approach, for any number of
reasons from federalism.
But also from the perspective of you're talking about a
$1.5 billion grant program with 56 grantees and thousands of
subgrantees, and the ability to track the use of all these
subgrantees of all this equipment, I mean, I think that would
be--it would be a significant, you know, consideration to think
about.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Tyrangiel. I'm sorry.
Mr. Hurd. Yeah. The same question. I believe some local law
enforcement in terms of NDAs with the FBI on some of the use of
this technology. Is that correct, and how does that work?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Yeah. So the nondisclosure agreements that
you're referring to are agreements between the FBI and State
and local law enforcement. Those agreements are intended to
protect particularly sensitive information about the
operations, the operation of the technology, the capabilities
of the technology. They're not meant actually to preclude more
transparency in terms of disclosing that they've been used in
any particular case, and actually FBI is revising those
agreements now. But as to the question about how they intersect
with State and local use, traditionally they're not a means to
oversee the actual use of the equipment, rather they're an
agreement about the sensitivity of the information involved.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. Thank you.
I'm going to now recognize Mr. Lieu for an additional 5
minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Let me follow up on Chairman Hurd's questions about the
FBI. So I have a letter from April 13, 2015, written from the
Federal Communications Commission to Senator Bill Nelson. My
understanding, according to this letter, is that for these
devices to be used by law enforcement, they have to be
certified by the FCC, and the commission places two conditions
on them: one is that these devices will be used in fact by law
enforcement, and second, that State and local law enforcement
agencies must coordinate in advance with the FBI the
acquisition and use of the equipment.
Is there any reason we couldn't, consistent with DOJ
policy, ask the FBI to say, okay, if you're going to use this
equipment, you need to use it consistent with our FBI
standards, which are DOJ standards, which is you need to get a
warrant before you use it?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So as I was mentioning, these agreements
that you referenced to are--with respect to the sensitivity of
the information and agreements about how to manage that
sensitivity, they may be more or less effective at managing and
effecting oversight over the use of this technology, but it is
something we're happy to look at.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
And then, Mr. Stodder, I forgot to ask you the first time.
Mr. Stodder. Yeah.
Mr. Lieu. We'll send you the ACLU letter as well----
Mr. Stodder. Thank you.
Mr. Lieu. --and if you could respond to some of the issues
that they raised, that would be great as well.
Mr. Stodder. Be happy to do that.
Mr. Lieu. So I have a different line of questioning, which
is, these policies don't apply to the NSA or CIA or other
agencies other than your own, correct?
Mr. Stodder. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. What happens if the FBI is doing an operation
with local law enforcement? Can they sort of say, hey, you
local law enforcement, you go use the stingray and do what we
can't do? Is there anything in policy that keeps them from
doing that?
Ms. Tyrangiel. If I'm understanding your question
correctly, if the FBI is working with the locals and using a
cell site simulator, this----
Mr. Lieu. Well, the FBI is not using it, but the local----
Ms. Tyrangiel. Oh.
Mr. Lieu. --person is----
Ms. Tyrangiel. As in--yeah, they get around this policy----
Mr. Lieu. Correct.
Ms. Tyrangiel. That is not permitted.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. Thank you.
In terms of these other agencies, what law enforcement
other than--we'll take out the intelligence agencies, but what
other law enforcement would not be covered by the two policies
here today?
Mr. Stodder. Well, it would be law enforcement that's not
part of the Department of Homeland Security or the Department
of Justice, so presumably the Park Police, or I'm informed of
the--I guess the Government Printing Office potentially has a--
--
Mr. Lieu. Correct.
Mr. Stodder. Yeah. So are there other law enforcement
agencies that would not be covered?
Ms. Tyrangiel. I'm not aware of which other law enforcement
agencies would even have this capability.
Mr. Stodder. Yeah.
Ms. Tyrangiel. So----
Mr. Lieu. And then you had mentioned earlier there's going
to be tracking of the number of times that these devices are
used, or only when they're used without a warrant?
Ms. Tyrangiel. No. The policy requires a tracking of
numbers annually of how many times they're used and how many
times they're used in emergency circumstances in addition to
the requirement under the exceptional circumstances exception
to track any and all exceptions under that provision of the
policy.
Mr. Lieu. And that's both agencies?
Mr. Stodder. Correct.
Mr. Lieu. And who gets this information?
Ms. Tyrangiel. The agencies are required to track and
collect their use, and the criminal division tracks the number
of exceptions granted.
Mr. Lieu. Would this committee get that information or
could this committee get that information? Is it public?
Ms. Tyrangiel. We'd be happy to work with you on any
requests you have for that information.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Stodder. Similarly with the DHS.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Iowa,
Mr. Blum, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Blum. Thank you, Chairman Hurd.
And thank you, Ms. Tyrangiel, is it?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Tyrangiel.
Mr. Blum. Tyrangiel, and Mr. Stodder for appearing here
today. Appreciate it very much. I've got about 5 questions to
each one of you, so if you can be quasi brief, we can get
through this in 5 minutes.
First question, does your agency take the position that it
does not, does not need a warrant to use the device to track a
known suspect, a known suspect, in public?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Our agency has gone to a policy that
requires a warrant with two narrow circumstances for
exceptions. So, we are now using a warrant as a general matter
except in two circumstances. And I----
Mr. Blum. And those are?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Exigent circumstances that would satisfy the
Fourth Amendment warrant exception and exceptional
circumstances where the Fourth Amendment is not implicated and
getting a warrant is impracticable. So even if the Fourth
Amendment isn't implicated, if it's not impracticable to get a
warrant, agents must get a warrant.
And if there are exceptional circumstances, that we expect
to occur very rarely, then there would need to be sign-off from
a high level agency official, the U.S. attorney, and a deputy
assistant attorney general from the criminal division. And even
in such circumstances----
Mr. Blum. To not get a warrant?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Exactly.
Mr. Blum. What were those three individuals, a high level--
--
Ms. Tyrangiel. A high level agency official within the law
enforcement agency, the U.S. attorney in the district, and the
deputy assistant attorney general in the criminal division.
Mr. Blum. Is it all three or any of those three?
Ms. Tyrangiel. All three.
Mr. Blum. All three to not get a warrant?
Ms. Tyrangiel. That's right.
Mr. Blum. Okay.
Mr. Stodder?
Mr. Stodder. As a matter of DHS policy, similarly to the
DOJ policy, DHS policy, we have determined that before the use
of cell site simulators, that we will require probable cause in
a warrant in most cases, with two exceptions, similar
exceptions to the Justice Department: one is exigent
circumstances, so involving, you know, well-recognized Fourth
Amendment exception if there's life and limb at issue, et
cetera.
And the second is exceptional circumstances, which in the
DHS context is--the main example here would be the Secret
Service protective mission with regard to protection of the
President, which is not a criminal investigative mission, but
it's where probable cause may not necessarily be the right
standard in that context.
And, again, we also have, you know, significant sign-off
where the Secret Service believes that it needs to have a cell
site simulator but does not have probable cause or won't get a
warrant, but we would need sign-off from a senior level
executive within the Secret Service as well as the local U.S.
attorney. And even there, we would also apply the Pen Register
statute essentially to obtain a court order to use the
technology or in an emergency Pen Register under the Pen
Register statute.
Mr. Blum. So both of those signatures required or just one
of the two?
Mr. Stodder. Both.
Mr. Blum. Both. Well, what about when the suspect is the
subject of an arrest warrant? Is there any change there?
Ms. Tyrangiel. No. A search warrant is still required under
the policy, again, barring exigent circumstances that would
satisfy the Fourth Amendment's warrant exception or the
exceptional circumstances provision that I described to you
that requires all that sign-off and fitting in with particular
circumstances.
Mr. Stodder. Same with DHS.
Mr. Blum. Mr. Stodder. Tell me if this is correct or not. I
believe I have it correct. Each agency's policy requires
deletion of the data at least once every 30 days?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So our policy----
Mr. Blum. Is that correct?
Ms. Tyrangiel. Yes. And it also requires deletion as soon
as the mission is completed. So if it's before 30 days, in the
circumstance where you're trying to identify an unknown phone,
it gets deleted immediately. It doesn't wait until the 30 days.
Mr. Stodder. And the same is true under the DHS policy. It
requires deletion immediately after the mission.
Mr. Blum. Right after the mission?
Mr. Stodder. Yeah.
Mr. Blum. Now, the government's great at making laws,
setting rules and regulations. I'm from the private sector.
Where we're weak is follow-through.
So my question is what mechanism is there in place to
ensure that what you just said actually happens?
Ms. Tyrangiel. So there are a couple provisions in the
policy that address this: one is there needs to be an auditing
procedure put in place by each agency to make sure that the
data is deleted consistent with the policy; and second, the
policy requires each agency to designate an executive level
point of contact in each jurisdiction to ensure that the
policy's implemented and complied with.
Mr. Blum. Mr. Stodder?
Mr. Stodder. The DHS policy is identical in that respect.
Mr. Blum. So is this currently in place or is this----
Mr. Stodder. Yes.
Ms. Tyrangiel. The policy is effective immediately and----
Mr. Stodder. In place.
Mr. Blum. And out of curiosity, what will the punishment be
if this policy is not followed? Because I've sat in on enough
of these hearings and have people sit in your chairs where
things, you know, weren't followed through on, things were
messed up, they were against the rules, the IG says they need
to change, and they don't change, and they receive bonuses
instead of being terminated. So what happens if the rules are
not followed?
Ms. Tyrangiel. As with any technology procedure within an
agency, if individuals violate their agency's orders, they are
accountable to their agencies and subject to discipline.
Mr. Blum. Mr. Stodder?
Mr. Stodder. And the same thing is true in DHS. I mean,
each component will have a structure essentially to hold their
employees accountable for not using technologies in a way
that's authorized by DHS policy, and certainly DHS headquarters
would have a similar sort of capability of management response.
Mr. Blum. So you're saying it's the Department's policy?
Mr. Stodder. Yes.
Mr. Blum. Yeah. I hope you will tell us today at this
hearing that if someone doesn't follow these policies and
somebody's privacy rights are in question, that you're going to
take the appropriate actions----
Mr. Stodder. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. --if it's----
Mr. Stodder. Department----
Mr. Blum. Go ahead.
Mr. Stodder. At the Department of Homeland Security it
certainly--you know, the component leaderships would take the--
whatever appropriate action would make sense under the facts
and circumstances of that case.
Ms. Tyrangiel. Same here.
Mr. Blum. Great. I think my time is up. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hurd. I have a very basic question before we end. Is
the private use of IMSI-catchers, is that illegal?
Ms. Tyrangiel. I don't know the details of sort of how the
manufacturers market themselves or to whom they can provide
this, whether it is illegal. I can speak, you know, obviously
to the government use and to these agreements between the State
and locals and the FBIs, but not the private use.
Mr. Stodder. Yeah. I'm similarly hampered by lack of
knowledge on that in this sense, but we are happy to get back
to you on that.
Mr. Hurd. Great. Thank you.
I apologize we started late today, but this is an important
issue of being able to protect our civil liberties and ensure
that law enforcement has the tools they need in order to do
their jobs.
I think the plans have come a long way over these past few
months. And we look forward to the additional information that
we requested and having further conversations on this, and
looking forward on how we can have some legislative fixes to
this across the Federal Government.
I appreciate you all's time here today. And without--I
thank you for taking your time to appear.
And if there's no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
