- ENSURING AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (FOIA)

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENSURING AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (FOIA)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 3, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-91

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-472 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Sean McLaughlin, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Katy Rother, Senior Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 3, 2015.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Joyce A. Barr, Chief FOIA Officer, U.S. Department of State
Oral Statement...............................................     8
Written Statement............................................    10
Ms. Melanie Anne Pustay, Director, Office of Information Policy,
U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21
Ms. Karen Neuman, Chief FOIA Officer, U.S. Department oF Homeland
Security
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31
Mr. Brodi Fontenot, Chief FOIA Officer, U.S. Department of the
Treasury
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Written Statement............................................    37
Ms. Mary Howard, Director, Privacy, Governmental Liaison, and
Disclosure, Internal Revenue Service
Oral Statement...............................................    40
Written Statement............................................    42

APPENDIX

RESPONSE from Ms. Barr DOS to Questions for the Record...........    94
RESPONSE from Ms. Pustay DOJ to Questions for the Record.........   110

ENSURING AGENCY COMPLIANCE WITH THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (FOIA)

----------

Wednesday, June 3, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:12 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Mica, Duncan, Jordan,
Walberg, Amash, Gosar, Gowdy, Meadows, DeSantis, Mulvaney,
Buck, Walker, Hice, Russell, Carter, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer,
Cummings, Norton, Lynch, Connolly, Cartwright, Duckworth,
Kelly, Lawrence, Watson Coleman, Plaskett, DeSaulnier, and
Welch.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
We appreciate all of you being here for the third panel of
this 2-day hearing, ``Ensuring Agency Compliance with the
Freedom of Information Act.''
The President has, ``committed to creating an unprecedented
level of openness in government.'' Those were his words. That
is not the case when it comes to filling FOIA requests. The
backlog of FOIA claims has more than doubled since the
President has taken office.
In March 2014, the Associated Press reported the Obama
administration more often than any other administration had
censored government files or outright denied access. Last year,
the administration used exemptions to withhold information more
than 550,000 times. Agencies must consult with the White House
on, ``all document requests that may involve documents with
White House equities.'' Just in the last year, the government
fully denied access or censored records in at least 250,000
cases, or roughly 39 percent of all requests. This is the
highest number of denials in the history of FOIA.
Yesterday, we heard from individuals who waited years to
get public records they requested. These requests came from
media--national, reputable media organizations, as well as
individuals. The witnesses yesterday told us the FOIA system is
broken and probably broken by design.
In preparing for this hearing, the committee received
numerous examples of delays, unreasonable redactions, and
abusive fees, all of which hindered transparency.
For instance, the EPA strategically avoided disclosure
under FOIA when discussing the development of the Pebble Mine
in Bristol Bay, Alaska. Documents obtained by the committee
show that the EPA employees contemplated and advocated for a
preemptive veto of the project well before the petition was
submitted to the EPA.
The IRS contacted one requester, Colin Hanna, on four
separate occasions to explain it needed more time to respond to
his FOIA request, but after 2 years they closed his request,
asserting Mr. Hanna failed to reasonably describe his requested
documents.
GSA identified 70,000 records as responsive to a FOIA
request on its Green Buildings Initiative and then used the
number of records as a reason to close a request from the
Taxpayer Protection Alliance.
A requester waited 10 months before the DEA told him that
his request for 13,000 documents related to the capture of
Mexican drug lord El Chapo would cost $1.4 million.
One 26-year-old freelance journalist wrote the committee
about his first experience with FOIA, saying, ``I often
describe the handling of my FOIA request as the single most
disillusioning experience of my life.''
The responses are enlightening and continue to come in.
They seem to be numerous, bipartisan, across the board,
consistent, and just absolutely frustrating.
We also saw unreasonable and inappropriate redactions,
including many from the FCC. Unredacted documents produced by
the committee show the FCC blacked out the Chairman's initials
on every email he sent or received--blacked them out. In doing
so, the FCC claimed a personal privacy exemption that isn't
permissible for use even with lower-level staff.
The FCC also claimed that staff commentary like ``wow'' and
``interesting'' were deliberative and redacted them under a
(b)(5) exemption. The time and expense that it takes to go
through and do such silly, silly things is so frustrating and
ridiculous. It gets very frustrating to hear anybody claim
that, oh, well, we spend this exorbitant amount of money, when
you are going through and blacking out ``wow'' and
``interesting'' and the name--yesterday--one of my favorites,
personal favorites, is blacking out the name of the Department
of Defense person who sang the national anthem, as if that is
some state secret.
In one instance, simply quoting an attached press release
qualified for a redaction, while the press release itself was
released in full. It is amazing how many instances we have of
publicly available information that is on the Department's Web
site, comes back via a FOIA as redacted information. And a
press release--press release--that it was publicly released is
something that you have to hold back from the public? It makes
no sense.
How can we trust the government's redactions when we have
examples of such unnecessary and, in many cases, inappropriate
redactions?
Despite significant corruption within the agency in recent
years, the IRS is still obstructing taxpayers' efforts. Just
getting the witness here today required a subpoena. The other
four agencies we asked to invite their senior FOIA officers,
they all agreed, they all showed up. Not the IRS. Nope, not the
IRS. We can't have that. There is only 1 person at the IRS out
of 90,000 that can testify, Mr. Koskinen. How wrong he is.
Ms. Howard, we appreciate you being here, but I should not
have to issue a subpoena to get your presence here. We are
talking about openness, transparency. We want to hear from you.
You have dealt with this for years. But yet we had to issue a
subpoena in order to get it.
And when we sent a letter to all five of the departments
and agencies asking for some basic information, a one-page
request, anywhere between two and eight different examples that
we wanted information, Department of Justice, at least they
sent us a letter, at least they gave us something. It was
terribly incomplete. The IRS, no letter. Nothing.
We send a request to you, I send a subpoena to you, and you
give us nothing? These other four did. I am telling you, we
will drag the IRS up here every single week if we have to. You
are going to respond to the United States Congress. You are
going to respond to the American people. You work for the
American people. You are not going to just drag us around.
Because you know what? If it was the other way around, if the
IRS went after an individual, you wouldn't put up with it.
There is no way you would put up with this.
We expect you to respond to requests from the United States
Congress. We have a right to see it. We have a constitutional
duty to perform our oversight responsibilities. And for you to
not respond to this committee in a timely fashion by giving us
an electronic copy, which is what you were supposed to do,
which the other four figured out, is not appropriate. We don't
have that material, and we wanted it before the hearing. And I
had to get a subpoena to drag you here, and it is wrong.
I have heard personally from multiple FOIA requesters that
they wait and they wait and they wait, and, when they finally
get a response, the request is either flatly denied or the
pages are blacked out. We saw examples of that yesterday. So
why is this necessary? And there are some cases where you do
have to redact material. I understand that. I understand that.
I appreciate that. But the lack of consistency is just
stunning. The time that it takes is just unbelievable.
Department of Justice, as the FOIA litigator and the
provider of agency-wide guidance, ought to be the model agency,
but we know that it is not. The Department of Justice denied
approximately 40 percent of its FOIA requests in the fiscal
year 2014. Three percent of FOIA requests were denied on the
basis of exemptions. Thirty-seven percent of requests were
denied for other reasons. Five percent of all requests were
denied on the basis of claiming documents were, ``not
reasonably described.''
DHS is drowning in FOIA requests and needs to ensure the
right resources are put towards properly clearing these
backlogged cases. Department of Homeland Security receives
about one-third of all FOIA requests and is responsible for
about two-thirds of the Federal backlog. So it was particularly
disappointing to see the DHS FOIA program in the GAO's 2015
duplication report. Even the GAO has come in and said this is a
terribly mismanaged, ill-executed system, so much so that
there's highlights in the GAO's 2015 duplication report.
My disappointment grew yesterday when Lisette Garcia from
the FOIA Research Center revealed to us the DHS has hired
contractors for the primary purpose of closing, rather than
completing, cases. We would like to explore that.
Individuals requesting records from Homeland Security might
hear from contractors multiple times inquiring about whether or
not they are still interested in their requests. That always
cracks me up, right? A citizen, person from the media, goes out
of their way to put in a FOIA request; so much time goes by
that the government comes back to them and says, are you still
interested? That takes time and resources.
And the State Department is as bad, if not worse, than DHS
on FOIA compliance. The agency has open cases dating back for
decades--decades. Last year, the State Department failed to
fully respond to more than 65 percent of its requests. The
Center for Effective Government graded 15 of the top FOIA
agencies and gave the State Department an F on FOIA processing.
The agencies before the committee today need to bring
sunshine to their FOIA programs. Agency leadership has failed
to make FOIA a priority, and that makes the job of the
witnesses before the committee much more difficult, if not
impossible.
We know you have a tremendous amount of requests coming
your direction. There are a lot of good people who work in your
departments and agencies, and we thank them for their services.
Not everything is bad. But it is our role and responsibility to
understand how it really works, what you are up against, what
you are dealing with in a very candid way so that we can help
make it better and that we can understand it. And there
undoubtedly have to be changes. My guess is you want to see
some changes. We want to see some changes. So we want to ferret
that out.
We have heard from the people that are very critical, but
you are the people who are right there on the front lines, and
you represent hundreds and literally thousands of people who
are trying to do their job and deal with the tensions that come
from political persuasions that have been on both the Democrat
and Republican side of the aisle. You have career professionals
who have been there through lots of different organizations. We
want to hear candidly from you what is working, what is not
working. But give us candid information so we can help better
understand it. That is all we ask today.
We thank you again for your presence.
And, at this time, I will now recognize the ranking member,
Mr. Cummings, for his opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
thank you for holding these very important hearings on the
Freedom of Information Act, which is the cornerstone of our
Nation's open-government laws.
Thank you also to our agency witnesses for being with us
today.
You do have a critical responsibility, which is to make
Federal records available to the American public as effectively
and efficiently as possible. You are also charged with
implementing the directive President Obama issued on his first
day in office, to implement a new presumption of openness that
reverses the policy of withholding information embraced by the
Bush administration.
Your job is also extremely difficult and is getting harder.
You and, by implication, the President are being blamed for the
increase in FOIA backlogs.
As we heard at our hearing yesterday, FOIA backlogs have
increased in part as a result of cuts to agency budgets and the
dwindling number of FOIA personnel forced to process record
numbers of incoming requests. But we did not just only hear
that. Mr. McCraw of The New York Times talked about a culture
of unresponsiveness. And I hope that we will get to that and
talk about that, because I agree with the chairman. In order
for us to get to the bottom of this, we have to have an honest
assessment of what is going on.
There were a number of witnesses that came before us
yesterday that talked about a fear of people who are dealing
with the FOIA requests, honoring them the way they should be,
because they are afraid to get in trouble. If that is the case,
we need to hear about that.
Now, going back to personnel, the number of FOIA requests
skyrocketed from 2009 to 2014. In 2009, when President Obama
took office, there were about 558,000 requests submitted to the
Federal agencies. By 2014, that number rose to more than
714,000, a surge of 28 percent. That is quite a surge.
On the other hand, the total number of full-time agency
FOIA personnel dropped to its lowest point since President
Obama took office. In 2009, the number of full-time FOIA staff
at Federal agencies was 4,000. In 2014, that number dropped to
3,838, a decrease of about 4 percent.
It seems obvious that Congress cannot continue to starve
Federal agencies for resources through budget cuts, staffing
reductions, sequestration, and government shutdowns and then
blame those agencies for not being able to do their jobs
effectively.
But, again, I want to go back. I want us to not only deal
with the personnel issues, but this whole culture that Mr.
McCraw talked about of unresponsiveness, I want to deal with
that, too, because I want the total picture so that we can be
effective and efficient in trying to remedy this situation.
If we want FOIA to work, we need to restore adequate
funding, staffing, and training so agencies can handle the
increasing workloads they will continue to face. That is
another issue. Is there an issue of training? It is one thing
to have personnel; it is another thing to have personnel that
are properly trained.
But this is not what House Republicans are doing. Today,
right now, down the hall in the Appropriations Committee,
Republicans are voting to withhold nearly $700 million--hello--
$700 million from the State Department's operational budget
until it improves its document production processes. The
operational budget includes the salaries for all--for all--of
the State Department's FOIA employees.
Let me say that again. Today, with a record number of FOIA
requests and with record low FOIA staffing, the answer from the
Republicans is that we are going to withhold two-thirds of a
billion dollars, more than all State Department FOIA staff
salaries combined. How in the world is this supposed to help?
It simply does not make sense.
We know that there are problems with FOIA. We know there
are delays. We know that we must do better. But it is hard to
imagine a more counterproductive attack on the FOIA process.
I also take issue with the claims that President Obama has
not been one of the most aggressive and forward-thinking
Presidents in the history in pressing for more open government.
I have often said that he would never get credit for anything.
If things go wrong, they blame him; if things go right, he gets
no credit. Those who try to argue that President Bush took the
same kind of unprecedented transparency actions as President
Obama must have amnesia. There simply is no comparison--none.
Beyond ordering the presumption of openness for FOIA, the
Obama administration issued a national action plan to establish
a consolidated FOIA portal and enhance training for FOIA
professionals. President Obama did that. It established a FOIA
advisory committee to improve implementation and increase
proactive disclosures of government information. President
Obama did that. The administration implemented a new policy of
disclosing White House visitor records. President Obama did
that. It established ethics.data.gov, which posts lobbying
disclosure reports, travel reports, and Federal Elections
Commission filings all in one place, and it has made enormous
amounts of government information available through data.gov.
That is right, President Obama did that.
Finally, I suspect that some of my colleagues will continue
their focus on former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
her emails, so let's review the facts.
On December 5, 2014, Secretary Clinton provided more than
30,000--30,000--emails, totaling about 55,000 pages, to the
State Department. The Department has those emails and is
currently reviewing them to make them available to the public
under FOIA.
This is a sharp contrast to former Secretary of State Colin
Powell, who admitted that he used a personal email account for
official business all the time. Unlike Secretary Clinton,
Secretary Powell did not--did not--preserve any of his official
emails from his personal account, and he did not turn them over
to the State Department.
I am not naive; I understand the Republican focus is on
Hillary Clinton as she runs for President. But if we really
want to review compliance with FOIA, if we really want to
review it and straighten it out and make it right and have the
FOIA laws do what they are supposed to do and if we really want
to be most effective and efficient, we should not do so
selectively by ignoring facts based on political expediency. As
I have often said, we are better than that.
To conclude, there is a major--a major--bipartisan step we
can take to improve FOIA now. In February, I joined with
Representative Issa--yeah, that is what I said--I joined with
former Chairman Issa, our former chairman, on a bipartisan
basis to introduce the FOIA Oversight and Implementation Act.
We passed it out of our committee unanimously, out of this
committee, unanimously, several months ago. And I hope we can
move forward in a bipartisan way to pass this bill.
Now, the chairman said yesterday to me that we are going to
see what we can do to work that out, and what we need from you
are suggestions. I am sure maybe all of you are familiar with
653, and if there are things that you think we can do to
improve that bill to make it so that it can be more effective
and efficient and that you can do your jobs better, then we
want to know it.
Ladies and gentlemen, we can go around and around and
around and around and around in circles, and we will be talking
about this same stuff 10 years from now, and the backlog will
be even greater. And so I look forward to hearing what you all
have to say. Again, give us the good, the bad, and the ugly so
that we can now effectively address this issue.
And, Mr. Chairman, I really thank you for your indulgence.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will now recognize our first panel of
witnesses. Let me introduce them.
Ms. Joyce Barr is the Chief FOIA Officer with the
Department of State and has been involved in the FOIA process
for the last 4 years. Ms. Barr was confirmed as the Assistant
Secretary for Administration in December of 2011. As Assistant
Secretary, she is responsible for the day-to-day administration
of a variety of functions, ranging from logistics, records
management, privacy programs, the Working Capital Fund, as well
as Presidential travel.
We appreciate you being here.
Ms. Melanie Anne Pustay--did I say that properly?--is the
Director of the Office of Information Policy at the Department
of Justice since 2007 and has worked with FOIA for at least the
last 12 years. The Office of Information Policy, sometimes
referred to as OIP, is responsible for developing guidance for
executive branch agencies on the Freedom of Information Act.
OIP is charged with ensuring the President's FOIA memorandum
and the Attorney General's FOIA guidance are fully implemented
across the government. Before becoming Director, she served 8
years as the Deputy Director for OIP, where she was responsible
for the Department's responses to access requests made to the
Department's senior leadership offices.
Ms. Karen Neuman serves as the chief privacy officer and
Chief FOIA Officer within the Department of Homeland Security.
In her role as chief privacy officer, Ms. Neuman is responsible
for evaluating department-wide programs, systems, technologies,
and rulemaking for potential privacy impacts. She has extensive
expertise in privacy law that helped inform privacy policy
development both within the Department and in collaboration
with the rest of Federal Government. She centralizes both FOIA
and Privacy Act operations to provide policy and programmatic
oversight and support implementation across the Department.
Mr. Brodi Fontenot serves as the Chief FOIA Officer and
Assistant Secretary for Management in the Department of
Treasury. He has served as the Chief FOIA Officer since
January--for the last--which year did you become that?
Mr. Fontenot. Just this year.
Chairman Chaffetz. Just this year. I wanted to make sure I
had that right. January of this year.
Mr. Fontenot serves as the Secretary of Treasury on the
development and execution of treasury's budget and strategic
plans and the internal management of the Department and its
bureaus. In January 2014, President Obama nominated him as the
Treasury's Chief Financial Officer.
Ms. Mary Howard is the Director of the IRS' Privacy,
Governmental Liaison, and Disclosure Division in the United
States Department of Treasury. She has served in this role
since January of 2014. In this role, she is responsible for
managing a multifaceted privacy program and ensuring compliance
with the Privacy Act, the Freedom of Information Act, and the
Internal Revenue Code known as 6103. Ms. Howard represents the
IRS' interests in identity theft, information protection,
disclosure, and data-sharing. Ms. Howard began her career at
the IRS in 1988 as a revenue agent and has served in various
roles throughout the agency and throughout her career.
We appreciate you all being here.
If you would please rise and raise your right hands,
pursuant to committee rules, the witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Thank you.
Let the record reflect that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
As you take your seat, we would ask that you limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your full written statement will be
made part of the record.
And, with that, we will now start with Ms. Barr, and you
are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOYCE A. BARR

Ms. Barr. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. Good morning. Thank you
for the invitation to appear before you today.
My name is Joyce Barr, and I serve as the Assistant
Secretary for Administration as well as Chief FOIA Officer for
the State Department. I am a career Foreign Service officer,
with over 35 years of experience serving around the world.
Thank you for your interest in and advocacy for improving
transparency to the public. We share that goal at the
Department and work every day to achieve it.
In addition to providing a range of support services around
the world, the Bureau of Administration is also responsible for
responding to requests under FOIA as well as managing and
maintaining official department records. The State Department
is committed to openness. It is critical to ensuring the public
trust and to promoting public collaboration with the U.S.
Government.
However, meeting our commitment to openness is very
challenging. We have a large backlog of over 16,000 FOIA
requests. We know this backlog is unacceptable and are working
to reduce it. Last year, we achieved a nearly 23-percent
reduction in our appeals backlog by streamlining case
processing. We made progress; more is needed.
The backlog is due to several factors. Our caseload
increased over 300 percent since 2008. In fiscal year 2008, the
Department received fewer than 6,000 new FOIA requests, but in
fiscal year 2014, we received nearly 20,000. Since the
beginning of this fiscal year, we have already received over
15,000 new requests.
Second, many of these cases are increasingly complex. Other
national security agencies are exempt from release of some
information under the FOIA. As a result, requesters often come
only to the Department to request information on any and all
national security issues. The Department is often the public's
first and only destination for documents on these issues.
These complex requests require multiple searches throughout
many of our 285 missions across the globe. They involve the
review of classified or highly sensitive materials and require
coordination with other Federal agencies. They can generate
large amounts of material that must be reviewed by State and
interagency subject-matter experts across the Federal
Government.
We receive many complaints about delays, but our goal is to
do everything we can to complete each request as soon as
possible.
Secretary Kerry recently reinforced our commitment to
transparency in his March 25 letter to our inspector general.
In that letter, he recognized the work that has already been
done and noted the Department is acting on a number of
challenges to meet its preservation and transparency
obligations. The Secretary asked the inspector general to
ensure we are doing everything we can to improve and to
recommend concrete steps that we take to do so.
I am here as the Department's senior FOIA official to
assure you that we have committed to working cooperatively with
the IG with his review and any recommendations that may follow.
My testimony for the record includes information about
related issues, such as our FOIA Web site and the role we play
in helping the public get access to information from
Presidential libraries.
Again, the Department of State is committed to public
access to information.
Mr. Chairman, I thank the committee for the opportunity to
testify today and would be pleased to address questions that
you or any other member of the committee may have on FOIA
within the State Department. Thank you.
[prepared statement of Ms. Barr follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Ms. Pustay, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
If you can make sure that microphone is kind of pulled
straight and tight to your--up there. If you straighten it out
and turn it on, that would be great.
Ms. Pustay. Okay.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MELANIE ANNE PUSTAY

Ms. Pustay. Are we good?
Good morning, Chairman and Ranking Member Cummings and
members of the committee. I am pleased to be here today to
discuss the FOIA and the Department of Justice's ongoing
efforts to encourage agency compliance with a very important
law.
There are several areas of success that I'd like to
highlight today. Despite receiving continued record high
numbers of FOIA requests and operating at the lowest staffing
levels in the past 6 fiscal years, agencies have continued to
find ways to improve their FOIA administration. Seventy-two out
of the 100 agencies subject to the FOIA ended the fiscal year
with low backlogs of fewer than 100 requests. Processing nearly
650,000 requests, the government also continued to maintain a
high release rate of over 91 percent.
Agencies overall also continued to improve their processing
times. For a number of years, OIP has encouraged agencies to
focus on their simple track requests, with a goal of processing
those requests within an average of 20 working days. And I'm
very pleased to report that this past fiscal year the
government's overall average was 20.5 days for those simple
track requests.
And there's also many other achievements that simply can't
be captured by statistics. Agencies continue to post a wide
variety of information online in open formats. They're making
discretionary releases of otherwise exempt information. They're
utilizing technology to help improve FOIA administration.
The Department of Justice continued to work diligently
throughout the year to both encourage and assist agencies in
their compliance with the FOIA. I firmly believe that it's
vital that FOIA professionals have a complete understanding of
the law's legal requirements and the many policy considerations
that contribute to successful FOIA administration. So, as a
result, one of the primary ways my office encourages compliance
is through the offering of a range of government-wide training
programs and the issuance of policy guidance on FOIA.
In 2014 alone, my office provided training to thousands of
individuals on a range of topics, including comprehensive
guidance on the FOIA's proactive disclosure provisions. That
guidance included strategies for identifying frequently
requested records, and it also encourages agencies to post
records even before receipt of a single request, in accordance
with the President's and Attorney General's FOIA directives.
And I'm particularly pleased to highlight for you today the
substantial progress that we have made on a number of
initiatives to modernize the FOIA.
First, in collaboration with the 18F team at GSA, we've
been working on the creation of a consolidated FOIA portal that
will be added to the resources that are available on FOIA.gov.
This service will allow the public to make a request to any
agency from a single Web site and will also include additional
tools to improve the customer experience.
Second, OIP has been working on the potential content of a
core FOIA regulation. We formed an interagency task force to
tackle this project. We've met with civil society organizations
to get their input. And our team is actually now hard at work
drafting language for this important new initiative. We look
forward to our engagement with both civil society and our
agency colleagues as we work forward on that project.
Now, third, in an effort to improve internal best
practices, we launched what we're calling a series of best
practices workshops. And we started there with the very
important topic of improving timeliness and reducing backlogs.
These workshops provide a unique opportunity for agencies to
learn from one another and to apply innovative strategies more
broadly across the government.
And then, finally, just this past March, I'm very pleased
that we completed our commitment to enhance FOIA training by
making standard e-learning training resources available to all
Federal employees. Embracing Attorney General Holder's message
that FOIA is everyone's responsibility, these new training
resources target the entire spectrum of Federal employees, from
the newly arrived intern to the senior executive. These
training resources are available to all agency personnel
anywhere in the world and at no cost. They address the FOIA's
many procedural and substantive requirements, but they also
emphasize the importance of good communication with requesters
and good customer service--very important topics. Given how
important all of this is to the successful implementation of
the FOIA, I'm very proud that OIP can provide these resources
to all government officials across the world.
So, in closing, in the face of many challenges this past
fiscal year, agencies have achieved successes in many areas.
And while we certainly believe there's more work to be done and
we're continually looking for ways to improve the process,
we're proud of what we've done so far, and we look forward to
working with the committee as we jointly pursue the goal of
improving access to information.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Pustay follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Neuman, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREN NEUMAN

Ms. Neuman. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. My name is Karen
Neuman, and I'm the Chief Privacy Officer and Chief FOIA
Officer at the Department of Homeland Security. I'm very
pleased to be here before you today to discuss how DHS
implements the Freedom of Information Act.
DHS is composed of several distinct components, each with
unique authorities and categories of records. Our components
operate their own FOIA offices, staffed by FOIA professionals
who respond directly to requesters seeking records.
My office has dual responsibilities to protect privacy and
promote transparency. Every FOIA request deserves careful
consideration to promote transparency while protecting the
privacy of individuals and operationally sensitive information.
We have some significant challenges, and we also have done
some good things. As you know, DHS gets the largest number of
FOIA requests of any Federal agency and produces the largest
number of responses. In fact, DHS received 40 percent of all
FOIA requests submitted to the government in fiscal year 2014.
In this 12-month period alone, we received an unprecedented
291,242 requests. As a result, we also have the largest
backlog.
Since January 2009, DHS experienced a 182-percent increase
in its number of FOIA requests. At the same time, our FOIA
professionals have significantly increased their output to meet
this increased demand. In fiscal year 2014, these professionals
processed 238,031 requests.
The Department of Homeland Security takes our obligation to
promote transparency and further the values of open government
embodied in the statute very seriously. Nonetheless, we face
serious challenges to connecting requesters with the records
they seek. I'd like to briefly highlight some of the measures
we have implemented to reduce these challenges, including to
reduce our backlog.
The Government Accountability Office was asked by Congress
to review DHS' processing of FOIA requests. In November 2014,
GAO published its report with four recommendations. We
concurred with all four recommendations and are taking steps to
address each one.
For example, as recommended by GAO, we are in the process
of finalizing our FOIA regulation, including preparing to
publish a Federal Register notice seeking comment. As also
recommended, we sought assistance from DOJ OIP in developing
and implementing a policy to ensure that all DHS components are
capturing FOIA costs consistently.
Quite apart from these recommendations, I've initiated
several new measures that are designed to improve DHS FOIA
operations in both the near term and the long term.
First, in January this year, I requested a top-to-bottom,
independent review of six DHS component FOIA offices. That
review is currently underway and is being conducted by the
Office of Government Information Services, also known as OGIS.
Second, my office is establishing a short-term blanket
purchase agreement for FOIA support services. This contract
will be utilized as needed by our component FOIA offices that
require additional help. My goal here is really to empower the
components to take quick action to manage backlog surges before
they get out of control.
Third, my FOIA leadership team has met with colleagues at
other agencies to learn about the types of records that can be
made available through technology and other routine procedures
that are currently sought through a FOIA request.
Fourth, my office continues to look for greater
efficiencies from the use of technology. We offer each
component FOIA office the ability to use a centralized FOIA
tracking, processing, and reporting case management system with
customizable features. We're also working with the DHS Chief
Information Officer to develop an e-FOIA mobile application
that will enable the public to submit FOIA requests and check
the status of these requests from a smartphone or mobile
device.
As a result of these measures, we are starting to see a
slow but steady reduction in our backlog. Yesterday I learned
that, as of May 2015, the DHS backlog was reduced by 10
percent, from 103,480 to 92,066, since the beginning of the
fiscal year.
Despite the challenges we face, I am pleased that the
administrative and technological infrastructure we have put in
place is resulting in a trend in the right direction. We are
working hard every day to provide access under the statute, and
there is room for considerable improvement. I look forward to
working with you to improve FOIA at DHS, and I welcome your
recommendations and look forward to taking your questions.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Neuman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Fontenot.

STATEMENT OF BRODI FONTENOT

Mr. Fontenot. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings,
distinguished members of this committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on Treasury's role in fostering
transparency through FOIA.
My name is Brodi Fontenot, and I'm the Assistant Secretary
for Management at the Department of Treasury and the designated
department's Chief FOIA Officer. As such, I take compliance
with FOIA seriously. Although the nine Treasury bureaus
independently process FOIA requests directed to each bureau, my
team is responsible for providing agency-wide guidance and
training as well as monitoring Treasury FOIA performance and
proposing agency-wide policy and improvements.
When I joined Treasury 6 months ago, I was pleased to
discover that the Treasury team had already begun implementing
new measures to improve FOIA performance and efficiency
Treasury-wide. For example, at our departmental offices,
beginning in 2013, my team doubled the number of full-time
employees dedicated to FOIA.
We used additional capacity in two critical ways. First, we
devoted focused attention on closing Treasury's oldest FOIA
cases. Second, we made significant changes to procedures and
staffing used to manage FOIA cases to improve efficiency and
timeliness.
We have more work to do, but these initial measures are
already producing results. For example, in fiscal year 2014,
the Treasury-wide FOIA backlog has decreased by 8 percent. We
closed 13 of our oldest 20 cases agency-wide. We also processed
more FOIA cases--FOIA requests in less time. Treasury closed 73
percent of incoming cases--requests within 20 days. That's a 3-
percent increase over 2013. Five of nine Treasury bureaus
closed more requests than they received during the fiscal year.
Four Treasury bureaus ended the year with a zero backlog. And
we also released more information overall. Treasury released
records in full or in part in response to 90 percent of cases
in which responsive records were identified.
In sum, today, Treasury is releasing more information,
processing more requests in less time, and making tangible
progress on reducing its pending FOIA inventory and closing its
oldest cases compared to just 18 months ago.
But we also remain committed to making further strides. My
team and I will continue to lean forward to drive improvements
and to provide as much information as we can, as quickly as we
can, both within the spirit and the letter of FOIA.
I welcome your questions today. Thank you.
[prepared statement of Mr. Fontenot follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Howard, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARY HOWARD

Ms. Howard. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and members of
the committee, thank you for having me here today. I'm Mary
Howard, and I'm the Director of IRS' privacy, governmental
liaison, and disclosure operations. I'm here today to testify
on the IRS' policies and procedures regarding complying with
requests for information under the Freedom of Information Act.
Each year, the IRS processes thousands of FOIA requests,
most of which require labor-intensive searches of both paper
and electronic records. Despite this volume and complexity, the
IRS closes more than 80 percent of its FOIA cases in 30
business days or less. In fact, our average cycle time
generally hovers right around 21 days.
The IRS follows a standard procedure for handling each FOIA
request it receives. This involves analyzing the request to
determine whether it can be processed under FOIA, determining
the scope of the request and searching for responsive records,
reviewing material to decide what should be released or
withheld, and sending a response to the requester.
Over the last several years, our FOIA operation has faced a
number of challenges. For example, the size of an average FOIA
request and the volume of potentially responsive documents have
mushroomed as more and more requests require searching email
and other electronic documents. Broad requests can easily
result in the IRS needing to collect and redact thousands of
documents in response to a single requester.
Another challenge involves personnel. We have managed to
protect the overall staffing of the FOIA process in IRS,
experiencing only a slight decline over the last few fiscal
years despite financial constraints and related hiring freezes,
but a high turnover rate has created some difficulties.
Replacing our FOIA specialists involves not only hiring new
workers but also training them to bring them up to the expert
level required to handle complex FOIA requests. The cuts to our
budget have had a negative impact on the timing of replacement
hiring and the delivery of the training.
The net result has been a gradual loss of expertise in the
FOIA area at IRS over the past several years. The problem is
expected to get worse. We estimate that more than 60 percent of
our FOIA professionals will be eligible to retire over the next
5 years.
Another critical aspect of the IRS' ability to adequately
respond to FOIA requests involves the management of official
records. Here, too, the IRS faces significant challenges. This
is largely because we don't have systems that let us easily
search and retrieve electronic records and emails unless
they're part of the taxpayers' case records. We are also unable
to categorize, label, and centrally store electronic records,
including email. And I hope you'll ask me some questions so I
can give you some more insight into that.
Without this capability, we must conduct an account-by-
account search for documents to comply with a FOIA request.
This is an extremely tedious and time-consuming process, and
that's before we get to the actual review for the exemptions.
Additional funding would allow us to upgrade our infrastructure
platforms and acquire more effective search capabilities. We
could then respond to large document requests far more quickly
than we're able to now.
So let me turn now to the events of 2013. Beginning that
summer, the IRS was faced with an unprecedented number of FOIA
requests related to the processing of applications for the
501(c)(4) status. In all, there were 154 requests, and that
might not sound like a lot, but they were very voluminous and
complex in nature. At the same time, four congressional
committees, the Treasury inspector general, and the Department
of Justice were all requesting large amounts of documents from
IRS on the same issues.
The IRS created a special team to review and produce
documents responsive to the six official investigations. This
team redacted the documents required by 6103 of the Internal
Revenue Code to ensure that Federal tax information was
protected appropriately. Because of its experience on
conducting reviews and producing documents for litigation, the
IRS Office of Chief Counsel performed the 6103 reviews and the
document production. That was required for all the requested
documents except those going to the tax-writing committees.
While Counsel was conducting this effort, disclosure staff
was addressing and responding to their regular FOIA casework
that flows in at a rate of 10- to 12,000 cases per year. The
IRS determined that responding to the investigations would take
precedence over responding to the requests for information
under FOIA. And the IRS has produced to Congress more than 1
million pages of documents for those investigations.
Given that all FOIA documents need that 6103 review, we
waited until we had fulfilled the request of the investigators
until we went forward. Of the 154 cases I mentioned, FOIA
cases, 34 remain pending with the disclosure office.
We regret that the process has taken this long, but, given
the extraordinary circumstances, we really felt there was no
other way that we could respond appropriately to Congress and
the investigators. The IRS remains committed to FOIA as we work
through these challenges.
So this concludes my statement, and I look forward to
responding to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Howard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for the
hearings of the past couple days.
And as I have contemplated what we have heard from the
three panels thus far on FOIA in the last 2 days, you know, I
am just absolutely convinced that FOIA really isn't the
problem; it is just an evidence, an outcome of the problem. The
increasing size of government and the control of government is
the problem.
I mean, it is an absolute fact that we have amongst the
highest paid bureaucrats administering these programs and
others in government anywhere in the world. We have the highest
technology, at least amongst the highest technology, of
anyplace in the world to administer our bureaucracy. We have
the largest number of bureaucrats in the world to administer
our bureaucracy.
And with the size of government like this, why would we
expect anything other than a huge, huge number of FOIA requests
coming from an increasing number of American citizens who feel
under attack from their own government? They are regulated,
they are taxed, they are supervised, they are overseen almost
more than any other free country in the world.
So I look at our panel of witnesses, and I say, how in the
world can you be expected to do your job in a way that
satisfies not only Congress but the people of the United
States? They are going to ask more because they don't trust us.
They are tired of being overrun.
I will get to my questions.
Also, with all due respect, if dollars, more dollars, were
the answer, then the war on poverty, the war on hunger, the war
on pollution, the war on crime, the war on many other things
would be ended. By the way, Fast and Furious, Benghazi, IRS-
gate would be taken care of. We would know the answers.
Attorney General Holder--former Attorney General Holder
wouldn't have been held in contempt of Congress. Lois Lerner
wouldn't have been held in contempt.
FOIA isn't the main problem. Liberty demands transparency
from a limited government to succeed. And we are not succeeding
in addressing the concerns of our people. Government has grown,
and, thus, it is increasingly mistrusted and it will be
mistrusted from all sides of the aisle, politically speaking.
And so, Mr. Chairman, I again thank you for these hearings.
It just makes it clearer and clearer why we are in the battle
with the budget to reduce government to the size that liberty
can expand and not government.
Ms. Neuman, DHS has the largest backlog of any Federal
agency. How does the duplicative process of requests contribute
to--processing of requests contribute to backlog? And I refer
specifically to the relationship between USCIS and ICE.
Ms. Neuman. Thank you. I appreciate that question.
Let me just say that, with respect to the backlog, any
significant delays in processing requests don't meet my
standards, and I expect to see improvement. That goes for
duplication, as well. And, as you may be aware, the GAO studied
that aspect of our FOIA operations and made some
recommendations that we are implementing in a number of ways.
USCIS and ICE receive a significant number of our FOIA
requests, many of which are immigration-related. There may be
instances where one or more of those components holds files--or
holds records that are contained in the alien file. We do not--
we do not support unnecessary duplication, and we have----
Mr. Walberg. Will the two agencies be put back together
under the arrangement that was in place before 2012, where they
weren't duplicating?
Ms. Neuman. Well, that's really not my decision to make. I
also want to tell you----
Mr. Walberg. Whose decision is it?
Ms. Neuman. I--it's up to the Members of Congress who write
the statute.
I will also tell you that we've implemented technology
measures that----
Mr. Walberg. But I don't understand that that is our
responsibility. It worked before 2012; at least they worked in
that nonduplicative arrangement. Why can't it be put back in
there? Who is responsible? And it's not Congress.
Ms. Neuman. So my focus is really, as the Chief FOIA
Officer, on connecting requesters with their records. And I
have got to spend my time looking at, the way the agency is
constructed now, what inefficiencies, if any, are preventing us
from meeting our transparency mission----
Mr. Walberg. So the answer is you're not going to do
anything to put the two component parts back together to stop
duplication.
Ms. Neuman. I am focussing on connecting requesters with
their records.
Mr. Walberg. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, and I
didn't get the answer. Or I guess I did.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and the ranking member,
for your courtesy this morning and for holding this hearing. I
want to thank the witnesses for your help in addressing this
issue.
Ms. Barr, there has been a lot of discussion up to now
about Secretary Clinton and her use of personal email for
official business. It's my understanding from the documents
that we have here that Secretary Rice, Condoleezza Rice, did
not use a personal email account for official business. Is that
right?
Ms. Barr. Yes, that's what I understand. She has told us
that she did not conduct a lot of official business over email,
but when she did she used a State Department account.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. How about Secretary of State Colin Powell?
In his autobiography he admits that he used his personal email
account for official business all the time. I have a great
quote here. He says, and this is a quote from former Secretary
of State Colin Powell: ``To complement the official State
Department computer in my office, I installed a laptop computer
on a private line. My personal email account on the laptop
allowed me direct access to anyone online. I started shooting
emails to my principal assistants, to individual ambassadors,
and increasingly to my foreign minister colleagues who, like
me, were trying to bring their ministries into the 186,000-
mile-per-second world, the speed of light.''
So do we have any emails from Secretary Powell?
Ms. Barr. No, we do not have any emails from Secretary
Powell. We did ask him if he had any official records. He noted
when he came back to us that he started at what was then the
beginning of the State Department's email age, but he did not
have any records to return to us.
Mr. Lynch. There was some critical decisions made. His
speech before the U.N. About the existence of weapons of mass
destruction, we don't have any emails regarding that decision
and how those statements were made?
Ms. Barr. I have no personal knowledge about that, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Yeah. Okay. You know, this is troubling because
it seems like in the case of Secretary Clinton the way people
handled their emails, at least it's been suggested, that really
determined her fitness of whether or not she can be President.
That's basically the statement that's being made today.
And I'm puzzled because Secretary Rice did not perform in
that manner, Secretary Colin Powell did not perform in that
manner, and I'm just wondering if we have a uniform standard
here. It doesn't seem from the Federal Records Act that it
requires people to not use personal email.
Ms. Barr. When we are dealing with the Federal Records Act
of course we have to work with employees to maintain records.
But with regard to using nongovernment email services, if
people do that we ask that they capture those records by
copying their official account.
We are working very hard looking forward to make sure that
people understand what their requirements are. Under the
Federal Records Act if, for example, they are out and their
BlackBerry stops working, to make sure that they copy their
accounts. But overall I would say that what is most important
to us is that we have that collection now and we are processing
it for----
Mr. Lynch. Right. I appreciate that. Let me just say--I
only have a little bit of time left here--it's my understanding
that former Secretary Clinton delivered about 55,000 pages in
emails.
Ms. Barr. That's correct.
Mr. Lynch. Yeah. Have any of the other Secretaries of
State, during your time, and you've been there a while,
Secretary Rice, Secretary Colin Powell?
Ms. Barr. No, only from Secretary Clinton.
Mr. Lynch. All right. That's about my time.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I'll now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Howard, the White House on April 15, 2009, sent a
directive out from Gregory Craig, Counsel to the President. It
says: ``This is a reminder that executive agencies shall
consult the White House Counsel's Office on all document
requests that may involve documents with White House
equities.'' He goes on and says: ``This need to consult with
the White House arises with respect to all types of document
requests, including congressional committee requests, GAO
requests, judicial subpoenas, and FOIA requests.''
So my question to you, Ms. Howard, when Congress sends you
a request for information, what percentage of that do you share
with the White House?
Ms. Howard. To the extent that I've been involved in
responses to Congress or responses to FOIA, we have never
shared information with the White House. I became aware of this
memo when we were asked for some information actually to
demonstrate how many times we had this interaction. It was a
FOIA request. I was curious as to why we were getting a FOIA
request since we don't have interaction with the White House on
FOIAs, and I was presented with this memo.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you've never sent anything to the
White House?
Ms. Howard. I can't speak for the entire IRS. I mean, that
would be a question for Chief Counsel or the Commissioner. I
can simply speak for the Disclosure Office and the FOIA
process. We do not interact with the White House.
Chairman Chaffetz. So if you get a subpoena form the United
States Congress, you get a subpoena from me, in the Oversight
Committee, you don't share that with the White House?
Ms. Howard. The fact that it exists? Yeah, we may share the
information that we got the subpoena, we may share the fact
that we're working on a subpoena, but the actual documents that
were being produced for the subpoena?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yeah.
Ms. Howard. We would produce those documents and redact
them for 6103. Again, that might involve Chief Counsel----
Chairman Chaffetz. What percentage of those do you share
with the White House?
Ms. Howard. What percentage do I share with the White
House----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yeah.
Ms. Howard. --would be zero.
Chairman Chaffetz. Within the IRS, you do not share those,
to the best of your knowledge, you don't share----
Ms. Howard. To the best of my knowledge, the Disclosure
Office does not consult the White House.
Chairman Chaffetz. The White House told you you're supposed
to do it. The White House directed you to do that. You're
telling us that you didn't comply with the White House request?
Ms. Howard. Well, you know, I'm kind of towards the end of
my career, so I'll be real honest with you. I saw this memo. I
was amazed to see the memo. It's written to agency counsel,
which is not me. I looked through the procedures that we have
in our Internal Revenue Manual, which are basically how we run
our operations with FOIA and I never saw this. I never saw any
evidence that this is incorporated, and I ignored it.
Chairman Chaffetz. When you respond to a letter from
Congress or there's a response to a subpoena from Congress, who
sees that before we get it?
Ms. Howard. In most instances, counsel would look at
something like that, the chief of staff or the Commissioner.
But again that's really a question for the Commissioner in
terms of what that process is like.
Chairman Chaffetz. So Lois Lerner, Lois Lerner, requests
for documents for Lois Lerner----
Ms. Howard. Uh-huh.
Chairman Chaffetz. --who saw those documents? Who did you
have to get clearance from before we get those documents?
Because we still don't have them all.
Ms. Howard. The 6130 redactions, as I said in my testimony,
were done by Chief Counsel, the Office of Chief Counsel. We may
have redacted some of those documents for--well, you don't get
the FOIA----
Chairman Chaffetz. I'm asking what signatures do you need
to see on there before you send it back to us?
Ms. Howard. I'm not certain because I'm not the one doing
the sending. That would be----
Chairman Chaffetz. But you're the Director of this, and
you've heard of Lois Lerner, I would hope, by now.
Ms. Howard. I know Ms. Lois Lerner, yeah.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yeah. So who do you have to check off
with before we get those documents?
Ms. Howard. Again, sir, with all due respect, that was not
a process that I was personally involved in, nor was my
disclosure operation.
Chairman Chaffetz. If you had to guess that maybe we would
ask about Lois Lerner.
Ms. Howard. Which is why the Commissioner thought that
perhaps he might be the best to answer your question.
Chairman Chaffetz. But you're the director. It's your job
and role and responsibility.
Ms. Howard. No, sir. My job is the FOIA program.
Chairman Chaffetz. Your title, correct, Director, Privacy,
Governmental Liaison, and Disclosure.
Ms. Howard. Right.
Chairman Chaffetz. That's your title.
Ms. Howard. That is my title.
Chairman Chaffetz. And you're telling me you're not
responsible for the governmental liaison and disclosure part of
that?
Ms. Howard. Not in the context that you're asking me.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why? Because it's Lois Lerner?
Ms. Howard. No, I think because it was an unprecedented,
voluminous----
Chairman Chaffetz. Wait. What was unprecedented about
asking for information about Lois Lerner? What's unprecedented
about that?
Ms. Howard. I think that Lois Lerner was the tip of the
iceberg. Really? So do we.
Ms. Howard. I think that that request included far more
than just one person.
Chairman Chaffetz. So what makes you think it's the tip of
the iceberg?
Ms. Howard. In terms of the way the request was structured.
Chairman Chaffetz. What was so striking about it? It's
pretty simply. I mean, in this electronic age, we're asking for
all of her emails in a certain timeframe. How hard is that? I
mean, that should take about 10 seconds, right? What's so hard
about producing those documents? Why has it taken so long? It's
taken years.
Ms. Howard. And, again, I cannot talk to the specific
documents about Lois Lerner, but what I can give you is some
insight into how we----
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So when the request came, both in
a letter and then in a subpoena, who does that go to?
Ms. Howard. The Commissioner.
Chairman Chaffetz. It doesn't go to you?
Ms. Howard. No. Not first.
Chairman Chaffetz. But when we send these documents over,
this doesn't land on your desk?
Ms. Howard. It does not land on my desk.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does it land on any of your staff's
desks?
Ms. Howard. No. It landed on the desk of the Commissioner
and the Chief Counsel.
Chairman Chaffetz. So they are solely responsible for the
fulfillment of that request and for the subpoenas, correct? I
mean, if it doesn't go to you, you're the Director of Privacy,
Governmental Liaison, and Disclosure, and you're telling me
that your department, your group doesn't get that because it
came from Congress, right?
Ms. Howard. No, no, because we made a business decision
that because of the scope of that request we would set up a
special project team, and that special project team----
Chairman Chaffetz. Who decided that? I want some names
here. Mr. Koskinen?
Ms. Howard. I think it was before his time, so I guess the
Acting Commissioner.
Chairman Chaffetz. Right.
Ms. Howard. It was before my time too. So, you know,
whatever I tell you is just hearsay. But it was my
understanding that the Commissioner----
Chairman Chaffetz. We expect a little bit more.
Ms. Howard. Again, it was not directed towards my division.
Chairman Chaffetz. So it doesn't come through your office,
your department, your group, whatever you want to call it.
Ms. Howard. We might be involved in it, but so are the IT
people.
Chairman Chaffetz. Was the Lois Lerner case dealt with
differently than anything else? You said it was unprecedented.
I want to know why.
Ms. Howard. Well, I think because there were a lot of other
501--504(c)(3)--(c)(4) documents that were requested at the
same time.
Chairman Chaffetz. So anything that had to deal with those
documents, the (c)(4) documents----
Ms. Howard. Uh-huh.
Chairman Chaffetz. --went a different direction than
normally?
Ms. Howard. It went into sort of a project team where we
felt that we could handle----
Chairman Chaffetz. So there is a special project team
that's set up?
Ms. Howard. There was at the time. I don't believe it's
still functioning.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why was there a special team set up?
Ms. Howard. Because of the volume of the----
Chairman Chaffetz. It didn't have anything to do with
volume. It had to do with the topic, didn't it?
Ms. Howard. I don't believe so, no. I think it was a
business reason of how we would best use our resources. In
actuality, looking back on it from my perspective, it was a
very positive thing for the Disclosure Office because we could
do all of our regular FOIA work, except for those particular
topics.
Chairman Chaffetz. So, I mean, what you're telling me is,
anything that came in on this topic, (c)(4), not just Lois
Lerner, but (c)(4), went in a different route. It went to the
Commissioner and it went to the General Counsel. There's only
two political appointees in all of the IRS, the Commissioner
and the General Counsel. Those are the only two out of 90,000.
And you're telling me that those requests went a different
route than normally anything else does, and it went to them,
correct? That's exactly what you told me.
Ms. Howard. I don't want to go on record as saying that I
know specifically where requests went to. My understanding is
that requests from Congress are given a certain level of
respect and concern so that they go to the Commissioner's
office first and are parceled out as to who's going to work
them after that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you know who the lead of that special
project team was?
Ms. Howard. I do not.
Chairman Chaffetz. My time has expired. We'll now recognize
Mr. Cummings?
Mr. Cummings. Yeah. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Cummings for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Ms. Neuman, you have said that there was room for
improvement. Can you tell us what those improvements might be
that you were talking about?
Ms. Neuman. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. I want to get to the bottom line and be
effective and efficient. So tell me.
Ms. Neuman. As do I, Congressman Cummings.
One of the things I did when I first came aboard was to try
to understand where some of the bottlenecks were in the
Department in terms of the component backlogs and understand
what the reasons for those backlogs might be. In doing so, I
did identify some of the systemic challenges and decided that
we really did need to address in the long term an independent
comprehensive review of what these systemic challenges are,
what the reasons for these backlogs are, and then get some best
practices in place for dealing with those.
In the interim, I decided that I could implement some more
immediate measures to address some of these challenges. For
example----
Mr. Cummings. I want to know what still needs to be done to
improve. I don't have a lot of time.
Ms. Neuman. Sure. I personally believe that we can leverage
technology and deploy much more advanced technology throughout
the Department that can be used to address the backlog.
Mr. Cummings. And what's it going to take to make that
happen?
Ms. Neuman. Well, we're in the process of doing that
already. We are in the process. We've rolled out a successful
pilot that's intended to reduce the backlog and duplication.
It's been adopted by 11 components thus far, and other
components are in line to adopt it as well.
Mr. Cummings. How many components are there?
Ms. Neuman. Well, there are 15 components that process FOIA
requests. Eleven of these components have adopted this
technology----
Mr. Cummings. So you need four more, is that right?
Ms. Neuman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. You have four to go. When do you expect that
to happen?
Ms. Neuman. I personally don't--I'm not aware of the
timeframe. I would be happy to confer with my staff and get
back to you on that.
Mr. Cummings. Confer. I would appreciate it if you would
confer----
Ms. Neuman. Absolutely.
Mr. Cummings. --and get back to me and let me know as when
that's going to happen.
Ms. Neuman. I'd be happy to.
Mr. Cummings. I would also like for you to--because I don't
have a lot of time, I'm going to ask that you--you all--give us
your recommendations.
You know, as I listen here it seems like everything--you
all make everything sound so rosy, and I want to try to get to
the bottom line of what the problems are. We heard a lot of
testimony yesterday. In all fairness to you, I think all of you
all are probably doing a whole lot of good things. But at the
same time, we have to balance that against what we have heard
over the last day or so.
Will you do that for me, Ms. Neuman?
Ms. Neuman. Yes, I will.
Mr. Cummings. And other witnesses?
Ms. Neuman. Yes, I will.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Barr, I want to ask you some key
questions because I want to follow up on what Mr. Lynch was
talking about. And I want to thank you for being here.
For the past several months there have been intense
discussion about former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
her use of personal email for official business. However, new
documents--new documents--which we received late last night
raise significant questions about the email usage of former
Secretaries of State Condoleezza Rice and Colin Powell. The
State Department sent a letter to these former Secretaries of
State last fall requesting information about their use of
personal email for official business.
On December 5, 2014, Secretary Clinton and her attorneys
responded by providing more than 30,000 emails totaling 55,000
pages. The State Department now has those emails and is
currently reviewing them to make them available to the public
under FOIA.
Is that correct, everything I just said?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Neither Secretary Rice nor
Secretary Powell provided any emails to the Department in
response to that request. Is that correct?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Not one. We know that Secretary Powell used a
personal email account for work because he wrote about this in
his biography, and Mr. Lynch talked about that. But unlike
Secretary Clinton, Secretary Powell did not preserve any of
these emails. Is that correct, to your knowledge.
Ms. Barr. Yes, he told us he did not have access to those
anymore.
Mr. Cummings. So that means you didn't have access to them?
Ms. Barr. No.
Mr. Cummings. Last night, the committee received new
documents regarding former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
In 2007, the watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and
Ethics in Washington submitted a FOIA request seeking State
Department policies governing the use of Secretary Rice's email
accounts. CREW also requested copies of emails from her
official account as well as, ``email messages that have been
sent by the Secretary of State from any private mail account
and that pertain to official government business.''
We received the State Department's response to this inquiry
last night. It states that although the Department officials
are still looking, ``no responsive material was found.''
So, Ms. Barr, are you aware of any emails that have been
identified from Secretary Rice's email account, any?
Ms. Barr. No, I'm not aware. Well, I want to make sure that
I understand your question. Are you asking me if I'm aware of
any emails from her account that should be regarded as
responsive material to this request?
Mr. Cummings. That's right.
Ms. Barr. Okay. No, I'm not aware of any that are
responsive to this particular request.
Mr. Cummings. All right. And we already know you don't have
emails from Secretary Powell. Is that right?
Ms. Barr. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Cummings. So between the two of them, do you have
emails?
Ms. Barr. You mean personal?
Mr. Cummings. No, no, no, no, no, no. In response to your
request. You sent the request. You all sent the request. Do you
have any emails with regard to the request?
Ms. Barr. No.
Mr. Cummings. So, Ms. Barr, as you stated today, can you
tell us with certainty whether Secretary Rice even had an
official State Department email account?
Ms. Barr. Yes. It is my understanding that she had an
official State Department request.
Mr. Cummings. Account.
Ms. Barr. Account.
Mr. Cummings. Account. Okay.
Ms. Barr. Sorry. But I would like to also say that emails
are not the only way we capture records. We have cables, memos,
agendas, we have lots of other ways that we capture official
records. So while in these two instances we did not have emails
to respond to requests, we have other types of records that we
maintain that are looked at to see if we have responsive
materials when people ask us through the FOIA process.
Mr. Cummings. Well, I appreciate that. Right now, though,
I'm just talking about emails.
Ms. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Cummings. You don't have any emails from Secretary
Powell?
Ms. Barr. That are responsive to the request?
Mr. Cummings. Yes, ma'am. And you have none from Secretary
Rice?
Ms. Barr. That is true. That's correct.
Mr. Cummings. It's amazing. Secretary Powell and Secretary
Rice served during critical times in this Nation's history,
during 9/11 attacks, the war in Afghanistan, and the war in
Iraq, yet as far as we can tell State Department officials
don't have their emails from this 8-year critical period.
Ms. Barr, Secretary Powell has been straightforward about
his failure to preserve his emails, but Secretary Rice has
never spoken publicly about hers. In response to the State
Department's letter last fall, her representative responded by
proclaiming: ``Secretary Rice did not use a personal email
account for official business.''
Do you know if Secretary Rice's attorney conducted a
thorough review of her personal email account like Secretary
Clinton's did, do you know?
Ms. Barr. I am not personally familiar with what her
attorney did to respond to that request, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Well, my time has run out. But these new
revelations are startling, so I hope that we will look at that
era just like we've been looking at the present era with regard
to these emails. All right.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pustay, let me come to you. Did you watch the testimony
yesterday where we had 12 different witnesses across two panels
talking about FOIA requests?
Ms. Pustay. I didn't. I didn't watch it, but I was keeping
up with it throughout the afternoon.
Mr. Meadows. So you are aware of their less than flattering
testimony as it relates to your particular involvement with
FOIA requests, maybe not yours personally but the Justice
Department. Are you aware of that, that it was less than
flattering?
Ms. Pustay. I don't know if I'd agree with that. I
respectfully don't agree with that characterization. I
understand, though, let me say this, I understand that
requesters have examples of things that are frustrating
experiences.
Mr. Meadows. So what you're saying is that the testimony
that we heard yesterday was just a few examples of frustrating,
because that's not what I got from that, and I would
characterize it as less than flattering.
I'm having a hard time reconciling your opening testimony
with the testimony of a number of witnesses yesterday with
regards to the Department of Justice and your responsiveness,
because your opening testimony provided very glowing terms. So
I guess my question for you is, on scoring different agencies
on how they respond, who gets the best marks and who gets the
worst marks on your scoring? Because I understand you score.
Ms. Pustay. Right. We do an assessment every year.
Mr. Meadows. Just who gets the best ones--I've got 5
minutes--so who gets the best scores and who gets the worst
scores?
Ms. Pustay. Well, we have, if you look at the assessment,
you'll see we have a range of milestones, over 20-some
milestones, so we rank and score agencies on a whole bunch of
things.
Mr. Meadows. So how does the Justice Department score on
those milestones?
Ms. Pustay. The Justice Department scores quite well on
those milestones.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Would you suggest that if you're setting
the milestones and you're scoring the milestones, that the
testimony from all these other folks, who if they set
milestones they wouldn't give you high marks, how do you give
yourself high marks?
Ms. Pustay. I actually for the past 2 years, Congressman,
have been working collaboratively with representatives from
civil society to set the milestones. It's actually been a joint
effort.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So let me ask you this then. Ms.
Attkisson gave us an example of requesting a FOIA request and
it taking 10 years. Her daughter was 8. She was 18 by the time
the FOIA request. Would you say that that is a great response?
Ms. Pustay. Right. No, of course not, of course not.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Would you say that that response is
unique, that there are none others like that throughout all the
FOIA requests?
Ms. Pustay. No, of course not as well.
Mr. Meadows. So what part of violating the FOIA law that is
very clear--I mean, you know the FOIA law, I would assume, and
it gives particular responses--what part of violating the FOIA
law does the Department of Justice condone?
Ms. Pustay. Right. I think that it's important to look at
areas that need improvement in FOIA.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So what part of the law does the Justice
Department condone?
Ms. Pustay. We don't--we endorse----
Mr. Meadows. So you don't condone violating the law?
Ms. Pustay. Of course not.
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Ms. Pustay. Of course not.
Mr. Meadows. So I would think that would be your answer.
Do you violate the law.
Ms. Pustay. Of course not. We work hard----
Mr. Meadows. So you've never violated the FOIA law?
Ms. Pustay. We work hard, we work very hard at my office--
--
Mr. Meadows. I believe that. So the question is----
Ms. Pustay. --to promote transparency and promote
compliance with the law.
Mr. Meadows. I believe that. So the question, under sworn
testimony today, is the Justice Department does not violate--
has never violated the FOIA law. Is that your testimony?
Ms. Pustay. I think what you're asking me is, do we ever
respond to requests beyond 20 working days?
Mr. Meadows. Is that the law?
Ms. Pustay. The law allows for extensions of time in
unusual circumstances.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So with the extensions have you ever
gone beyond the law?
Ms. Pustay. So I wouldn't characterize it as going beyond
the law because the law actually recognizes, in many different
aspects, the FOIA recognizes the reality, Congressman, of the
need for agencies to take more time to respond to certain
requests that are voluminous, for example.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So let me ask it a different way.
Is there anything in the law that would ever give you waivers
to allow 10 years to respond to a FOIA request? Because I can't
find it. Can you show----
Ms. Pustay. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. Direct me to where----
Ms. Pustay. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. --it would be 10 years?
Ms. Pustay. Sure. The way the timing provision is set out
in the FOIA is it's in section 6. There's a basic response time
of 20 working days. There's a provision to ask for 10
additional days.
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ms. Pustay. And then there's a whole series of steps that
agencies can take if they need beyond the additional 10 days.
There's a whole series of things that agencies can do.
Mr. Meadows. So can you direct me to the actual paragraph--
--
Ms. Pustay. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. --and send that to me where it says it's okay
for 10 years?
Ms. Pustay. Absolutely. I'll send you the paragraph that
says----
Mr. Meadows. So do you believe it's in there for 10 years?
Ms. Pustay. What I know is in there is a provision that
allows for an extension beyond 30 working days.
Mr. Meadows. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
And we would be interested if you'd send that to the
committee and help articulate that for us. That it would be
most helpful. Thank you.
Ms. Pustay. Of course.
Chairman Chaffetz. We'll now recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Barr, I must say I am reeling from the stunning
revelation that you have no emails from two former Secretaries
of State who covered the entirety of the Bush administration.
And I want to make sure I understood your answers to Mr.
Cummings very clearly. You are the top FOIA official at the
Department of State. Is that correct?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. And if I understand your sworn testimony,
you're saying that as of right now the State Department has not
been able to identify any emails from Secretary Powell or
Secretary Rice. Is that correct?
Ms. Barr. What I was saying is that the State Department
did not have any emails that were responsive to the request.
Mr. Connolly. Do you have other emails?
Ms. Barr. I know that we have other emails for Secretary
Rice. I'm not sure what we have in our collection for Secretary
Powell. My statements were based on what I understood to be a
summary of how we had requested a number of former Secretaries
to come back to us with whether they had official records.
Mr. Connolly. Well, now, Ms. Barr, my time is limited.
Ms. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Connolly. I'm going to help you clarify your testimony.
Ms. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Connolly. So are you saying you actually do have emails
from Secretary Powell, they just----
Ms. Barr. I'm not sure if I have actual emails from
Secretary Powell in general. Is that what you're asking me?
Mr. Connolly. I'm asking is there any evidence at all of
any emails from Secretary Powell on his official or personal
email accounts that you have access to as the head FOIA
official for the Department of State?
Ms. Barr. I know that he did not provide any copies of
emails of official records after----
Mr. Connolly. Really, for 4 long years?
Ms. Barr. Please let me finish, okay?
Mr. Connolly. Yes. But please do so in a concise fashion. I
only have 5 minutes.
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Go ahead.
Ms. Barr. We don't have any emails that were responsive to
our request.
Mr. Connolly. No, you keep on using that phrase. Do you
have any emails from Colin Powell that you have access to?
Ms. Barr. Because my personal knowledge of what we might
have, in general, I'm not sure.
Mr. Connolly. You're not sure.
Ms. Barr. But I thought that the question that was asked of
me before was much more specific.
Mr. Connolly. Do you have access to any--since you're not
sure about Colin Powell, which I still find stunning--there's
no evidence of any, but you're not sure. What about Secretary
Condoleezza Rice, do you have----
Ms. Barr. I know that she used a state.gov account.
Mr. Connolly. So you have access----
Ms. Barr. And I'm sure we have access to them. But I
thought that the question was in the context of responsive
material or----
Mr. Connolly. What do you mean by responsive material?
Ms. Barr. Because we had a request.
Mr. Connolly. Yeah.
Ms. Barr. That's what I thought.
Mr. Connolly. And your testimony was there is no evidence
of extant emails from her responsive to the request.
Ms. Barr. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. None.
Ms. Barr. We didn't provide any.
Mr. Connolly. So what happened to them?
Ms. Barr. Well, if it's not responsive we don't supply it.
But that doesn't mean that there are no emails, period, from
her.
Mr. Connolly. But there are some emails from her. You're
not sure about Colin Powell, but you are sure about Secretary
Rice?
Ms. Barr. I know that Secretary Rice used a state.gov
account.
Mr. Connolly. Which means they're preserved somewhere.
Ms. Barr. Somewhere.
Mr. Connolly. Have you ever seen one?
Ms. Barr. No, not personally.
Mr. Connolly. I find that amazing as well. Does the Federal
Records Act apply to both Secretaries Powell and Secretary
Rice?
Ms. Barr. Yes. It applies to all. But again Federal records
can be more than email.
Mr. Connolly. I understand that, but let's stick with
emails for a minute.
Ms. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Connolly. So is it compliant with the Federal Records
Act to in fact wipe out emails----
Ms. Barr. No.
Mr. Connolly. --whether they are on your personal account
or your official account?
Ms. Barr. It is not. We ask each employee to preserve
official records, and that's a responsibility for every
employee.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Barr. And we have to depend on individual employees to
carry out their responsibilities.
Mr. Connolly. So just to summarize, and please correct me
if I get it wrong, your testimony is you're unaware of any
surviving emails from Secretary Powell responsive----
Ms. Barr. You said personally.
Mr. Connolly. I understand. But you have a title.
Presumably you'd know, if anyone knew. But we'll use your
phrase, responsive to the request.
Ms. Barr. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. In that lane, there are no surviving emails
from Secretary Colin Powell that you're aware of?
Ms. Barr. That are responsive to the request.
Mr. Connolly. And with respect to Secretary Rice,
similarly, you're unaware of any surviving emails from
Secretary Rice responsive to the request?
Ms. Barr. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. There may be or, in fact, your guess is there
are surviving emails from her, but they are outside that lane
of responsive to the request?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yesterday, as you well know, each of you, this committee
heard testimony from several esteemed members of the press and
outside groups who've experienced tremendous problems with FOIA
requests. And, quite frankly, I was shocked and astonished by
the testimony we heard yesterday.
Several comments stick to my mind, one in particular by Tom
Fitton, the president of Judicial Watch, who used the phrase
``criminal obstruction'' to describe the manner in which the
IRS has handled FOIA requests having to do with the IRS'
targeting of conservative groups. He also said that an agency
official actually told him that if you scrutinize the
government, the government will scrutinize you.
Moments ago, Ranking Member Cummings said that all of you
are making things sound rosy. We're not talking about a rosy
situation here. We have a mess with potential criminal
obstruction taking place.
Ms. Howard, is that what Tom Fitton described common
practice with the IRS?
Ms. Howard. It's not my experience that it's any practice
within the IRS. I see no evidence of criminal wrongdoing or of
any intent to do anything but make records available.
Mr. Hice. So you see no targeting take place. You would
deny what has come out pretty nationally.
Ms. Howard. Outside of my area of expertise. I can only
speak to the records production.
Mr. Hice. If someone makes a FOIA request to the IRS is
that person potentially now a target for retaliation?
Ms. Howard. No, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So you would deny that there has been any
type of retaliation, audits, that type of thing from the IRS
because of people are so-called scrutinizing?
Ms. Howard. I'm simply saying that in my experience the way
in which FOIA requests come in, they are logged into a system.
The folks who work the FOIA requests have access to that
system. The rest of the IRS has no need to have access to that
system. So I'm not sure that it's common knowledge----
Mr. Hice. That's not my question. My question is, has the
IRS participated in retaliation through audits or whatever
because people are requesting FOIA information or what may be
perceived as scrutinizing the IRS?
Ms. Howard. I have no direct knowledge of the audit side of
the house. That's not my area of expertise or familiarity.
Mr. Hice. But you do have knowledge of the FOIA side of
things?
Ms. Howard. I have knowledge of the FOIA side of things.
Mr. Hice. And you're denying there would be any such
retaliation.
Ms. Howard. I have not shared any information with anyone
who would be in a position to retaliate.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, let me go further to a comment you
said, made a little bit earlier in discussion with the chairman
regarding Lois Lerner.
Are you saying--and I just want to clarify your testimony
here today--are you saying that there was no special treatment
that was given to her for protection, in spite of the fact that
you yourself said that her case was the tip of the iceberg?
Ms. Howard. What I meant was that the request for her
emails was just part of the request that this committee and
other investigators made for information on the (c)(4) issue.
One of things I do want to clarify----
Mr. Hice. Please be quick.
Ms. Howard. Okay. Is that the title Governmental Liaison in
my title really is not the liaison with Congress. It's liaison
with State and other Federal agencies and the data exchanges
that we do with them. That's where my area of responsibility
is, in addition to FOIA. So a lot of the requests that would
come from Congress would not automatically land on my desk.
Mr. Hice. We're not talking about requests from Congress.
Ms. Howard. You're talking about FOIA requests.
Mr. Hice. We're talking about FOIA requests and other
requests. We're trying to get to the bottom of what appears to
be outright obstruction, and we're getting a rosy picture that,
quite frankly, is not an accurate picture.
I want to shift over, Ms. Neuman, to you. In your testimony
you mentioned that your agency avoids FOIA requests that might
be operationally sensitive material. Is that a correct----
Ms. Neuman. No, it's not. We don't avoid any FOIA requests,
but we do consider FOIA requests that may be seeking
information that is operationally sensitive and may be
protected.
Mr. Hice. Is operationally sensitive, does that include
anything that your agency would not want the public to know or
see?
Ms. Neuman. No, no. It would include information about law
enforcement, investigatory techniques, for example, national
security issues. And when we get a request----
Mr. Hice. So there would be no other case where information
is denied. Listen, we had testimony one after another after
another. And I don't know where you guys get some of your
information, quite frankly. We had people all over the board
saying the average wait is years to get FOIA responses.
I wish I had more time. My time is running out. But the
FOIA request is absolutely essential to government transparency
and the constitutional rule of law, and the evidence is
abundant that it is at least being avoided, if not totally
obstructed, and this is an issue we have got to get to the
bottom of, get to the root of, and you folks here are part of
the problem.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Ms.
Duckworth, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Barr, in September of 2012 the OIG for the State
Department issued a report on the Department's FOIA program.
I'm looking at it now. It's ``Inspection of the Bureau of
Administration, Global Information Services, Office of
Information Programs and Services.'' And the report states:
``The Department's FOIA process is inefficient and
ineffective.''
Are you familiar with this report?
Ms. Barr. Yes, I am.
Ms. Duckworth. I know you had only been on the job just a
few months when it was issued. But I wanted to ask you a little
bit more about it. The report focused on the Office of
Information Programs and Services. That office is within the
Bureau of Administration, I understand, and you serve as the
Assistant Secretary for that Bureau. Is that correct?
Ms. Barr. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. Duckworth. I'd like to go through some of the issues
raised in the report. It said about the Office of Information
Programs and Services, and I just want to quote the report, it
says: ``Persistent neglect of fundamental leadership
responsibilities and management practices has had profound
consequences in IPS. The OIG team's observations, discussions
with IPS staff, and the responses to OIG's questionnaires
indicated an office with problematic morale, perceptions of
favoritism, micromanagement practices, and confused lines of
authority.''
This really concerns me. And I understand that you'd only
been on the job just 6 months, so this investigation probably
took place before you got there. But how did you respond to
those findings?
Ms. Barr. Well, I took those, that OIG report, very, very
seriously. It was within the first 6 months of my tenure, and I
immediately became involved in doing everything I could to
address the issues.
In addition to just devoting my personal time to doing
whatever I could to make sure that employees received proper
leadership training, that there were more clear lines of
authority, we actually moved some people around. One part of
the problem was that there were supervisors who were not
physically located close to the employees that they were
supervising.
In addition to that, at that time I did have some positions
that I was able to reallocate to that section. We also had a
number of vacancies. And, in fact, at the beginning of that
period when the report was being released we were able to hire
a new director who made a huge difference in that section.
It is something that I am always involved with, with any of
my units, but this report was like the first very negative
report I'd received on one of my units when I started, so I
took it very seriously.
Ms. Duckworth. Would you say that this is an ongoing
process for you? Are you still dealing with the issues in the
report?
Ms. Barr. Yes. We've closed most of the recommendations,
but some of the recommendations that involved other bureaus, we
are still working on it. We have to do a quarterly report to
the IG, so it's something that I talk to the senior management
in that section about all the time.
Ms. Duckworth. Okay. The report also found flaws in the
Department's records management, and it stated that the
Department's records management infrastructure is inefficient
and ineffective. It also said that failure to develop and
implement electronic systems has resulted in poor performance.
Is the State Department overall taking steps to improve its
records management processes?
Ms. Barr. Yes, we are. First of all, we are participating
in a government-wide working group that is dealing with records
management. And I have been in a couple of those meetings
myself, and I can assure you that there are very passionate and
involved people working very hard on this.
In addition to that, as I mentioned earlier in my oral
testimony, the Secretary himself is very much committed to
preservation and transparency and has asked the OIG to look
into a number of issues, and what we are doing on records
management is one of those issues.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you. Well, I hope that the State
Department will continue to make these priorities a top goal
for the agency. FOIA is certainly a critical tool for Americans
to demand the accountability that they deserve from their
government, and I'm sure you know that this--I'm sure this
committee and myself personally will be following up to make
sure that that process continues. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlelady.
And we'll now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, members of the panel, in preparation for this
hearing I actually used my search engine on my computer to look
up FOIA requests, and I was quite surprised and somewhat
disappointed, I have to be honest with you, that one of the
results is what I hold in my hand. And this is a handout from
the Web site of the minority leader, the minority party leader
in the Senate, Senator Harry Reid. It is a document that
encourages deferred action applicants to file FOIA requests, to
file FOIA requests for criminal records and immigration files
so that the lawful permanent residents who are here now can
actually find out and be prepared when their parents or their
children file for deferred status.
I was really shocked. It is quite impressive. It offers
tips as to what they should do to file the FOIA request, but it
clearly states in this handout, it clearly states that ICE,
that the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services is
not currently accepting any applications because of the court
order that we are all familiar with. Yet it still encourages
them in this document to go ahead and file. It still encourages
them to do that.
Ms. Neuman, I want to ask you, in the last fiscal year the
FOIA backlog at DHS has more than doubled. Why is this? Do you
know why it's more than doubled?
Ms. Neuman. Congressman, the FOIA backlog has more than
doubled in part because we've received an enormous increase in
the number of requests for fiscal year 2014. ICE and USCIS are
the recipients of most of these requests as many of these
requests seek immigration-related records.
Mr. Carter. So you do think that it's a result of people
encouraging these applicants to file FOIA requests.
Ms. Neuman. No, sir, I don't. I can't speak to the many
events that take place outside of DHS that trigger searches in
requests. We do focus on trying to fulfill those requests.
Mr. Carter. But you do admit that those requests have been
related to immigration requests.
Ms. Neuman. I am saying, if I understand your question
correctly, that a significant number of the requests received
by the Department are requests for immigration records.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Fair enough. Okay.
In your opening statement you said that the number of
requests through DHS has increased over 182 percent since----
Ms. Neuman. Since 2009.
Mr. Carter.  Since President Obama took office, that's
correct. Is that correct?
Ms. Neuman. Since he issued his open government directive.
Mr. Carter. Since he issued his open government directive.
Ms. Neuman. 2009, yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. So you think it is a result of the deferred
action program.
Ms. Neuman. Again, I can't speak to the many events and
activities outside of the Department that may trigger a surge
in FOIA requests. I can't speak to whether or not anyone is
encouraging requests and whether those words of encouragement
might increase the filing.
Mr. Carter. Ms. Neuman, are you familiar with the G-639
form?
Ms. Neuman. I can't say that I am off the top of my head.
Mr. Carter. Okay. When did you take over in this
department?
Ms. Neuman. At the end of fiscal year 2013.
Mr. Carter. Okay. The G-639 form I believe was just
introduced in your Department this year, so I would think that
you would be familiar with it.
Ms. Neuman. And if you might remind me what that is.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Well, it has to do with the applicants
that--it was created for the FOIA requests from those who were
seeking information on DACA and DAPA to help expedite that. Do
you know whether that form has been used, the increase in the
usage of that form?
Ms. Neuman. I personally don't have awareness of the
specific form that you're talking about. I would be happy to
consult with my staff and get back to you.
Mr. Carter. Well, I hope you will. I would think that you
would have complete awareness of that, being the director, if
there was a new form implemented in order to expedite some of
the FOIA requests that are coming through.
Ms. Neuman. I'm not aware of specifics with respect to the
processing of specific cases or specific types of cases.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Well, can you get back with us on that--
--
Ms. Neuman. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. --and please provide for this, not only that,
but what it's used for specifically?
Ms. Neuman. Absolutely.
Mr. Carter. Because that's what I understand it's used for.
And if that form has been used and how much it's increased.
Ms. Neuman. I'd happy to do that.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I want to mention to you as well, Ms. Neuman. I have a
bill, H.R. 1615, that I am introducing to address the backlog
of FOIA requests at DHS. As you know, the majority of FOIA
request backlogs exist at DHS, majority throughout the
government, so this is something. I hope that you will look at
it. I hope it will be something that can assist you and help
you and help us to eliminate this backlog as best we can.
Ms. Neuman. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'll yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from the Virgin
Islands, Ms. Plaskett, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, witnesses, good morning to you all, and thank
you for the information that you're providing to us.
One of the things that I really wanted us to focus on is my
colleagues here discussed that there is a problem, and everyone
is aware that there is a problem. I don't think that you
sitting here are the problems. I think that there are processes
and directives and issues that have happened within your
agencies that create these backlogs that we're talking about,
and I'd really like to try and get to the root of what is the
reason for this.
We've talked about in some instances, Ms. Pustay, as the
Director of the Office of Information Policy, that agencies are
receiving more and more FOIA requests, correct? And you
highlighted in your testimony that the Federal Government
received 714,231 new FOIA requests in fiscal year 2014. Is that
correct?
Ms. Pustay. That's correct.
Ms. Plaskett. In the beginning of fiscal year 2009, I
understand that there were 557,000.
Ms. Pustay. Right.
Ms. Plaskett. That's an increase of 28 percent.
Ms. Pustay. Exactly.
Ms. Plaskett. So that's one variable that becomes a problem
for us, which is the increase in the number of FOIA requests.
Ambassador Barr, you spoke as well, and I understand that
the Department of State has an increase in over 300 percent of
FOIA requests. Is that correct?
Ms. Barr. Yes, since 2008.
Ms. Plaskett. So that's one side of the equation. I think
what we haven't really talked about is the other side, which is
the amount of resources that you have. And I would have hoped
that you all would have brought that to light in some of your
testimonies. So I wanted to dig into that a little bit as well.
So in 2009 the Open Government Directive instructed
agencies with sizeable FOIA backlogs to try and reduce those by
10 percent. Was that a directive that was given to each one of
you?
Ms. Pustay. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. Yes?
Ms. Pustay. Correct. That's issued to everyone.
Ms. Plaskett. Was everyone issued that?
And, Ms. Pustay, you mentioned the government shutdown in
your testimony, and you said: ``We roughly estimate that this
3-week period could have resulted in 32,000 more FOIA requests
being processed.'' Right?
Ms. Pustay. That's correct.
Ms. Plaskett. What are the resources? Have you increased
the resources that you have to address these backlogs?
Ms. Pustay. Well, I can tell you that the challenges that
we've identified, that agencies are facing with backlogs are,
number one, as you already have mentioned, the steady increase
in incoming requests. Secondly, staffing has been at its lowest
level. This past fiscal year it was lower than it's been for 6
years. So resources, hiring freezes, government shutdowns where
requests can come in but there is no one at the government that
can process them, they all impact backlog.
Ms. Plaskett. So, Ms. Pustay, with that, you're talking
about the decreases.
Ms. Pustay. Right.
Ms. Plaskett. Your Office of Information Policy during
fiscal year 2014, there were 3,838 full-time FOIA staff devoted
to the administration of FOIA throughout the government. We
understand that that is a 9 percent decrease in the amount of
full-time FOIA staff from the year before. Does that figure
sound correct?
Ms. Pustay. Well, it's certainly not the size of OIP. We're
about 43 people at OIP. I think you're talking about----
Ms. Plaskett. Throughout government to handle FOIA
requests.
Ms. Pustay. Yes. So definitely the staffing levels across
the government have decreased.
Ms. Plaskett. And how does that impact the processing of
these FOIA requests?
Ms. Pustay. We are trying very hard to find ways to gain
efficiencies in processing, utilizing technology, and that's a
big factor that we've been--a big area where we've been putting
a lot of emphasis. And there are efficiencies to be gained with
technology. But at the end of the day you do need trained FOIA
professionals who can analyze documents for disclosability, and
so there's just no substitute for personnel to actually handle
requests.
Ms. Plaskett. So it's your belief that having additional
staff to process these backlogs as well as the additional FOIA
requests that come in would be the best way in which to handle
these backlogs.
Ms. Pustay. I think having resources for both staff and
technology together would be a very effective way.
Ms. Plaskett. Ms. Neuman, would you agree that that would
help your agency?
Ms. Neuman. In my case, I don't want to get too far ahead
of the independent review that I mentioned, we also are
deploying technology because doing so does create efficiencies.
But I can't dispute at this point the value of staff resources
along with the enhanced use of technology.
Ms. Plaskett. And Secretary Barr, Ambassador Barr, would
you say that would assist you as well?
Ms. Barr. Yes, I do believe it would assist me. But I think
that within many agencies we are all trying to meet our
priorities and----
Ms. Plaskett. So are the FOIA requests a priority?
Ms. Barr. Yes, it is a priority.
Ms. Plaskett. So what would be the best way to address that
priority?
Ms. Barr. I think we have to continue to work with
technology to see if we can gain additional efficiencies. But I
also see that the increasing requests are also part of the
American public's increasing interest in what we do, and I
don't expect that to abate any time soon.
Ms. Plaskett. So then how do you address it? With the
technology alone or with staff as well?
Ms. Barr. Some staff as well. But I know we are all
competing for resources----
Ms. Plaskett. Well, that's what you come to Congress for,
is to ask us for those resources. So you have an opportunity
here to do that, and I would think that you would avail
yourself of that opportunity.
Ms. Barr. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Plaskett. I yield back my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Before you yield back, if you will yield
me a moment.
Ms. Plaskett. Of course, Mr. Chairman, always. Well, not
always, but in this instance, yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let's get to the question first, and
then we'll see, yeah.
Ms. Pustay, you said across government that resources are
done, if I heard you correct.
Mr. Fontenot, can you please clarify, from your
perspective, what's happening? You wrote in your testimony
something different than that.
Mr. Fontenot. Yes. Treasury-wide, over the past several
years, we've increased our resources related to FOIA.
Specifically, at the end of 2014 we had 151 full-time
equivalent employees working in FOIA, and that's a 21 percent
increase over the prior 2 years.
Chairman Chaffetz. So to say that personnel resources
across the board government-wide, Ms. Pustay, are down is not
accurate. In fact, Mr. Fontenot wrote in his testimony:
``Beginning in 2013, my team doubled the number of full-time
employees dedicated to FOIA.'' That's not a decrease. It's an
increase quite dramatic, actually.
We appreciate the dedication and commitment that you've
made, Mr. Fontenot.
Ms. Pustay. Mr. Chairman, if I could just correct the
characterization. When I'm giving the figure about staffing
being decreased, I'm giving an overall number. The number of
requests overall has increased, overall staff has decreased.
Chairman Chaffetz. I understand the requests, but you were
talking about personnel to deal with those. And some agencies
have evidently prioritized it more than others because they
doubled the number of personnel at the Department of Treasury.
Ms. Pustay. I am giving the figure for overall. Each agency
reports in their annual FOIA report their number of FOIA
staffing, so it's very easy to look, right on foia.gov, to see
which agencies increased, which decreased, the exact numbers
for all of them. It's all publicly available.
Chairman Chaffetz. You said they all decreased, and Mr.
Fontenot said he doubled it.
Ms. Pustay. My statement is, and I'm sorry that it's
misunderstood, was that overall staffing has decreased.
Government figure overall. That's what I'm talking about.
Mr. Cummings. Would the gentleman yield?
Chairman Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr. Cummings. Just real quick. I understand what you were
saying about overall because I said it in my opening statement.
Ms. Pustay. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings. And I just wanted to make sure we are clear.
Although there are agencies that may have increased, overall
government with regard to FOIA personnel has decreased.
Ms. Pustay. Absolutely. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. And further yielding, part of my point
is some think it's in their best interest to just slow this
think down, just ride it out, and others have given it more
priority. But anyway, we'll continue the discussion.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Cartwright, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, in the wake of the Edward Snowden
revelations, obviously there has been a debate and public
outcry over what some are seeing as the government's overly
aggressive reaches into people's personal lives. I don't think
most people would question that the need for the government to
retain secrecy in certain areas to protect our national
security is important. In my mind, though, there is still an
important role for FOIA requests to shine a light on government
actions that might not be in line with the core values that
make our country great.
Ms. Neuman, I want to ask you, with decreased funding and a
shrinking number of FOIA staff, what has the effect been on the
public's ability to maintain that visibility and that
transparency and to hold judicial, legislative, and executive
branches accountable?
Ms. Neuman. Well, certainly with the backlog, that has
impacted the speed with which we can respond to requests and
fulfill those requests. I will say that DHS processed 238,031
requests, up from 204,332 in fiscal year 2013, so that's a 16
percent increase in the number of processed FOIA requests from
the previous fiscal year.
Is it where I would like to see it? No, of course not. I
would like to see greater improvements precisely to fulfill the
values of transparency and shining a light on executive branch
operations, as you know, that's embodied in the statute.
Mr. Cartwright. Great.
Ms. Neuman. And our professionals are working very hard to
fulfill those requests and shine that light.
Mr. Cartwright. It wouldn't hurt to have more professionals
doing this man and woman power work, right?
Ms. Neuman. Well, let answer that this way. These are lean
times for all Federal agencies, as you know.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, you're being very diplomatic, Ms.
Neuman, and appreciate it, but I have to move on.
In his testimony, David McCraw says that there are three
primary areas of FOIA delays that need to be addressed. First,
the culture of unresponsiveness; second, agencies deferring
responses to other agencies; and third, that there are times
when the information being requested has been submitted by
companies to regulators, and so the agency has had to resolve
private industry privacy concerns.
Congress has been working on legislation to expedite the
sharing of cyber threat information, not just between private
companies but also within the government. Now, here on this
committee we have passed out of this committee with approval
H.R. 653. This committee reported it out with approval this
year.
Ms. Pustay, would you comment on 653? Are you familiar with
that legislation?
Ms. Pustay. I'm not prepared to comment on any specific
legislation, Congressman.
Mr. Cartwright. Okay.
Ms. Pustay. I certainly can speak to some of the concepts
that you just mentioned.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, let's do that. Do you have
recommendations on how these efforts might be applied to
increasing government transparency?
Ms. Pustay. Well, I think one of the key things that we've
been doing, just to take an example, after meeting with civil
society representatives during my tenure as Director of OIP, I
have been very impacted by the fact that the basic concept of
better communication can really go a long way to making the
FOIA process seem more understandable and flow more smoothly
and prevent disputes from happening.
So in that sense it has been a focus of mine. I have done
two separate guidance articles on the importance of good
customer service and making sure that requesters understand
what's happening with their request, that they have a point of
contact at an agency.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, good. I don't mean to cut you off.
Ms. Pustay. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cartwright. But would you forward those to my office?
Ms. Pustay. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you for that.
I want to conclude by following up on something Mr.
Connolly from Virginia was talking about. He was talking about
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's emails. And, Ms. Barr,
you were testifying that your understanding is that she used an
official account to do emails, although you had not ever seen
one of those emails from her on that account or any other.
My information is that Secretary Rice has not disclosed
whether she used a personal email account for official
business. She has not disclosed whether she used a private
email account for official business. And, Ms. Barr, can you
confirm or deny that? Do you know either way on that question?
It's a yes or no, and I have to hurry. Yes or no, do you know?
Ms. Barr. Secretary Rice told us that she did not use
personal email for official business.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I'm going to invite my dear friend
from South Carolina, who I know is looking into the question of
emails of Secretaries of State to really delve into the
question of whether Secretary Condoleezza Rice used private
email accounts for official business.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to all of our witnesses.
Ms. Barr, you previously testified that the former
Secretary's email arrangement with herself was not acceptable.
Those are the words you used, not acceptable. What made it not
acceptable to you?
Ms. Barr. I know that in my oral statement today I was
talking about it. Our backlogs were not acceptable. But I think
in my former testimony that was being asked if I thought in
general it was okay to use--if any employee would use a private
email account.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. No, you are exactly right. It was in
response to a question when you testified before the Senate.
And I am sure the circumstances were, was it okay to
exclusively use personal email with which to conduct public
business, and you used the phrase not acceptable. So I am not
asking about the backlog. I am asking about the exclusive use
of personal email with which to conduct public business. What
makes it not acceptable?
Ms. Barr. What we want to make sure that we do under the
Federal Records Act is to capture official records so that they
are available to be a history of what we do and how we come to
those decisions. We don't like for records to be separated from
the agency, so we were very pleased to have these records back
in our possession so that they are part of our collection and
that we can make them available to the public.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you recall why former Secretary Clinton said
she availed herself of a personal server and used exclusively
personal email? Do you recall the explanation given? Or have
you been given an explanation for why she went that route?
Ms. Barr. I can't speak to that authoritatively. My
understanding is that the Secretary said that she did it as a
matter of convenience. I don't know that personally, sir.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, that is my understanding too, in part
because that is what she said. I guess my next question would
be, if it was solely for convenience, why not return the
records the day you separated from the State Department?
Ms. Barr. I have no information on that, sir.
Mr. Gowdy. Has she provided any explanation for why she
retained care, custody, and control of those public records for
almost 2 years after she separated?
Ms. Barr. I am not aware of that, sir. I'm aware that we
have them now.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you know what prompted the former Secretary
to return those public records to the public domain?
Ms. Barr. We sent a letter to Secretary Clinton, as well as
to Secretaries Rice, Powell, and Albright, and asked them if
they had any records that might have been generated on non-
Department systems that should be part of our official records.
Mr. Gowdy. How were you able to comply with FOIA requests
in that almost 2-year interim between the time you wrote the
letter and the time that she retained care, custody, and
control of all of those public records?
Ms. Barr. Sir, emails are not the only records that we use.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. But it's part of the record. So if you
received a FOIA request that would have included emails, how
would you have been able to comply with that FOIA request given
the fact that you had neither care, custody, nor control of
those records?
Ms. Barr. Well, we would still search all of our records,
and we would still look at things like cables, decision memos,
other types of documents that we keep to provide a record of
what we do, agendas.
Mr. Gowdy. So you would have given what you had, but you
would have made no representation that what you provided was
complete, because necessarily it could not have been complete
because you didn't have the full panoply of public records.
Ms. Barr. Well, we always look at what we have, sir.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. You can't give it if you don't have it,
which then raises the next question I have. I was listening to
my friend from Maryland and my friend from Virginia make note
of the fact the former Secretary did return emails. What
guarantee can you give my fellow citizens that what you have
now is the complete public record? Have you been through all of
her records to determine what's public and what's private?
Ms. Barr. We are processing them now. And, no, we have not
completed our review.
Mr. Gowdy. You're processing what was originally on the
server or are you processing what she provided to you?
Ms. Barr. We are processing what she provided to us.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you know what mechanism she would have gone
through to determine herself what was public record and what
was private or what may have been a mixed use? Do you know who
made that initial determination for the former Secretary?
Ms. Barr. She has told us that erred on the side of
inclusion.
Mr. Gowdy. So did she tell you that she personally reviewed
all of the emails or did she retain counsel to do so?
Ms. Barr. I am not aware of whether she personally did it
or if she retained counsel.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I thank you for answering my questions. I
am over time. Suffice it to say I have a number of additional
questions in this area, and perhaps at some point I will able
to ask them.
Mr. Cummings. Will the gentleman yield just for a moment?
Mr. Gowdy. I am out of time. But if the chairman says I'm
not, then I'm not.
Mr. Cummings. Just one question. Ms. Barr, what emails are
you processing for Secretary Powell and Secretary Rice? You
said you are processing emails.
Ms. Barr. For Clinton.
Mr. Cummings. Yeah. But what emails are you processing for
Secretary Powell and--listen to me--Secretary Powell? Any?
Ms. Barr. No.
Mr. Cummings. Are you processing any for Secretary Rice?
Ms. Barr. No.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentlewoman from the
District of Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. I understand, Ms. Barr, while we have Secretary
Clinton's, we don't have any from Secretary Powell because he
didn't save his. Is that right?
Ms. Barr. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. Thank you.
Now, when we get a chronic problem like this that keeps
coming back, we often set up an officer or another department
or another part of government to help us out. So I of course
noticed, indeed, in fact, in H.R. 653 there is the creation of
a Chief FOIA Officers Council. It would be run jointly by the
DOJ's Office of Information Policy and the Office of Government
Information.
This question is initially for Ms. Pustay because your
office would be tasked to run the Office of Government
Information Services. Do you support the notion of a Chief FOIA
Officers Council.
Ms. Pustay. I'm not prepared today to answer any specific
questions about a specific legislative proposal. But what I can
tell you is that chief FOIA officers, who are designated high-
level officials within each agency, designated by law with the
FOIA as it currently exists, I think really hold the key to
helping improve FOIA across the government, and we do a lot to
work with chief FOIA officers. Because the idea there is that
you want a high-level official in every agency who has
authority and responsibility to make sure that the FOIA
operations have sufficient staffing, have sufficient attention,
have the resources that they need to operate.
And gearing off that important role that a chief FOIA
officer plays, starting in 2009 with Attorney General Holder's
guidelines, we created a mechanism called the Chief FOIA
Officer Report, and every year we ask, we at OIP, at the
Department of Justice, we ask chief FOIA officers to report to
us every year on the steps they have taken to improve FOIA
compliance. And we address a range of issues, use of
technology, proactive disclosures, timeliness in responding to
a request. And every year we have been changing the metrics
that we ask and the questions that we ask of those chief FOIA
officers, because as we see FOIA processes improve, or as we
see steps taken to improve FOIA, we want to keep pushing
agencies to do more and to do better. So it is an evolving
process for us.
So I think that we have a lot of really good mechanisms in
place right now that take advantage of the position of the
chief FOIA officer.
Ms. Norton. Well, let me turn to the chief FOIA officers.
How do each of you feel about the notion of a Chief FOIA
Officers Council? Would it be beneficial to you in any way?
Ms. Neuman. It is an interesting idea. I would have to give
that some thought. And after doing so, I would be happy to
share my thoughts with you.
Ms. Norton. Have you given any thought to that? You are the
ones that it seems to me ought to be consulted about this.
Mr. Fontenot. Yes, ma'am. I have not given thought to this
as of now, but I am happy to take that back.
Ms. Norton. Well, I think the committee would benefit from
your advice and counsel, particularly since there has been a
subcommittee hearing here. The Subcommittee on Government
Operations had a FOIA hearing and heard from Frederick Sadler.
He has previously served as a FOIA officer at the Food and Drug
Administration. Let me read to you what he says. ``It would
seem appropriate to require agency representation at the
highest level possible when the individual is also the most
knowledgeable. Past experience has shown that not every chief
FOIA officer has the skill set, since this is by definition not
necessarily that individual's specialty.''
Ms. Barr, I will start with you. Do you agree with Mr.
Sadler's comment.
Ms. Barr. I think it would depend on how that person--each
agency organizes this issue differently. For the State
Department, I am the chief FOIA officer, but I also have a lot
of other responsibilities. So I have a deputy assistant
secretary that is an expert in these issues, and I consult very
closely with that person.
Ms. Norton. What about the exchange of ideas across agency
lines? Do you believe that sharing of information about agency
experience and their ideas, their own best practices, what they
have done right or wrong, would improve the implementation of
FOIA? Would the FOIA officers have a view on that?
Ms. Pustay. I mean, I can certainly tell you that we
definitely think that's incredibly important, and we have many
mechanisms to share best practices. We have what I mentioned in
my testimony, was the creation of a Best Practices Workshop
Series where the whole idea is to identify a topic. And as I
mentioned, our very first topic was improving timeliness and
reducing backlogs. And then identify agencies that have
achieved success in that area, and then have them come and
speak to a gathering of anyone, every interested agency
employee, and share their best practices so that we can
leverage success across the government.
Then what we have done at OIP is take that even further in
that we have created a dedicated Web page on OIP's Web site
connected to the Best Practices Workshop Series where we list
the best practices that came out of each of these sessions. We
have also issued guidance in relation to the best practices.
So it's something that we have been doing already for a
full year now, and we feel that it's been very successful, and
it's a very important way to have agencies be able to
capitalize on the good things and the innovations that one
another is doing.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to yield
my time to the gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank my friend from North Carolina.
Ms. Barr, I appreciate you talking with me earlier. I want
to pick back up where we were. I was seeking some level of
assurance from you, to the extent that you could give one, that
what was produced to the State Department did, in fact,
represent the full universe of what would be public records.
And, again, I have no interest in private documents. I really
could care less. I am interested in making sure the whole
public universe is complete.
So what assurance can you give the public that the State
Department has everything that would be considered a public
record from her tenure as Secretary of State?
Ms. Barr. She has assured us that she gave us everything
she had. And like we do with other Federal employees, we have
to depend on them to provide that information to us. So we have
the documents, and we have accepted her assurance that she has
given us everything that she had which should be a part of our
official records.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, you mentioned other Federal employees,
which got me wondering. And I wrote down a list of some of the
other Cabinet-level folks that I have worked with in my time
here. Attorney General Holder, did he have his own server?
Ms. Pustay. Are you asking me?
Mr. Gowdy. I am asking whoever can answer it.
Ms. Pustay. I can let you know that Attorney General Holder
used an official DOJ account.
Mr. Gowdy. He did. How about new Attorney General Lynch,
does she have a personal server?
Ms. Pustay. Same as well. She is using an official DOJ
account.
Mr. Gowdy. What about President Obama, is there any
indication? Because if you are going to pursue the theory of
convenience, I can't really imagine a busier person on the
globe than President Obama. Did he have his own personal
server?
Ms. Barr?
Ms. Barr. I have no knowledge.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, the reason I am asking is because you said
that you are doing it the exact same way you would with any
other public official. And my point is, because of this
arrangement that the former Secretary had with herself, you are
not in a position to do it the same as you would with any other
public official because Vice President Biden and President
Obama don't have their personal attorneys going through their
emails to decide what to return and what not to return.
I assume your position is an apolitical, nonpolitical,
unbiased position. Am I correct in that assumption?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gowdy. And I believe the Department of State has an
inspector general. Am I right?
Ms. Barr. Yes, and we have asked the inspector general to
look into some of these issues. We are cooperating with them.
Mr. Gowdy. I know you have, and I didn't mean to suggest
otherwise. Do you know who nominated the current inspector
general?
Ms. Barr. I don't have that information at my fingertips,
but I can get back to you.
Mr. Gowdy. You don't have to, because it was President
Obama. Do you know who controlled the Senate when he was
confirmed? Do you know what the vote was? It was unanimous.
Ms. Barr. I knew you were going to give me that
information.
Mr. Gowdy. It was unanimous. Those may be the only
questions I can answer today, but I do know the answer to those
two. President Obama nominated the current inspector general,
and he was unanimously confirmed by a Senate controlled at the
time by Democrats, which makes me think that he, like you, is a
neutral, detached arbiter who is solely interested in
separating what should be in the public domain from what should
be purely personal.
So why not let the inspector general look at all the
records just to make absolutely sure, and that way we are not
in a position of having to take someone's lawyer's word for it?
Why not do that?
Ms. Barr. Well, it was my understanding that--you are
talking about the email collection, not the entire process?
Mr. Gowdy. No. I am talking about--I mean, you have been
put in the position of having to take a lawyer's word that you
have all the public records. And perhaps it is just the
cynicism of actually being a lawyer. I am just wondering who
with a fiduciary duty to the public can make sure that the
public record is complete. Instead of the former Secretary
hiring an attorney to do it, why can't the attorney that works
for all of us, why can't the inspector general do it?
Ms. Barr. So you are asking me why can't the inspector
general make the determination of whether we received all of
the emails?
Mr. Gowdy. Yes.
Ms. Barr. I really can't speculate on that.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I am out of time. Hopefully I will get
some more time, and we can speculate together after that.
I yield back to the chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Duncan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Chairman, thank you for having these
hearings. This is very, very important. And I would simply say
that the testimony we heard in here yesterday, the record on
these FOIA requests is simply horrendous. We heard in here
yesterday Sharyl Attkisson say that FOIA is a pointless,
useless shadow of its former self. She testified that it took
over 10 years, 10 or 11 years, to get a request that she
submitted.
Another witness, Mr. Leopold, said that the Pentagon told
him it would take 15 years to give him material, and they said
they would only give it to him if he would agree never to file
another FOIA request. And, of course, then the court ruled in
his favor and said it was ridiculous that they came up with
that 15-year business.
Mr. McCraw from The New York Times who said that The New
York Times, just that one business, had to file eight different
lawsuits last year, FOIA lawsuits. And I am told there were 422
FOIA lawsuits just in 2014.
We had another witness, Cleta Mitchell, who told about the
years she had spent litigating FOIA and brought in here
numerous, looked like about 10 or 12 notebooks full of pages
that finally were sent to her with practically everything,
thousands of pages, with 100 percent on most of those pages
totally redacted. And it really was just useless.
I can tell you the American people think the Federal
Government is already far too big, too out of control, and far
too secret. And the American people are not going to stand for
more secrecy from the Federal Government.
And I would say to each of you and to any FOIA officers
that might be listening that if you don't start doing better
this committee, this Congress, is going to have come down very,
very hard and come up with some legislation that I am sure none
of you are going to want to live with at all.
Ms. Pustay, can you assure me that if Chairman Chaffetz
calls a hearing a year from now that we are going to hear a
much better story than we have heard these past couple of days?
I mean, you talked about timeliness and all these things that
sound good, but surely you don't accept or don't defend a
system that takes 10 or 15 years to grant simple requests?
Ms. Pustay. No, of course not. What we do every day at OIP
is work very hard to try to help agencies improve their
administration of the FOIA, and we do that through a number of
ways. And we want fundamentally for all agency professionals
who are handling FOIA requests to understand the law and
understand their obligations. And that is why we focus so much
on training and why we're so happy that we were able to
complete e-learning training resources that are now available
to anyone, anywhere in the world, free of charge, because at
its foundation we need trained FOIA professionals.
But we also want to make sure that there is good customer
service, as I mentioned, so that requesters understand the
process and know what's happening. We also want to use
technology to find greater efficiencies in processing FOIA
requests so that we can proceed more quickly.
So there are a lot of things that we can do, and we are
trying very hard to help agencies do better.
Mr. Duncan. Well, I'm assuming that there are some requests
that are granted without--I hope that there are some requests
being granted without forcing lawsuits over it, but I am told
that almost all of these lawsuits, these FOIA lawsuits have
ended up with rulings in favor of the plaintiffs and against
the Department.
Ms. Pustay. I mean, respectfully, Congressman, that is
really just not accurate. The number of lawsuits is really
small in comparison to the number of requests we get, 700,000
requests, 400-some lawsuits. So it is like 1 percent of
requests go to lawsuits.
We don't want anybody to have to go. It is an important
right to have a judicial review of an agency's action, but of
course we don't want requesters to feel that that is where they
have to go.
Mr. Duncan. Well, do you agree that you need to do better,
that this system must be improved and must be faster?
Ms. Pustay. We're constantly looking for ways to improve
it, and we constantly want things to be faster.
I just also want to say that in terms of the results of
litigation, the Administrative Conference on U.S. Courts, ACUS,
did a study of just that exact point, of who prevails and who
doesn't prevail in FOIA lawsuits, and they found that year
after year the government prevailed in FOIA lawsuits over 80
percent of the time. So I want to correct that misstatement
that was conveyed to you.
Mr. Duncan. But you do accept the fact that when we have
requests that are taking 10 or 15 years to grant, that the
system is broken?
Ms. Pustay. It is not that the system is broken. The system
works well for many requesters. And, I mean, since 2009
agencies have responded to nearly 4 million requests. So every
time a student gets their information for their paper or a
reporter gets information for his article, that's a success
story for FOIA.
But at the same time I'm not saying there are not problems,
and I'm not saying there are not areas where we can improve,
and that is what I try to focus on in my office really every
single day, is to try to help agencies improve.
Mr. Duncan. Well, we heard yesterday about some problems
that we shouldn't have been hearing about, I can tell you that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chairman.
Ms. Howard, you had an exchange earlier--I apologize, I
couldn't be here--but you had an exchange with the chairman
where you referenced a special project team that was created to
deal with requests for information concerning the targeting and
a former employee at the Internal Revenue Service, Lois Lerner.
I just had some basic questions. When did the special project
team start?
Ms. Howard. My understanding was that it started soon after
the request came from Congress and other investigators asking
for documents around this whole issue. So that would have been
somewhere in the spring, early summer of 2013.
Mr. Jordan. About 2 years ago, okay, a little over 2 years.
And that was the reason why, to deal with requests from
Congress? Or was it also requests from outside folks, people
like we heard from yesterday, who represented groups who had
been targeted, was it to deal with that as well?
Ms. Howard. It was, because there was a recognition that
most of the documents would be responsive to both Congress, the
investigators, and the FOIAs, and so we centralized the process
for gathering them and redacting them----
Mr. Jordan. And was that unusual, for the IRS to do such a
thing, to create such an entity?
Ms. Howard. I think it was a normal response to an unusual
situation. I see the IRS doing this on an ongoing basis, when
we have surges of work----
Mr. Jordan. So it is not unusual for them to put together a
special team?
Ms. Howard. It is not unusual for us to gather together
resources that are going to be focused on achieving----
Mr. Jordan. Are they called special teams? I mean, I am
using the words you----
Ms. Howard. Yeah. And if I gave you the impression that
there was a title called special team, that's probably not
correct.
Mr. Jordan. I'm just using what you said, special project
team.
Ms. Howard. It was a project team put together----
Mr. Jordan. Okay. And who was on that team?
Ms. Howard. My firsthand knowledge of that is none.
Mr. Jordan. You can't tell us who was on it?
Ms. Howard. I can't tell you who was on it, no. I know that
it was made up mostly of chief counsel, their attorneys. They
pulled them offline to work on them. We took resources that
were familiar with 6103.
Mr. Jordan. Okay, I'm going to me stop you there. You
mentioned chief counsel. So was the Chief Counsel at the
Internal Revenue Service part of the special project team
created shortly after it became known that there was targeting
going on approximately 2 years ago?
Ms. Howard. I have no personal knowledge. You would have to
ask him or the Commissioner that.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I mean, we will do that. Is it your
assumption or do you believe--you're the one who brought up
special counsel both in your response to Mr. Chaffetz earlier--
not special counsel, but chief counsel. Do you think the Chief
Counsel was part of the team?
Ms. Howard. I think there were hundreds of attorneys that
were part of the team, and I think that it was a production
team. It was a way to amass documents and mass produce them.
Mr. Jordan. All right. And you were asked by the chairman
earlier about do you have any interaction with the White House
before you release information, and I am quoting from your
response. ``To the extent that I have been involved in
responses to Congress or to FOIA, we have never shared
information with the White House.'' Accurate? That was your
response?
Ms. Howard. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. You go on to say in that same answer to the
chairman: ``I can't speak for the entire IRS. That would be a
question for the Chief Counsel or the Commissioner. I can
simply speak for the Disclosure Office in FOIA progress. We do
not interact with the White House.''
Do you know if the special project team that was put
together, gathering all this information, most likely had the
Chief Counsel on it, do you know if they were checking with the
White House before they gave information to Congress and/or
other FOIA requests?
Ms. Howard. I have no personal knowledge of how that team
acted, except that I know that they amassed hundreds of
attorneys to go through the documents and redact them for 6103.
Mr. Jordan. Do you think it's likely that the Chief Counsel
talked with the White House before he gave the information to
Congress?
Ms. Howard. I think it's unlikely, but I don't know.
Mr. Jordan. You think it's unlikely. Well, that would be in
direction contradiction to the memo sent to every chief counsel
back when this administration first started, April 15, 2009:
``The need to consult with the White House arises with respect
to all types of document requests, including congressional
committee requests, GAO requests, judicial subpoenas, and FOIA
requests.''
So we have this memo from Greg Craig to all chief counsels.
You're telling me it's likely the Chief Counsel of the IRS was
part of this special project team created just to deal with
requests about the targeting and Lois Lerner. And then you're
saying you think it's unlikely that they actually checked with
the White House, which would be a direct contradiction to what
they were told to do by the White House Chief Counsel.
Ms. Howard. Except that the memo does specify documents
with White House equities. I'm not sure that the documents we
had----
Mr. Jordan. You don't think the White House has an interest
in knowing about information related to the Internal Revenue
Service targeting people? You don't think they have an interest
in that? Equities is an interest, right? They have an interest
in that. This is all document requests that may involve--may
involve--White House interests. That's pretty broad.
And then the next paragraph gives clarification of that and
says congressional committee requests, which you said is the
reason the special project team was created, not to mention GAO
requests, judicial responses, and FOIA requests.
So I would say if the Chief Counsel, who is most likely
part of this special project team, which is something I think
we are going to find out, and the chairman will be pushing for
that, if he is likely part of this special project team, he
wouldn't be following the memo if he wasn't consulting with the
White House. Do you agree?
Ms. Howard. Sir, the special project team was put together
not because the responses were due to Congress, but because of
the volume and the number of investigators and the scope of the
documents that were needed. It was a business reason, a
business process.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I'm out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I am going to now recognize myself. I have a series of
questions I need to do before we wrap up, and members may have
some other questions.
Ms. Howard, I want to give you an opportunity to talk about
the IT challenges that the IRS has and what you are dealing
with. What sort of software are you dealing with, and how bad
is it?
Ms. Howard. I believe it was Congressman Carter when he was
speaking referred to the fact that he had an opportunity to go
onto a search engine on his personal computer. He put in a few
key words that had to do with FOIA. He pushed a button, and he
got all kinds of responses. That is just not the way it works
in IRS. We don't have that library of electronic documents that
we can go in and search through a Google or Bing or any of the
other search engines that you might have. We need the ability
to actually tag those records so that we know what they are,
who created them, how they were created.
Chairman Chaffetz. Can you do key word searches?
Ms. Howard. We can do key word searches within accounts. So
that means if you're going to look for emails, I would have to
look at your account, my account, anyone's account that might
be involved, account by account, and then look within each of
those emails.
Chairman Chaffetz. You can't do a massive look into----
Ms. Howard. It involves downloading everything into some
sort of massive database.
Chairman Chaffetz. What software do you use?
Ms. Howard. That would be a question for the IT person.
Chairman Chaffetz. You don't know what software you use on
your computer?
Ms. Howard. What software I use on my computer?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yeah.
Ms. Howard. Well, I have a Microsoft suite of products,
including Outlook Exchange.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you use Outlook.
Ms. Howard. Uh-huh.
Chairman Chaffetz. You can't type a word into Outlook and
search your database?
Ms. Howard. I can my own account.
Chairman Chaffetz. We'll have to dive deeper into this. And
I'd like actually if each of you, each of the five of you can
help us understand how bad or how good you think the IT
situation is.
Ms. Howard. I just want to add too that once you get the
documents you still have to go through line by line by line to
look for 6103 redactions and then the other exemptions within
FOIA. So it is not just about the IT, but certainly that's a
huge thing in IRS.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ms. Neuman, you mentioned the budget
detail worksheet that would be released in June of this year,
which will be any time. Do you have that yet, and if so, can
you provide it to this committee?
Ms. Neuman. I do not have that yet.
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry, you've got to be a little closer
to the mic there. Go ahead.
Ms. Neuman. I'm sorry. I am not aware that it has been
completed yet. I will check with my Deputy Chief FOIA Officer,
and if it has, I will be happy to certainly provide it to you.
Chairman Chaffetz. When it is complete, and you didn't
represent that it was complete, but when it is complete, can
you please share that with this committee?
Ms. Neuman. Absolutely.
Chairman Chaffetz. One of the questions we have is about
the charges that are given to the public and the expenses that
they have.
Let me start with you. Let me go back to Ms. Howard here.
Oftentimes people are frustrated because the law says you need
to respond within 20 days. You can give another 10-day
extension. But then oftentimes it's months before they hear
again. How do you pick those dates?
Ms. Howard. I think mainly they are just an approximation
of when we think the document production will be done.
Certainly in the case of the (c)(4) issues or the (c)(4) cases
we had just no idea of the volume of documents that would be
required and how long it would actually take for the responses
to Congress and the investigators to be completed.
Chairman Chaffetz. So when you do the search, do you send a
request out to anybody you think might have it and you count on
them to individually do it? You're not able to----
Ms. Howard. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. There is not a FOIA officer that can get
in there and do a search term, pull up every relevant email or
document?
Ms. Howard. No, because there is no library. There is no
massive----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, there is, there is. This is a
fallacy. It's wrong to say there is no library. It's called
email. And the reason we moved away from carbon copies and big
warehouses with stacks and volumes of file folders is because
electronically you can push a button, do a search, and generate
that. This is the year 2015 here. We are not in the stone ages
trying to knock something out and copy it on a stone. So don't
tell me there is not a database. It's called email, and it's
called Microsoft. They're a big company.
Ms. Howard. It's folder by folder by folder by folder,
account by account by account by account.
Chairman Chaffetz. And it's magic. You get a 28-year-old IT
person in there and they can find that in a couple hours. And
that's why we don't believe you. This is why we don't believe.
Don't say there's not a database. It's called email. Right?
Ms. Howard. My understanding is that the capabilities of
the system we have do not enable us to do that except account
by account by account.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I just fundamentally and totally do
not understand that.
And I don't understand how you all pick dates. Can you
please try to explain--we don't have time, because, I mean, it
would take you 10 minutes each to try to explain this.
The frustration for so many people is they don't get
exposure, they don't know when. And sometimes they last months
and years. Sometimes it's very legitimate. They need some
exposure to that, but there seems to be this great deal of
mystery as to why you say, well, it'll be July, and then July
comes, the next thing you know it's October. It just seems like
a slow walk. So can you help explain to us why and how you pick
the dates?
I also would appreciate from Homeland Security if they
could help us understand the new rulemaking that they're
involved with, with FOIA. The FOIA law is the law, so why do
you have to develop new rulemaking, and what in the world is
that going to look like?
Ms. Neuman. Are you asking me a question?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yeah.
Ms. Neuman. So the GAO report recommended that we finalize
our interim FOIA regulation which embodies FOIA policy and
guidance at the Department. The rulemaking process is underway.
We are preparing to issue it for public comment, after which we
will review the comments very carefully and the rule will be
finalized.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will be watching that, because if
Homeland Security thinks that they are going to come up with a
whole nother new set of rules that's different, this is again
one of the frustrations. FOIA is what FOIA is, but every time
you go to a different department and agency they got a whole
set of standards. They got different rules. They don't have
standards where you just plug and play and operate equally, and
that's a frustration.
Ms. Neuman. And the rule is really an implementing
regulation. It is not intended, nor do I believe----
Chairman Chaffetz. We are fascinated to see it.
The other thing I am terribly frustrated at is we talked
about the scorecard. And I believe this is put out by the
Department of Justice, right, you come in and do this
evaluation. And there is a color-coded scheme here, and it is
different categories of presumption of openness, effective
system in place for responding, proactive disclosure, improved
timeliness, and backlog reduction.
Ms. Neuman. Right.
Chairman Chaffetz. And if you sat and listened to the sum
testimony of today and compare it to yesterday, I mean, we had
as wide array of people as you can possibly have, from
individuals, to the New York Times, to the ACLU, to a former
CBS News reporter, to Vice. I mean, we got as wide of a swath
of people as we possibly could, and there wasn't anybody that
believed that in general things were going well. And yet when
you do your own scorecard, for instance at the Department of
Justice, you're solid green. You gave yourself 5 out of 5 on
presumption of openness, 5 out of 5 in an effective system in
place for responding.
Proactive disclosure, are you kidding me? The Department of
Justice gives themselves a 5 out of 5 on proactive disclosure?
Do you think anybody in the world believes the Department of
Justice is the most, they are at the top of their game, they
got an A-plus, 5 for 5, do you really believe that.
Ms. Pustay. I do. I absolutely do.
Chairman Chaffetz. Man, you live in la la land. That's the
problem.
Ms. Pustay. I live in the real world, Congressman.
Chairman Chaffetz. You live in fantasy land, because it
ain't working.
You're a very nice person, and I'm sure most of the people
are very nice people. It ain't working. Five hundred and fifty
thousand times Americans put forward a request and got a
rejection saying doesn't qualify. Do you think that's working?
Is that a presumption of openness? Do you think that's
proactive disclosure? I beg to differ. I think it is absolutely
fundamentally wrong. We are at the heart of why I think there
is a problem, because you all think you're doing a great job.
Ms. Pustay. Right. We are constantly evaluating, not just
how we do at DOJ----
Chairman Chaffetz. And your evaluation says you have no
room for improvement.
Ms. Pustay. That's not true at all.
Chairman Chaffetz. Then why do you give yourself 5 out of
5?
Ms. Pustay. You aren't looking at the whole of all the
different categories.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, I am. I will go through each and
every one of them. I just read the different disclosures, and
here it is in green, all green.
Ms. Pustay. We have green for proactive disclosures.
Proactive disclosures are making available to the public
information----
Chairman Chaffetz. Presumption of openness
Ms. Pustay. Exactly.
Chairman Chaffetz. Effective system in place for
responding.
Ms. Pustay. Responding to requests.
Chairman Chaffetz. Really, you have got an effective system
for--we can argue about this. I beg to differ. We had 11, 12
people yesterday that absolutely differ. On a bipartisan way, I
don't think there is anybody that would agree with you. Across
the board most every one of you got great scores, and I just
don't buy that.
I want to ask specifically about the Department of Justice.
Are you able to conduct an electronic search or do you rely on
the individual agency employees to proactively give you the
information?
Ms. Pustay. What you are talking about, I think, is a
really important improvement to FOIA administration, and we do
have within OIP the tools that are more sophisticated tools
that are used in the e-discovery context which allow individual
email accounts to be dumped or to be collected into one bucket.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you searched the universal index, is
that right?
Ms. Pustay. Well, I don't think it's called a universal
index, but we have tools that allow us----
Chairman Chaffetz. The UNI?
Ms. Pustay. We have tools that allow us to search multiple
email custodians simultaneously.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you search the electronic case files?
Ms. Pustay. We do sometimes. We would only search case
files if case files were relevant to a particular FOIA request.
We have lots of different offices.
What I want to emphasize is that technology is incredibly
important to FOIA administration, and we have been at the
forefront for pushing for use of more sophisticated technology
to process and handle FOIA requests. We did a pilot at DOJ
several years ago to show the benefits of being able to do
things like searching multiple custodians at the same time.
Chairman Chaffetz. So my understanding is that the FBI does
conduct searches on the universal index, but that that system
does not allow for text-based searches. But the FBI does not
search the electronic case files which contain uploaded
versions of the Bureau's nonrestricted investigative records,
and the ECF, as it's called, the electronic case file, is text-
searchable. And that's the disconnect. I don't expect you on
this spot to respond to that, but I do want you to get back to
us on this specific point, if you would.
Ms. Pustay. Sure.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. I have a few more questions. I
want you to kind of each go down the line here. We went through
with Ms. Howard here, but let's go back to Ms. Barr. This is my
last set of questions before I change my mind and ask another
one.
I want to know what is the instruction that you believe you
have been given to interact with the White House? What
percentage of the documents do you give to the White House or
somebody who represents the White House? What is the
expectation that you share information with them? Do you need
their approval before you send it back out? How does that work?
Because this directive is really concise, clear, short,
three paragraphs. I mean, they essentially want you to give
them everything. And so my question is, what do you have to do
in order to fulfill the demand from the White House that you
give them everything before you give it to us or to the media
or to the judicial branch?
Ms. Barr. Well, we have a standard process that we follow
for FOIA, and it does include, if the White House has an equity
in a document that we are working on, we do consult with them
as appropriate. But we follow the standard FOIA process.
Chairman Chaffetz. How do you determine if it's a White
House equity? I mean, what is not an equity?
Ms. Barr. When we get a request in we have a team of
reviewers, and many of these reviewers, because so much of our
work deals with things overseas, for the most part they are
retired foreign service officers, and some of them are even
foreign ambassadors. In fact, we have quite a few.
They look at it. We decide where we need to search for
documents. And then once we get the results of that document
search back, then we go through line by line. And at that point
we look at whether or not we need to coordinate with other
agencies. And that would be when we would include the White
House, if after they get these materials back they decide that
they have an interest in that document.
Chairman Chaffetz. And who at the White House do you send
them to?
Ms. Barr. I'm not familiar with who exactly, but I can take
that back.
Chairman Chaffetz. If you could let us know, we'd
appreciate it.
Chairman Chaffetz. Ms. Pustay?
Ms. Pustay. What I can tell you is that the process of
consulting with other agencies, which includes the White House,
has not changed. This memo reflects the same practice that we
have had administration to administration. I have been doing
this a long time. And the word equity is really just sort of a
more modern term. But what is captured by the memo and what has
been consistent from administration to administration is that
when an agency finds communications that originated with
another entity or that reflect a communication with the other
entity, that's when an agency as a matter of good practice
consults with that other entity to get their views on the
sensitivity of the material. And oftentimes that can include,
of course, getting their views that it's okay to release the
material. So it's communications is what happens, the memo.
Chairman Chaffetz. I think it's a big source of why it's so
slowed down. So what percentage of the information do you have
to share with the White House before you share it with us?
Ms. Pustay. I can speak obviously just to FOIA requests. I
don't know the percentage of requests that have the equity of
any particular----
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
Ms. Neuman.
Ms. Neuman. Yes. It is my understanding that with respect
to the White House, this happens very infrequently.
Chairman Chaffetz. Happens what?
Ms. Neuman. Very infrequently.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why? I mean, the memo says it should
happen on everything.
Ms. Neuman. Well, again, it is my understanding, and I
don't process these requests or get involved in these kinds of
consultations, but my understanding is that the kinds of
requests we get don't involve, quote, White House equities.
And, of course, when the request comes in, if there is an
indication that it is a request for White House records or
White House information, that would trigger the consultation.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, no, it doesn't. I'm not talking
about White House. I'm saying if you have information in your
possession at Homeland and it comes from a Member of Congress,
the judicial branch, it was a FOIA request, a GAO request, that
it should be shared with the White House. You are telling me
you don't do that?
Ms. Neuman. No, no. I am saying that we do, we follow DOJ-
issued guidelines that require consultation not only with the
White House----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, what about the White House- issued
guidelines, because I am reading to you the guidelines. We
handed you a copy of them. This is the guidelines. You don't
abide by it, or you do abide by it?
Ms. Neuman. And we adhere to this memo in accordance with
the DOJ guidance on that. We also report all such consultations
publicly in our FOIA reports. So you asked a question about
whether these consultations slow down or create additional
delay in the process? I have implemented some procedures to try
to minimize that delay or a delay associated with any
consultations, including directing a senior professional member
of my FOIA team to be the point of contact for those
consultations.
Chairman Chaffetz. And they communicate with who at the
White House?
Ms. Neuman. I would have to ask them.
Chairman Chaffetz. We're not getting much. We'll try Mr.
Fontenot.
Mr. Fontenot. Thank you. Again, I do not process specific
FOIA requests, but Treasury follows the Department of Justice
guidance from 2011 concerning FOIA referrals and consultations.
We consult with agencies and entities concerning documents that
originated at those agencies or in communication with those
agencies.
And obviously in this respect Treasury may consult with
staff from the Executive Office of the President or the White
House when those documents either originate or relate to the
White House. Again, we treat the White House just like any
other agency related to FOIA.
Chairman Chaffetz. You were on a roll. I was believing
everything you said until you said that last sentence. You're
nuts if you think you're treating the White House exactly the
same you treat the Bureau of Indian Affairs. There's no way
that's happening.
So with all due respect, we're trying to get our hands and
a grip on it. We would like some feedback on this.
Chairman Chaffetz. I think the directive from the White
House is crystal clear, and we will continue to pursue that.
I am well over time. I will now recognize the gentleman
from Maryland, Mr. Cummings, the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I think a lot of times I sit in these hearings and I try to
figure out where we're going. You all have to help me help you.
I said to you a little bit earlier, Ms. Neuman, I wanted you
all to get back to me with information as to--all of you--as to
things that we could do to make things better. It's kind of
hard to do that when you think you're almost perfect, though.
I'm serious.
Did you all watch the testimony, did any of you all watch
the testimony yesterday? Any of you? Hello? Anybody?
All right, I'll go to Ms. Barr. Did you watch any of the
testimony yesterday?
Ms. Barr. I just heard some of it, but I wanted to focus on
preparing for today.
Mr. Cummings. No problem.
Did you.
Ms. Pustay. Right. As I mentioned, I was updated throughout
the day on the testimony.
Ms. Neuman. As was I while I was preparing for the hearing.
Mr. Fontenot. I watched part of the hearing.
Ms. Howard. I watched most of it.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Fine. And when you hear the
testimony that you all gave today compared to what we heard
yesterday, it seems like a world of difference. And let me tell
you what I think is part of the problem.
I do think a personnel issue is part of the problem. I
mean, logic tells you that when you've got less people and
you've got more demand, you're going to have problems. I mean,
period. I also think that there are a lot of things that you
all are doing right. I mean, doing a great job at. And then I
think there are some cases that are maybe a little bit more
complicated, a little more controversial, and so the process is
slowed down a little bit, and in some instances perhaps a lot.
I mean, just listening to everything that has been said
between yesterday and today, that's where I come down on this.
And some kind of way we got to get past where we are because I
think we could do better. It's easy to say that we are scoring
excellent in this dot, dot, dot, dot that ain't true, folks.
It's not.
So some kind of way we've got to close this gap. And the
only way we're going to do it is that we have to be frank with
each other and we've got to begin to set some kind of, I want
to say goals, but the things, whatever you're going to send us
back are things that you should be doing that could be better,
and set some deadlines with regard to making those things
happen. Other than that, it's going to get worse. I'm telling
you, it's going to get worse.
So I'm hoping that you all will do that. I have discovered
from being on this Hill for 20 years now almost that you almost
have to--we have to set deadlines to get things done. And I've
also noticed that a lot of times people who come before us,
they have a tendency sometimes to outwait us. In other words,
they know that the Congress is going to change. They know that
we're going to move on to something else. And then the next
thing you know, things don't get done, and then they look
towards the new Congress, and then it's worse, and then we just
go through these circles over and over again. You have to have
been here for a while to see this cycle, and I've seen it.
So going to you, Ms. Barr, I want to just ask a few
questions, because I want to clear up this thing. I mean, we're
making a big deal with regard to Secretary Clinton. My
colleague, the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, who I
have a tremendous amount of respect for, suggested that we
should not take Secretary Clinton's word for the fact that she
has produced all her emails relating to official business. He
also suggested that Secretary Clinton's lawyers do not have any
duty to ensure compliance with the Federal records laws.
But, Ms. Barr, let's look at former Secretary Rice. Last
fall the State Department asked her, along with other
secretaries, for information about official emails on their
personal accounts. Is that right?
Ms. Barr. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. And former Secretary Rice did not respond to
the Department herself in response to your letter last fall.
She had a representative do that. That's what it says in the
State Department's report sent to the National Archives on this
issue. Do you know who Secretary Rice's representative is?
Ms. Barr. No, not offhand, sir, but I can find out.
Mr. Cummings. Do you know whether it's an attorney?
Ms. Barr. I assume so, yes.
Mr. Cummings. Okay. According to the report the Department
sent to the archives, former Secretary Rice's representatives
claimed that she did not use her personal email account for
official business. Do you know what his assertion was based on?
Do you have any idea?
Ms. Barr. Personally, just what was told to us. I don't
have personal knowledge of what was said.
Mr. Cummings. Okay. And so you don't know whether she told
him that or he reviewed the documents? You don't know?
Ms. Barr. That is true.
Mr. Cummings. Did you know if he thoroughly reviewed her
personal email account to find emails relating to official
business or did he just take her word? You don't know. Is that
your testimony?
Ms. Barr. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. So let me just state for the record that when
dozens of White House officials under the Bush administration
were using private email accounts at the RNC, we worked with
their attorneys to ensure that they were recovering official
emails and producing them. We did not suggest subpoenaing their
servers. We relied on them to go through their documents,
identify documents responsive to our requests, and produce them
to us. Attorneys do have a legal obligation to provide us with
truthful information, and this is the same process we use for
virtually every investigation we conduct.
Ms. Howard, I take it that you're getting ready to retire.
Is that what you've been trying tell us? You're not on your way
out the door today, are you?
Ms. Howard. Not today, no.
Mr. Cummings. How soon will you be gone?
Ms. Howard. I don't now. I think about that all the time.
Mr. Cummings. Take your time.
Ms. Howard. Like many people in IRS, I am eligible to
retire. And what keeps me working is the dedication of my
employees and the professionalism of my colleagues at IRS.
Mr. Cummings. Well, we appreciate all of you and the
employees that work with you.
What can we do to improve the system?
And then I will be finished, Mr. Chairman. This is where I
want to wrap up.
Ms. Howard. From our standpoint, we would like advanced
technology I think just to make it easier to do the searches.
We would also like at IRS, we would like access to a really
good FOIA system that would help us be more consistent and
accurate with our redactions so that we could get more done
with the same amount of people.
The other thing that my folks do in Disclosure, other than
just the FOIAs, is they are responsible for doing 6103
redactions for subpoenaed information around litigation, and
also for just making sure that the employees across IRS who
have interaction with taxpayers know the disclosure laws and
have their questions about disclosure answered as they need
them on a day-to-day basis.
So we have those responsibilities too. And I think the
technology would go a long way. We would like additional staff.
I think that what we see is a trend in the complexity of
requests. So instead of requests being for mostly taxpayers
asking for their own files, we're seeing more and more of the
types of requests that you had witnesses speaking about
yesterday that are very expansive in their scope and nature and
rely on us going to multiple custodians to find and retrieve
those records and then volumes and volumes of pages.
So we need people. We need people who are trained well in
the exemptions. And we need technology to help us with all of
that.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Fontenot?
Mr. Fontenot. Again thank you. I mean, I can obviously tell
you what we have done. The Department, we've added resources,
we've added people, we've added----
Mr. Cummings. What about training?
Mr. Fontenot. We've added better data, and we've train 100
percent of our FOIA professionals at the Department, and I
think that is yielding results. Again, we received about 14,000
requests overall last year, and we closed about 14,000 as well.
Again, an improvement year over year.
Mr. Cummings. Would you say that maybe, based upon what you
just said----
Mr. Fontenot. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. --you have a situation of best practices
there?
Mr. Fontenot. Again, we're always looking for best
practices. We try to adopt as many best practices as we can
from the Department of Justice. Our team works with them quite
a bit. Again, I think we're moving in the right direction, but
obviously we can always improve?
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Neuman?
Ms. Neuman. Yes, Congressman Cummings. I really appreciate
the question, and I have been giving it quite a bit of thought.
In my case, in the case of my agency, it's somewhat difficult
to say right now because we are in the midst of this
independent review that I have commissioned.
I think it's really important that I personally understand
what the actual systemic challenges are that are facing my
agency so that not only we can understand how to address those,
but so that we can communicate back with you about what it is
we actually need, because it may be tempting to turn to what
might seem like an obvious solution today, but that solution
may not actually address what the actual problems are.
I do think that FOIA as a 40-plus-year-old statute may not
have contemplated the kind of technology that's available not
only to seek information, but to respond to those requests, and
to that extent I think it's worthwhile considering how the
statute might be updated. And otherwise, I think it's a very
good question, and I'm interested in polling my FOIA unit along
with that and the outcome of this review. I would be delighted
to get back to you with my thoughts.
Mr. Cummings. I'm hoping that you all will get back to me
within 30 days. Would you all do that, please?
Ms. Pustay. Certainly.
Mr. Cummings. All right, go ahead.
Ms. Pustay. I think the number one thing from our
perspective is that we really appreciate and need the support
of Congress for adequate resources for FOIA. That will help us
both with personnel and with IT. They're both inextricably
intertwined.
Mr. Cummings. And training.
Ms. Pustay. And training as well, although we feel as
though we've done very well with training with the resources
we've just made available. We've been encouraging agencies to
do training. We're now asking agencies and getting a very good
response that agencies are giving their employees substantive
FOIA training, and we ourselves provide training to thousands
of personnel every year.
So training I think we have handled, I think in the sense
that we can do that now, and we're continuing to focus on that.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Barr?
Ms. Barr. Technology to help us quickly go through the
various. We have information all over the world with different
systems. That would be helpful. And, of course, people. And at
the same time, since we do have an inspector general taking a
look at our processes, we also hope to get something from that
as well.
But it's a very serious problem, but for us it's also a
complicated problem, just trying to get all of the information
in the right place quickly so that we can be responsive.
Mr. Cummings. I want to thank you all of you very much, and
we look forward to hearing from you and working with you.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I thank you all to be here. I just want to make a comment
on the IT part of the equation.
One of the frustrations is, if you look at the amount of
money that we pour into IT at the IRS, it's roughly $2 billion
per year, $2 billion. Now, you have 90,000 employees, right?
It's unfair to just divide that number and calculate out some
$20,000-plus per person. But it's an extraordinary amount of
money. And my guess is, if we went to almost any corporation,
private sector, and said, ``Year over year we're going to keep
giving you billions of dollars for your IT,'' and then to have
such a dilapidated system, I mean, we just don't understand
that.
It's not as if we're not pouring resources into IT budgets.
You have billions of dollars at your disposal. And every time I
turn around I hear across agencies how bad it works. And I'm
doing this off the top of my head, but it's something like $75-
plus billion a year--billion--is spent on IT in the United
States with our government, and it doesn't work. And then we
get data breaches. I mean, we didn't even get into the data
breaches that are happening at the IRS.
So we have got to get a grip on what is important, what is
working, what is not working. And if you think that there is a
database out there that can't be searched because Microsoft
wasn't smart enough to think about that, we've got big, big
problems.
So I want to make sure that you and your staff know how
much we do appreciate. It's a huge volume. It is supply and
demand, and the demand has been greatly increasing, and that
puts a lot of pressure on a lot of people. And I'm a huge
believer that the overwhelming majority of our Federal workers,
they work hard, they work smart, they are trying to do the
right thing. We're trying to do the right thing too.
So while these hearings are sometimes tough and pointed and
direct, that's what they're supposed to do. That's our
Constitution in motion. We are supposed to be self-critical.
That's what we do. That's how we get better. And we can't just
put a smiley face on everything and say, oh, it's all good.
We want to help solve those problems. We're not only the
Oversight Committee, but we're also supposed to be Government
Reform, and there will be a FOIA reform bill. We passed one out
of the committee. I want to take another breath and do several
panels and get your perspective, the media, the outside groups,
so that we get that thing just right. You don't get but once
every couple decades the chance to reformulate something.
So we're going to look back at that bill. We're going to
see if we can't tighten up a couple other things, maybe lessen
the number of exemptions, I think is something that we have got
to be able to look at, and then probably speed up some of the
other parts of the process so that it makes your job smoother
and easier.
And you got all these charts and graphs and, hey, what can
we release or not. Let's do what President Obama said. Let's
err on the side of release it. Release it. And I don't think
your folks in your departments and your agencies have the
freedom to do that. I think they are slowed down in what the
New York Times called, their representative, this culture that
says--and it has happened over a long period of time, not just
one administration--a culture that doesn't want to make a
mistake and consequently doesn't want to release it, and
consequently we aren't getting the American people what they
paid for.
We all work for them. You all work for them. And we've got
to be more responsive. They're telling us it's not working. And
so we've got to change something, we can't just keep doing the
same thing.
So I think it has been a productive 2 days of hearings.
Still lots more to learn. We look forward to the interaction
with you. I thank you for your time and your patriotism and
your dedication to the country and your government, and we
thank you. And this committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
