- SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION: INFORMATION SYSTEMS REVIEW

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION: INFORMATION SYSTEMS REVIEW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 26, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-72

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-192 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio                  Ranking Minority Member
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                    Columbia
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
CYNTHIA M. LUMMIS, Wyoming           TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                TED LIEU, California
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina        BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
MARK WALKER, North Carolina          MARK DeSAULNIER, California
ROD BLUM, Iowa                       BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
JODY B. HICE, Georgia                PETER WELCH, Vermont
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin
WILL HURD, Texas
GARY J. PALMER, Alabama

Jennifer Hemingway, Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Liam McKenna, Senior Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 26, 2016.....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. Carolyn W. Colvin, Acting Administrator, Social Security
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. Robert Klopp,Deputy Commissioner, Systems, and Chief
Information Officer, Social Security Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14
Ms. Marti A. Eckert, Associate Commissioner, Information
Security, and Chief Information Security Officer, Social
Security Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20
Ms. Gale Stallworth Stone, Deputy Inspector General, Social
Security Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28

APPENDIX

RESPONSE Ms. Colvin-QFRs.........................................    60
RESPONSE Ms. Eckert-QFRs.........................................    66

SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION: INFORMATION SYSTEMS REVIEW

----------

Thursday, May 26, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Duncan, DeSantis, Blum,
Hice, Carter, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Cummings, Connolly,
Cartwright, Kelly, Lawrence, Watson Coleman, Plaskett, Welch,
and Lujan Grisham.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order.
Good morning. We are having an important hearing today on
the Social Security Administration, Information Security
Review.
During the past 2 years, this committee has heard a great
deal about PII, personally identifiable information. Whether it
is the Office of Personnel Management, the IRS, or the
Department of Education, the Federal Government collects,
maintains, transmits, and generates vast quantities of
personally identifiable information.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology,
otherwise known as NIST--whoops, I forgot to read this part.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time. My bad. Without objection, so ordered.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology,
otherwise known as NIST, has said ``unauthorized access, use,
or disclosure of PII can seriously harm both individuals''--and
they went on to say--``and reduce the public trust in
organizations.'' NIST's assessment on the high value of PII to
institutional credibility and personal privacy has been proven
time and again perhaps no more poignantly than the data breach
at OPM where tens of millions of Federal workers highly
private, highly sensitive information on drug abuse, divorce,
and even their fingerprints were taken by sophisticated
attackers.
Ultimately, the cybersecurity battle is won as much in the
boardroom as it is in the computer lab. Today's hearing will
continue the committee's oversight on how Federal agencies are
securing America's data, and this time we are talking to the
Social Security Administration.
The information technology challenges Federal agencies face
begin with the culture and leadership established by
individuals such as those we have on the panel today. From the
administrator of the Social Security Administration to the
chief information officer to the chief information security
officer, the senior leadership has responsibility to modernize
the Social Security Administration's technology and harden its
information security posture to protect the massive amounts of
PII traveling across the Social Security Administration's
systems. And the volume of data is truly mind-boggling at this
organization.
In short, the Social Security Administration stores the
sensitive and personal identifiable information of virtually
every American living and deceased. The Social Security
Administration processes--and get these stats--processes an
average daily volume of nearly 150 million transactions. In the
past year alone, the data centers supported 1.6 billion
automated Social Security number verifications; 251 million
earnings items; 5 million retirement, survivor, and Medicare
applications; 3 million initial disability claims; 1.5 million
disability reviews; and 17 million new replacement Social
Security card applications, a lot of work and a lot of good
people working at the Social Security Administration.
This makes also the Social Security Administration a
frontline target in the information age. Of concern is how that
Social Security Administration networks bear the hallmarks of
poor information security similar to those seen at OPM's
networks back in 2014.
Year after year, penetration testers have been able to
obtain global access privileges on the networks. This year, the
agency didn't even detect the attack until auditors were told
about them after sitting in the network for 3 days. The
majority of Social Security Administration's 127 major
application databases and 19.4 petabytes of data reside on
mainframes which Social Security told testers they were
``apprehensive about scanning or other rigorous testing because
of its fragile operating posture.'' It is probably not a good
sign when they don't want to do testing because they are afraid
of how fragile the system is.
As has been proven by these pen tests or penetration tests,
adversaries have been able to gain footholds into the networks,
elevate privileges, and for the first time this year, do so
completely undetected by the Social Security Administration, at
least that we know of. Our cybersecurity conversation needs to
move beyond firewalls and intrusion detection systems. Advanced
persistent threats Federal agencies like Social Security face
are adept at bypassing those sorts of perimeter defenses.
Moreover, the question is not whether adversaries are going
to get inside the network but if they can be found before they
do serious damage. And that conversation about the modern tools
necessary to detect and mitigate advanced threat sectors is
almost impossible to have when we can't get agencies like the
Social Security Administration off of these legacy
technologies.
We had an important hearing about this topic yesterday on
the big broad problems and challenges that we face within the
Federal Government, and here we are going to examine a specific
agency, as we have done.
I would note that this committee has done something that
has not been done before, and that is we have a subcommittee
that is specific to the issues as it relates to information
technology.
Social Security Administration has been using programming
language such as COBOL and Fortran and ALC since the 1970s,
over 66 million lines of that old code to support operating
systems with the PII of all Americans. But I want to be fair.
In spite of these facts, Social Security Administration is
doing well in some areas, which gives me a sense of optimism
for the security of my data, my children's data, and frankly,
the data of everybody in this room.
In 3 out of the last 4 years the Social Security
Administration scored at least 96 percent on the Office of
Management and Budget's cybersecurity assessment, though the
score for fiscal year 2015 dropped 12 percentage points to 84
percent. During the most recent penetration test of the Social
Security Administration, the white-hat hackers were unable to
gain access to Social Security's internal systems through
public-facing systems. That is the good news. And Social
Security Administration was able to improve their score on the
most recent iteration of the FITARA scorecard from a D to a C.
There are some positive takeaways from here, but, however,
in the world of cybersecurity it only takes one vulnerability,
one port, one credential, or one back door to actually expose
millions of people's information. This is one of the largest,
most important organizations we have for the storage of data,
and thus, we felt it was important to have this at the full
committee hearing today.
Chairman Chaffetz. And with that, I will now recognize the
ranking member, Mr. Cummings of Maryland, who I believe where
the Social Security resides is in your district. So I will now
recognize Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And you
are absolutely right. The Social Security Administration is
located in the 7th Congressional District of Maryland. And of
course it manages our nation's Social Security program, and
certainly good to see the Honorable Carolyn Colvin, who I have
known for many years, and I want to thank you for your
leadership.
In fiscal year 2017, it will ensure that more than 50
million seniors and their dependents receive the benefits
earned through their lifetime of work. That is about 89 percent
of the United States population over the age of 65. To
administer Social Security program, as well as the Disability
Insurance program and the Supplemental Security Income program,
the Social Security Administration collects sensitive data on
nearly every American.
The data breach of the Office of Personnel Management
affected more than 25 million people. A breach at the Social
Security Administration could affect nearly every single person
in this country.
The good news is that Social Security has never had a known
exfiltration. However, threats are constantly evolving, and
today's hearing will enable us to examine what more must be
done to meet these threats and ensure that Social Security data
remains safe and secure.
In many ways, Social Security's information technology
systems are modeled for the Federal Government. The agency has
saved about $370 million in its IT budget over 3 years. This
sounds technical, but Social Security achieved highest
individual metric grade for IT project savings on FITARA
implementation scorecard metric that our committee
commissioned. In other words, it was the benchmark against
which the other 23 agencies were measured.
However, Social Security is confronted by tens of millions
of scans and probes every week trying to find vulnerabilities
in the agency's defenses. Every second of every day determined
hackers here in the United States and around the world are
trying to breach Social Security's firewalls.
Audits of Social Security's IT systems and practices have
found weaknesses that need to be corrected. In 2012, a FISMA
audit reported that these shortcomings constituted a material
weakness. The agency has worked to address these shortcomings,
and more recent audits have found improvements in the agency's
IT security.
But there is still ``significant deficiency in internal
controls'' according to the most recent audit. Additional
measures must be implemented to close remaining gaps.
Unfortunately, Social Security's IT budget has been underfunded
for years. According to the FISMA audit, one of the factors
that contributed to the agency's significant deficiency was
that ``SSA focused its limited resources on high-risk
weaknesses and therefore was unable to implement corrective
action for all aspects of the prior year deficiencies.''
And I hope that our witnesses will address this issue. At
yesterday's hearing there was quite a bit of testimony with
regard to whether there were sufficient funds going into these
agencies to do the things that they needed to do. That argument
goes back and forth, but we want to have a fair, accurate
assessment of how the money is being used that you are getting,
whether it is being used effectively and efficiently, and what
difference would additional money make.
There are some in the Congress who believe that the more
money you get--that you don't need any more money, and to be
frank with you, I think all of us want to know exactly what the
situation is. Are you asking to do more with less? I don't
know, but I would like to know.
So Social Security benefits are funded through the Social
Security tax paid by employers and employees. Funding for
benefits is considered mandatory spending and is not subject to
the appropriations process. However, the agency's
administrative expenses are paid from the account that is
funded by discretionary appropriations subject to the annual
appropriations process. Congress's failure to adequately fund
Social Security's administrative expenses has resulted in
extended wait times for seniors calling the 800 number, reduced
operating hours at field offices, and delays for adjudicative
hearings that now average more than 500 days. Underfunding
Social Security Administration has also affected its efforts to
modernize its 40-year-old IT infrastructure and address
evolving cyber risks.
The President's fiscal year 2017 budget seeks the first
installment of what is expected to be a $300 million request
over the coming years to upgrade Social Security's IT systems.
Congress must act on this request and provide the agency the
resources it needs to protect the data entrusted to it. Again,
we want to know how those funds are going to be used if you get
them and exactly whether they are being, again, used
effectively and efficiently.
Shortchanging data security at Social Security as a
senseless pursuit of austerity could put the privacy of every
American at risk, and that is a risk we simply cannot afford to
take.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
I will now recognize our panel of witnesses. We are pleased
to welcome the Honorable Carolyn Colvin, acting commissioner of
the Social Security Administration; Mr. Robert Klopp, deputy
commissioner of systems and chief information officer at the
Social Security Administration; Ms. Marti Eckert, associate
commissioner of information security and chief information
security officer at the Social Security Administration; and Ms.
Gale Stallworth Stone, deputy inspector general at the Social
Security Administration. We thank you all for being here.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify, so if you will please rise and raise your
right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. If you will please be seated
and let the record reflect that the witnesses all answered in
the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
it if you would limit your comments to 5 minutes. Your entire
written statement will be entered into the record.
So we are pleased again to have the acting commissioner
here, Ms. Colvin, and you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF CAROLYN W. COLVIN

Ms. Colvin. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting us to discuss
IT at Social Security. My name is Carolyn Colvin, and I'm the
acting commissioner of the Social Security Administration.
Just to provide you of the scope of what we do at SSA, with
an appropriation of around $12 billion in 2015, we paid more
than $930 billion in benefits to nearly 67 million people that
year. In addition, we maintained earning records for nearly
every American and completed over 8 million claims for
benefits. My written testimony provides further examples. Our
IT infrastructure supports all of this work.
I'm pleased to be here, along with our chief information
officer Robert Klopp and our chief information security officer
Marti Eckert. Mr. Klopp has impressive private industry
expertise in leading technology change and in balancing that
change with reliable service delivery. And Ms. Eckert is an
excellent public servant who has done great work to strengthen
our cybersecurity program.
The security and integrity of our IT systems is of
paramount importance to me, and I value Mr. Klopp and Ms.
Eckert's advice and guidance. I and other agency leaders
communicate with them regularly to discuss IT and cybersecurity
issues.
Today, I will describe in brief how IT supports our mission
and the need for a multiyear IT modernization effort. Mr. Klopp
will discuss how we invest in and manage IT and our paths and
achievements in modernizing our IT infrastructure. Ms. Eckert
will summarize our continuous cybersecurity efforts and
improvements.
We are all committed to working with Congress and OMB to
invest our IT dollars wisely, improve our cybersecurity, and
ensure compliance with FISMA and FITARA. Investing wisely in
technology is one of my priorities as we work to deliver smart,
secure, and efficient service. We must use all of our IT
funding for ongoing operational costs such as our network of
field offices, national 800 number, and our online services.
Each year, we see greater numbers of people across all
demographics doing business with us online. Since we launched
My Social Security in 2012, over 24.5 million customers have
created accounts. In fiscal year 2015 we received more than
half of all Social Security retirement and disability
applications online, including 75 percent of Medicare
applications.
That said, we have a significantly aged IT infrastructure
which is increasingly difficult and expensive to maintain.
Although our legacy infrastructure is not sustainable over the
long term, these aged systems are the very tools that we rely
upon each day to provide service to the public. We must
maintain these legacy systems while developing their
replacements.
Let me be clear. We need a sustained, long-term investment
to make the changes needed to develop a fully modern IT
infrastructure that is capable of supporting the millions of
people we serve every day, not to mention workloads that are
growing as the baby boomers age. That is why the President's
budget for 2017 requests a multiyear mandatory funding stream
so that we can undertake IT modernization that will bring our
systems up to modern standards.
As we continue to provide opportunities for better customer
service through new online services, we must remain vigilant in
continuing to strengthen our cybersecurity. I am firmly
committed to protecting the public's information. Our
cybersecurity defense capabilities are comprehensive,
multilayered, and strong. They safeguard the public's
information against evolving threats and cyber attacks. We have
a rigorous approach to cybersecurity testing, and we try to
hack our own systems every day. We also work with independent
auditors and Homeland Security. We are continually
strengthening our defenses.
In conclusion, we must position our agency for future
success, and this must involve smart IT investments and a
nimble cybersecurity program. I've worked to assemble a first-
rate systems team at Social Security, and I fully expect that
we will meet the challenges before us. With sustained and
adequate funding, we will continue to provide the high-quality
services the public expects and deserves.
I thank the committee for your support, and I will be happy
to answer your questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Colvin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Klopp, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT KLOPP

Mr. Klopp. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of the committee.
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry, if you just move that mic a
little bit closer right up there. There we go. Thank you.
Mr. Klopp. Okay, cool. Thank you for inviting me to discuss
IT at Social Security. My name is Rob Klopp, and 2015 Acting
Commissioner Colvin appointed me to serve as SSA's deputy
commissioner for systems and chief information officer. Prior
to my appointment, I worked for a variety of private sector
technology firms based in the Silicon Valley and elsewhere on
the West Coast. I was recruited by the U.S. Digital Service's
staff to try to help.
It was clear from the first day that the challenge facing
the SSA comes from an aging IT infrastructure serviced by an
aging IT staff. With acting Commissioner Colvin's full support
and leadership, here is what we've accomplished in the last 17
months. We've started modernizing the underlying infrastructure
and now have an authorization to operate production systems
from the cloud. We have started modernizing our data
architecture and will have a modern citizen database in
production by the end of this calendar year. With this
deployment, we will decommission our enumerations master file
that has served us for over 30 years.
We've deployed a modern development environment that
provides a basis for all new software development within the
agency. This continuous development infrastructure will help us
to significantly reduce the cost of developing, testing, and
deploying modern software and will provide the basis for
DevOps, the ``new'' new thing in software engineering.
We have developed an enterprise data warehouse that will
provide the agency with an integrated view of current and
historical data across every aspect of the agency. This
warehouse will provide the foundation upon which the SSA may
become a data-driven enterprise.
We have deployed significant new cybersecurity defenses and
are beginning the deployment of yet another.
We have reorganized our systems staff to get more focus on
cybersecurity, on software engineering, and on servicing our
business components. As part of this, we have started hiring
the next generation of IT staff and have procured a state-of-
the-art 90-day coding boot camp to create our own digital
services organization. This boot camp and the other
organizational changes are designed to make us more agile from
the top to the bottom.
Further, we are organizing around products instead of
around projects. This is a critical new approach that will help
us to minimize the effort that we now call maintenance and
reduce the accumulation of technical debt. It is technical debt
that forces us to spend millions on IT modernization. This
topic of product management is one that I hope you will ask me
about later.
We have developed a new IT investment process to help us
start product development off the right foot and allow us to
better track the actual benefits we estimated in our early
cost-benefit analysis.
We have started the first very modern product development,
DCPS. This Disability Case Processing System product will
deliver the long-promised and much-needed capabilities to
assist in disability determination. DCPS is modern through and
through using state-of-the-art programming languages, open-
source software, and the cloud. Development of the first
release is completely agile, and the customers will see the
work progress after each 2-week sprint. This first release is
hitting development milestones on time and on budget, and we
are optimistic that deployment for the first three States will
begin this calendar year.
Finally, we have engaged the agency and challenged them to
rethink how we engage our customers. Our customer connect
product is very ambitious, and it will set the stage for modern
IT by providing a perspective of what systems must look like 5
years from now when applications like Uber are passe.
It's been an amazing year. These are not initiatives just
on the books. They are in flight and will deliver operational
code this year. But there are issues. My biggest concern is
around sustained funding. With the support of the acting
commissioner, we've made great strides, but the foundation for
modernization effort is all that we've built. We can modernize
the agency, but we will require extra funding to keep the
legacy systems running and keep servicing the public. The SSA
delivers checks that represent 5 percent of the U.S. GDP, and
that is not an insignificant operation.
If we try to modernize in small increments, we will
progress at a pace that is slower than the pace of technology
that technology advances and actually lose ground. I think the
time to rebuild is now while the legacy systems are still
supported by the staff who developed it.
Rebuilding aged IT infrastructure is not unlike rebuilding
other aging infrastructure. Roads, bridges, dams, and/or the
grid requires an investment and a strong effort. We look
forward to working with Congress to overcome these challenges.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Klopp follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Eckert, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARTI A. ECKERT

Ms. Eckert. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to discuss
information security at the Social Security Administration. My
name is Marti Eckert, and I am the agency's chief information
security officer. In this role I support our CIO and our
agency's commitment to protect the information we manage and
our systems from threats and vulnerabilities.
Today, I will briefly discuss our cybersecurity program and
some of the measures we are taking to counter potential cyber
threats.
We take seriously our responsibility to protect the
information the public provides us. We take a strong, proactive
approach to risk assessment and mitigation associated with
securing this information in our many systems. We have strong
controls in place, but we know that in today's escalating
threat environment there is no perfect way to lock down every
system. Every cybersecurity program must be a practice of
continuous improvement.
We employ a dynamic enterprise-wide cybersecurity program
and leverage a defense in-depth strategy to help protect our
network, our data, and our employees. We work to protect our
information, detect attacks, identify suspicious activities and
systematically respond to software and hardware
vulnerabilities. We use an integrated proactive defense
strategy that enables us to carry out the agency's mission and
meet customer expectations in a safe and secure environment.
To keep our information safe, we use a comprehensive
holistic approach comprised of many technology solutions,
policies, and awareness programs. Our cybersecurity program
meets or exceeds all federally established oversight goals, and
as technology and standards evolve, we continue to meet newly
established benchmarks and security requirements each year. We
addressed the NIST cybersecurity framework core functions of
identify, protect, detect, respond, and recover.
To ensure we have a strong and robust program, we also
collaborate with other Federal agencies such as Homeland
Security to address cyber threats. We have no critical
vulnerabilities, as identified on DHS's Federal Cyber Exposure
Scorecard, and we meet all nine of the cross agency priority
cybersecurity goals on information security defenses.
We are proud of our cybersecurity program but remain
vigilant and continually improve and mature our defenses. We
have developed several cybersecurity best practices that we
share with other Federal agencies.
We continue to build upon the work we did last year during
the Cybersecurity Sprint to put in place standard practices
such as multifactor authentication. Since fiscal year 2012 we
have offered a multifactor identification method for citizens
to conduct business with us online on our My Social Security
portal. This summer, we will make multifactor authentication
mandatory for My SSA users in compliance with the Cybersecurity
Act of 2015 and Federal directives.
We rank sixth in our peer group of 24 CFO Act agencies when
it comes to FISMA compliance. In fiscal year 2015 our overall
score was lower than the previous year due in part to a change
in scoring metrics. Most of our reduced compliance metrics fell
into the area of risk management.
Let me assure you we take the auditor's findings seriously,
and we have completed actions on many recommendations from the
FISMA assessment. For example, we implemented a zero-tolerance
policy and immediate remediation for weak credentials. We
prioritize our actions when remediating audit findings to
address the most significant risks first following best
practices and making best use of limited resources to address
open recommendations.
To sustain a robust information security program, we must
respond with newer and innovative defenses that will improve
our ability to react quickly. Our plans include the use of more
analytics tools to identify threats faster and the use of
automation to respond and remediate incidents more quickly, as
well as updating technology to reduce our reliance on outdated
processes.
Your support in providing sustained adequate funding is
critical to ensure we maintain and evolve the high level of
information security the public expects and deserves. Thank
you, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Eckert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Ms. Stone, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GALE STALLWORTH STONE

Ms. Stone. Good morning, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
invitation to testify today.
The Social Security Administration holds sensitive data for
more than 300 million people. It administers programs that
result in payments of $2.5 billion per day. It has over 60,000
employees and more than 1,200 field offices across the country.
These realities inherently make SSA a tempting target for cyber
criminals. Indeed, recent data breaches of government agencies
underscore the need for Federal agencies to make every effort
to secure and protect sensitive information.
Unauthorized access to or the theft of SSA data could
result in harm and distress to hundreds of millions of
Americans. While it is a significant challenge to maintain
uniform information security controls across an organization as
vast as SSA, the agency must continue to make this its top
priority.
In our most recent Federal information Security
Modernization Act, or FISMA, report, we determined that SSA's
programs and policies were generally consistent with FISMA
requirements. However, we identified a number of weaknesses
that may limit SSA's ability to adequately protect its
information systems.
First, there were weaknesses in SSA's network security in
that SSA did not always resolve systems vulnerabilities in a
timely manner.
Second, inadequate access controls allow programmers to
have unmonitored access to various systems functions while
other users had in appropriate access to software.
Third, at some non-central office sites weaknesses not only
persisted in systems security but in policies and risk
management as well.
The risk and severity of these weaknesses met OMB's
definition of a significant deficiency in internal controls, a
conclusion we have cited in prior SSA FISMA compliance reports.
We believe the agency needs to address these weaknesses, as
well as strengthen its continuous monitoring program to provide
constant cyber protection, prioritize and implement risk
mitigation strategies, review and improve account management
controls, and enhance IT oversight to ensure consistency across
the agency.
It is equally important that SSA authenticates its users of
its electronic services. SSA provides many of its customer
service functions online through the My Social Security portal,
including the ability to change direct deposit information. In
recent years, we have received reports of changes to online
accounts that beneficiaries did not make or authorize. We've
also investigated many cases involving the fraudulent
redirection of Social Security benefits to financial accounts
controlled by identity thieves. Electronic fraud schemes such
as these can affect a significant number of victims and lead to
large Social Security losses.
While SSA has taken steps to strengthen controls over the
My Social Security portal, given the sensitivity of the
information in these accounts, SSA should implement additional
user authentication techniques to further guard against
identity and benefit theft.
Finally, SSA must properly manage its IT investments to
position itself for success. SSA expects to complete its
systems migration to the new data center in August. This modern
data center should meet SSA's IT needs for at least 20 years.
OIG provided real-time oversight of this project to help ensure
that it was completed on schedule.
The disability case processing system, however, has been in
development for more than 5 years. Last year, SSA reset the
project and it continues to work on a single case processing
tool for disability examiners across the country. To date, SSA
has spent more than $300 million on DCPS, so going forward, the
project requires diligent oversight and continued user
involvement.
In conclusion, OIG will continue to monitor these issues
closely and work with SSA and the committee to enhance and
protect the agency's information systems. Thank you again for
the invitation to testify, and I'm happy to answer any
questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Stone follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you all. I appreciate
your testimony but will now recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Duncan, for questioning.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for calling this important hearing.
I remember just a few years ago in this same committee when
we had a hearing on identity theft and how fast that crime was
growing and we had a witness from a company that had been on
one of the morning programs not long before that that this
company had downloaded 250,000 Federal tax returns just to show
that it could be done.
And so sometimes I wonder if there is such a thing as
cybersecurity. In fact, my staffer has one possible--he always
writes out many questions for me, but he has got one here: If
the government spent most of its budget on just updating and
modernizing IT systems, could we ever guarantee that they would
not be vulnerable to hackers and malicious code? And I think
the answer to that is no. And it seems to me that all this--I
don't know if it is almost a waste to keep trying to arrive
with cybersecurity that is impossible to obtain.
I also have gotten the figures. The Social Security
Administration has spent approximately $16 billion on
technology in the last 10 years, $16 billion, and yet I keep
reading these things about how their IT infrastructure is
aging, out of date. I mean, it just seems crazy to me because
the biggest corporations in this country and wants to do
business with all 310 million like Walmart and other giant
corporations, they spend a lot, but they don't spend as much as
the Federal Government does. We have been spending for the last
10 years Federal Government-wide about $81 billion per year.
And it seems to me that these computer companies were
turning the top people at these computer companies into not
just multi-, multimillionaires but multi-, multibillionaires,
and it seems to me that they are ripping off the American
people and the taxpayers in the process.
But I do have a question here for Ms. Stone and Ms. Colvin.
Would it be possible or logical to put the Social Security
Administration's most sensitive information into an intranet
system that would be accessible only to government agencies
with proper clearance, intranet instead of internet? Ms. Stone,
do you understand that question? Would it be possible to do
something like that, or Ms. Colvin?
Ms. Stone. I would defer to the agency on that because I
would say that that's the environment that we have now is that
it is intranet. But again, I will defer to the agency.
Ms. Colvin. Sorry. The system that we have now is--you
know, is available only to those who are given access to it,
which is primarily our employees. We share data with other
governmental agencies and some local and State agencies.
I would ask Rob Klopp, who is really our technologist, to
talk about other ways ----
Mr. Duncan. All right.
Ms. Colvin.--that this might be done.
Mr. Duncan. All right.
Mr. Klopp. So what we try to do today in order to
authenticate people is the same kinds of things that commercial
companies do. We will reach out and ask interesting questions
that come from your financial background through contracts with
folks like Equifax and Experian. So if you try to set up a My
SSA account, what we do is ask some question about, you know,
when did you start your mortgage on your house at such and such
an address, I mean, things that are very difficult for bad
actors to get a hold of.
So--and as Marti pointed out, the next level of this
authentication is to use two-factor authentication, and we're
going to mandate that on My SSA in the middle of this year.
So, you know, I think that we're trying to do--you know,
we're bringing on all of the best practices to do the best we
can to try to cut down the identity fraud, which is what
happens when people can get in. It's not really a cyber thing,
but it's definitely something that as CIO that I'm trying ----
Mr. Duncan. Well, my time is up, but I just think it is so
frustrating to see all of this spending, much more than is
being done in the private sector, and yet we are not hearing
the same excuses from the private sector. And I know the
easiest thing in the world is to spend other people's money and
there is just not the same pressures or incentives to hold down
spending in the Federal Government as there is in the private
sector. But we have got to do better. We can't keep getting
with all the spending, these--hearing over and over again that
the systems are out of date, aging, and so forth. Anyway, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I want to just follow up on what Mr. Duncan was just
talking about. I think he makes a very good point. I mean, when
you look at this situation, it seems that we are spending a lot
of money. And I believe that the money is probably being spent
effectively and efficiently, but I also think that we are--we
heard testimony yesterday that it is almost like trying to fix
an airplane while you are flying it, you know, create it while
you are trying to fly it because you are always trying to keep
up with things.
And, you know, listening to Mr. Duncan, it is interesting
to note that in the private sector, look at folks like Home
Depot and others, I could just name all the private folks who
have had their systems hacked very effectively.
So can you answer his question, though? I mean, how do we--
is it too big to properly address, this whole issue? In other
words, the thing that I think that concerns me is the image
will be presented that we are just spending, spending,
spending, and then the people on Capitol Hill, that is us, come
to that conclusion, and then you end up not getting the money
that you need. And then of course we are going to beat up on
you when you are not answering the calls, when you are not
addressing all the issues that you have to address. So somebody
make the best case for me, please.
Ms. Colvin. I think it's very clear that hackers and bad
people are going to constantly try to infiltrate every system,
just as you had the Fosters, and I think that we have to be as
determined that they will not, and I think that's the reason
for the rigorous testing, why we try to hack ourselves, why we
use independent auditors, and why we work very closely with
Homeland Security because each time a vulnerability is
identified, we address it immediately or as resources permit.
And I think that this is something that we have to
constantly do. We're in an evolving environment where
technology is certainly continuing to develop. We've had to
move away from the paper process so it's not like we have
options of not using the technology. So we have to constantly
look at best practices, constantly make sure we have the
expertise that we need inside the agency. I think SSA is
fortunate to have someone who's come from corporate America who
has worked with a lot of the technological changes and will
help us to move forward.
We know that it's a continuous, ongoing process. We do
believe--and I'll let Rob speak to this, but we do believe that
because our legacy system is so old, we are at risk and we need
to make changes, but we have to make them carefully because we
can't run the risk of not being able to get the $930 billion
out. And Social Security has never missed a check payment, and
we use that old system to do that.
I think also there's been a new way of procuring and
developing systems thanks to the work of the Congress and
others so that you have more agile development and that you can
look at the cybersecurity issues and what you need to do to
address those.
Rob, you want to add something to that?
Mr. Klopp. You know, I think Marti pointed out that, you
know, cyber is an ongoing effort. I think that part of the deal
is that we probably started off a little bit behind, and we
need--and we're catching up, but I'm talking about the Federal
Government in general, not about SSA in particular. And I think
we are catching up.
One of the side effects of having electronic information is
that it--you know, it is vulnerable. So we're working on it. I
think we'll continue to work on it. I think that the benefits
of technology outweigh these risks by so much that we just have
to keep on it and keep being vigilant.
Mr. Cummings. Let me ask you, Ms. Stone, I want to move on
to you. I understand that resource constraints have also
affected the inspector general's office, including its IT
security efforts. Most of the people on this committee, by the
way, have a phenomenal amount of respect for IGs. We try to be
as supportive of you all as we possibly can be.
Your office first approached creating a Computer and
Internet Security Incident Response Team in fiscal year 2015
budget request, but this request has not been funded, is that
right? And what role would that--what would have been the role
of that team?
Ms. Stone. The vision of that team would be to assist the
agency in the event of some type of cybersecurity incident.
Mr. Cummings. And so as a result of not having the
resources, what are the consequences?
Ms. Stone. We don't have agents to dedicate to that--to
those events.
Mr. Cummings. And was that a top priority of yours?
Ms. Stone. Well, that along with I just--generally building
that--an infrastructure around electronic information as a
whole where we're using data to identify potential
vulnerabilities and working with the agency to, I guess,
improve its continuous monitoring program, just providing that
constant feedback to them on where they're--we see
vulnerabilities.
Mr. Cummings. I am running out of time, but let me ask you
this. You made a number of recommendations. Do you see a lot of
this being the result of fiscal issues, in other words, not
sufficient funds? I mean, I'm just curious ----
Ms. Stone. Well, I ----
Mr. Cummings. See, because that is why we call you up here
is that we keep throwing money but that we don't see a lot of
progress. And so therefore, again, as I said a little bit
earlier, then folks say let's reduce the money. And so I am
just--you are the one making the recommendations. Your budget--
I know you have been affected based upon what you just said,
but what about your recommendations with regard to the agency?
Ms. Stone. Well, what I can say is that we have seen a
conscious effort by the agency to address issues like limiting
the privilege accounts that have higher access. We've seen them
work on continuous monitoring. We've seen them, I guess,
implement additional multifactor authentication. So there is a
willingness on the agency's part to address these. I can't
really speak to their budgetary use, but we have seen the
efforts on their part.
Mr. Cummings. Just one last thing, Mr. Chairman.
You know, one of the things that I tell my office is that,
you know, a lot of times the public has come to the point to
have low expectations of government. They don't expect to get
somebody on the phone. They don't expect things to be addressed
properly. And then the complaints, Commissioner, as you know,
then come to us.
And I think, you know, this whole idea of trying to do all
the other things that you have to do, that is address the
calls, and I know you get a lot of them, the complaints, the
problems, but you have got to have people and you have got to
have resources to do that. And so what happens if you don't
have the resources, if you don't have the people, the quality
of service has to suffer. I don't care--no matter where--I have
managed a lot of people in a lot of offices, and it has to
suffer.
So, again, my thing is making sure that the resources that
we do have are used in a way that is effective and efficient.
And again, that is sort of an offense of defense because,
again, these folks here, they will cut you--I mean, you won't
have a budget. And folks will be saying, you know, again, do
more with less. And you all have to constantly, and you know
this, make the best case for the funds that you have and the
funds that you need.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
One of the concerns--I do agree with Mr. Cummings that one
of the deep challenges is you are flying an airplane and the
capacity of that airplane continues to grow. And one of the big
concerns we have is we have to do the inspections, we have to
worry about the penetration tests. At the same time, we have
got a constant need in the IT sector to upgrade. So I do
understand and respect that, but I do believe also that we,
particularly in Congress, rely heavily on the inspector general
to be the impartial eyes and ears on the ground.
Ms. Stone, I want to talk about one of the penetration
tests at Social Security Administration. This was a test
conducted by the Department of Homeland Security. It was done
at the request of the agency, and it was done in August 2015.
When did your office first learn about this test?
Ms. Stone. We were actually briefed on these tests in
September 2015.
Chairman Chaffetz. So you were given a verbal briefing in
September, roughly a month after the test, correct?
Ms. Stone. Right.
Chairman Chaffetz. And when did you first get a copy of the
report?
Ms. Stone. Within the last 2 to 3 days.
Chairman Chaffetz. From just now, right?
Ms. Stone. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. And where did you get a copy of that
report?
Ms. Stone. I believe my chief of staff requested it from a
component within the agency.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I believe that--did you even know
that there was a report?
Ms. Stone. We did not.
Chairman Chaffetz. How did you learn that there was a
report?
Ms. Stone. In conversations with members of your staff.
Chairman Chaffetz. So now that you have had a chance--it is
our staff that lets you know that there is a report. You get a
verbal briefing. You don't know that there is an actual report.
We let you know that there is a report, and then now that you
have gone through that report, do you think that the verbal
briefing accurately portrayed the results of that test?
Ms. Stone. Well, at this point I would say we haven't had
an opportunity to do a deep dive on the report, which is why we
need to look for any inconsistencies. There was some language
used in there in the report, as I understand it, that was not
consistent with what we received during the verbal briefing, so
we wanted to make sure that we have an opportunity to evaluate
that report. And because we have our contract auditors doing
their annual FISMA review at this time, we will definitely
share that information with them.
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you think the testers--did you know,
for instance, that the testers observed and copied personally
identifiable information and were able to exfiltrate that
randomly generated return?
Ms. Stone. We did not know that until we had the
opportunity to review the report. I believe the earlier
briefing suggested that there were no PII.
Chairman Chaffetz. That is kind of an important point, do
you think?
Ms. Stone. Yes, it is.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, okay. We have got three people
from Social Security here. Please explain to us why you didn't
let the inspector general know a pretty important part of the
test that they were able to exfiltrate data. How can you not
share that with her?
Ms. Colvin. I can't speak to the specific report. Marti--
Ms. Eckert will be able to do that. But I do want to emphasize
that we invite the auditors and Homeland Security in to test so
that we can identify vulnerabilities that we can fix. My
understanding is that it's not as if they're penetrating us
from outside. We let them in, and then they began to look at
how they're going to be able to hack the system and they give
us the feedback and then we look at the recommendations of what
we need to do.
But relative to your question of why we did not inform the
Office of Inspector General, I think Marti probably would be
able to talk about what our process is.
Chairman Chaffetz. Go ahead.
Ms. Eckert. Thank you, Chairman. It may be the timing of
the briefing that we did as opposed to the actual final written
report and why there may have been inconsistencies in what was
shared.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, is it not common practice to share
those reports with the inspector general?
Ms. Eckert. We share many work products with the inspector
general ----
Chairman Chaffetz. I know, but ----
Ms. Eckert.--even--in ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Do you share them or not? You see where
it becomes suspicious to us when you have something that is not
very flattering, it is embarrassing, I think it is human nature
to want to, oh, I hate to share this, but I also do believe
that the inspector general is there to help be part of the
solution, not part of the problem. And it is suspicious when,
you know, you have this report and you don't share it with the
inspector general. You went to the lengths to give them a
briefing, correct?
Ms. Eckert. I believe so. I believe that was right at the
time that it was occurring, and we were letting them know that
that was going on.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, my understanding is that the
briefing happened roughly a month after the penetration test
started. So here is a copy of the report. ``Risk and
vulnerability assessment for high-value asset prepared for the
Social Security Administration September 28, 2015.'' Congress
shouldn't be the one to tell the inspector general that there
is a report. How would they even know to ask for the report?
Ms. Eckert. So we share over 1,100 different pieces of
information from them as part of the financial statement audit.
So Ms. Stone referred to the request--that we are doing that
again now, and we share everything that is required as part of
that audit. We don't necessarily share with them every work
product that we produce, and we will know in the future to
share those products.
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, this was a report produced by
Homeland Security?
Ms. Eckert. Yes.
Chairman Chaffetz. It just seems to us--it just comes
across as if you are hiding something from the inspector
general. The fact that they were able to, unimpeded, do a
penetration test, albeit that you invited them to do it, but
that was the finding, is that they were able to exfiltrate
personal identifiable information, which means there is a
problem and you don't share that with the inspector general.
Ms. Stone, is that the way it should work?
Ms. Stone. I would say no. Typically, we have a very good
working relationship with the agency, and there is back and
forth with sharing information.
I would like to add one point, however, to this is that
when we had our contract auditors in performing similar
penetration testing, we--those testers also gain access to the
point that they could see PII. So the fact that that weakness
or vulnerability existed was not news to us, but the fact that
there was a report and we had not gotten a copy, that was news
to us.
Ms. Colvin. Mr. Chairman, I will say that, again, we have a
very strong relationship with the inspector general as far as
being responsive. I always see them as an early alert system.
I'm sure that this had to be an oversight because there's no
evidence of any history of trying to hide something. It's very
possible that the staff was reviewing this so they'd be able to
respond prior to sending it to the Office of Inspector General,
but we will make certain that that type of breakdown does not
occur.
Chairman Chaffetz. I appreciate it. We have some more
questions about it, but I am well past my time. I will now
recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Cartwright, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Commissioner
Colvin, thank you for being here today and for your service.
The President's fiscal year 2017 budget overview states the
following--and I want to quote from it because it is
concerning--``our current state of service remains fragile as
the demands of balancing service and stewardship
responsibilities continue to strain our resources.'' And what
does this mean when it says the ``state of service remains
fragile'' at Social Security, if you know?
Ms. Colvin. Because of budget constraints, we are
constantly balancing between our service delivery to the public
and our program integrity efforts, which includes
cybersecurity. Because of the activity in fraud and the
activity in cybersecurity, we've had to continually shift
resources to program integrity. For instance, just in 3 years,
we've gone from spending $74 million in cybersecurity to $96.
That comes away from, of course, our customer service
activities, the same thing as we look at developing our systems
and other kinds of things.
I had to set up--or didn't have to but I felt it was
prudent to set up a centralized fraud unit because fraud was
becoming so prevalent in the country and we wanted to be able
to get out front and be able to detect it and prevent it, and
so we've switched considerable resources there. As a result,
we're seeing increased waiting times in our field offices on
our 800 number. You will recall that Congress was quite
concerned because I had to close a considerable number of
offices ----
Mr. Cartwright. And I wanted to ask you about that because
when you say customer service as being basically degraded, that
really bothers me. In fact, it says in the Social Security
budget overview, ``While we have worked diligently to improve
national 800-number service, the funding we receive for fiscal
year 2016 will increase wait times and busy signals.''
Commissioner Colvin, that is not acceptable. What is the
answer?
Ms. Colvin. The answer is we need committed, sustained
funding. I cannot spend money that I don't have. I cannot incur
an anti-deficiency. We have never made our--for the 3 years we
were in a total freeze, and as you well know, it takes 2 years
for our workers to even be qualified to do the claims work that
we have out there in the field.
When I was here in 1970, we had 70,000 employees. We're
down to 62,000 now and at the same time that our workload is
continuing to increase. So if we have to pull away from some of
the things that we do, it's always the impact on the customer.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, can you talk about the impact that
resource constraints, the type you are talking about, have had
on the Social Security 800 number and field offices? For
example, how long have wait times been this year?
Ms. Colvin. I don't know the specific answer to that off
the top of my head, but I'd say the average wait is probably 30
minutes. We still have lines in our field offices. We are
constantly looking at IT to see how we can take some of the
work out of the field offices to be able to address the wait
times. For instance, we have 4 million visitors a year to our
offices for a replacement Social Security card. We're beginning
now to roll out a replacement card online, but we have to do
that carefully. We have to make sure it's secure. So we're
doing whatever we can to pull out work from the field office to
make the wait times less, same thing with the 800 numbers, but
it's a resource issue.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, that is wait times on the phone.
Maybe even more important are the people who are waiting for
adjudicatory hearings. Can you discuss the impact that the
resource constraints have had on wait times for adjudicatory
hearings, Commissioner?
Ms. Colvin. There have been two impacts. One has been our
budget and the inability to actually have the number of ALJs we
need to have a hearing, as you know, at the hearings require an
ALJ. We also in the past years have had difficulty with getting
a register of candidates. We're working very closely with OPM,
and thanks to Congress, there was a required date for a test,
and so that's moving forward.
But at the same time, it's a resource issue. We're now up
to 570 days that someone has to wait for a hearing. It's
something that greatly concerns me because many of these people
die before they get a decision. But again, we try to balance
the resources we have.
Mr. Cartwright. So what happens if Social Security does not
receive the funding it has requested? What happens to these
wait times?
Ms. Colvin. They will increase. They will increase. We are
very efficient as an agency, and I must stress that. Our
overhead is 1.3 percent of all of our outlays. We like to talk
about USAA as being one of the best private insurance
companies. Their overhead is 8 percent, so I think we do an
incredibly good job with the resources we have, and I'm able to
tell you how we spend the dollars. But the bottom line is we do
compete with other agencies for the dollars, and we don't have
an adequate budget.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, the chairman of
the subcommittee on IT, Mr. Hurd of Texas.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Eckert, when was the DHS security review
done?
Ms. Eckert. My recollection is it was done in August. It
was last summer.
Mr. Hurd. How many critical vulnerabilities were found?
Ms. Eckert. There were a set of about nine recommendations
that they made to us.
Mr. Hurd. So you don't know how many critical
vulnerabilities were actually found?
Ms. Eckert. It was a penetration-type test ----
Mr. Hurd. Yes.
Ms. Eckert.--so it wasn't that they were looking for
specific ----
Mr. Hurd. How long have you been ----
Ms. Eckert.--software vulnerabilities ----
Mr. Hurd. How long have you been the CSIO?
Ms. Eckert. Three years.
Mr. Hurd. Three years? And you have a qualified--and, Ms.
Colvin, I want to start with you on a comment. You are right.
You all did the right thing by getting a third party to come in
and test your systems. That is a good best practice, but you
all approached this hearing absolutely wrong. You should have
come in here and said, listen, we have X number of critical
vulnerabilities from August of 2015 and that these are the
steps that we have taken to mitigate all of these actions. And
this information was given to the second group of people that
came and did another security evaluation.
And you are talking about how you are not properly
capitalized, but look, you guys have saved $300 million in IT
savings by doing things properly. Good work. But the reality is
use the money that you actually have in the right way. You are
not giving a team that is coming in here to test your digital
infrastructure, and you are not giving them all the information
from the previous test.
And not once have you all come in here and said that there
are these significant vulnerabilities, critical vulnerabilities
that we fix. The DHS team was able to escalate privileges once
they were inside their system and take control over your entire
system. That is a big deal, all right? And the fact that in
none of you all's testimony do you mention this.
And then you have the audacity to say that Social Security
meets all of the cross-agency priority cybersecurity goals.
Somebody was able to sit on your system and take complete
control over it. I wouldn't consider that to be a--I wouldn't
pat yourself on the back for being able to perform that. And
you are the CSIO and you don't know how many critical
vulnerabilities that there were in a report that was done and a
test that was done almost a year ago? Please.
Ms. Eckert. We report our vulnerabilities monthly to the
Department of Homeland Security. Every month, the number of --
--
Mr. Hurd. So what are you doing to fix it?
Ms. Eckert. We have very many different things that we do.
It is a holistic ----
Mr. Hurd. You have very many different things?
Ms. Eckert. It is a holistic, integrated approach. We do
patch management, we do intrusion detection, we do ----
Mr. Hurd. Okay. Ms. Eckert, you obviously ----
Ms. Eckert.--continuous monitoring ----
Mr. Hurd.--didn't read my background before you came here.
I did this for a living, okay, and so saying you have many very
different things is not a strategy on how to mitigate critical
vulnerabilities.
Ms. Colvin, how many records do you have on the--how many
Americans do you have information on?
Ms. Colvin. We have over 175 million wage earners, and then
we have ----
Mr. Hurd. How many Social Security numbers are there?
Ms. Colvin.--about 65 million beneficiaries. We have
records on most--on everybody.
Mr. Hurd. Pretty much everybody, right?
Ms. Colvin. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. I think that is a pretty big deal.
Ms. Colvin. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. When you talk about PII, this is the treasure
trove a ----
Ms. Colvin. Yes.
Mr. Hurd.--and it should be protected with the best tools.
And we should have--I have said this 100 times. This is not an
issue of technology. This is an issue of leadership. You have
information on every single American in the United States of
America, and your CSIO doesn't even know from the last report
how many critical vulnerabilities there were. They don't know
how many times they were able to escalate privileges. And then
the other group that is coming in and you are doing a best
practice, you are not sharing that information with the IG? And
our subcommittee, our staffers had to inform the IG of this
information? This is absolutely ludicrous.
And the reason we have all of you all here is because it
stops with you ----
Ms. Colvin. I understand.
Mr. Hurd.--right? This is your responsibility. This is
your--you have got to make sure this happens, and if I were
you, I hope you have some very uncomfortable conversations with
your CIO and your CSIO because this is basic information that
they should know. And as a taxpayer, as someone who did this
for a living, as someone who was responsible to 700, 800,000
Americans, I am appalled by this. And you know what, if I were
the Russians, I were the Chinese, I were other hackers, I would
be licking my chops because these people are not prepared to
protect this information. This is outrageous.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for this. Thank you for the
bipartisan nature of this, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hurd. Unbelievable.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I say to the panel some of the frustration you are hearing
is not only about Social Security. We have had a series of
hearings where we hear the same story, and we are very worried
that the Federal Government is so vulnerable.
There is a story on CNN today that the nuclear program of
the United States is protected on floppy disks, technology
going back to the 1970s, and one asks what could go wrong with
that?
So I welcome anyone answering, but following up on my
friend from Texas, Mr. Hurd, how worried should we be? I mean,
given the fact that you have, as you say, Ms. Colvin, data on
every American, to make sure they have the benefits when they
qualify that they need and that they are entitled to? But the
downside of that is you have got data on every American. And we
saw what happened with the OPM breach, which compromised
information on people who trusted, you know, their information
with a Federal agency for a job application or for Federal
service or for a security clearance.
And so help reassure us that we are not facing something
similar with Social Security Administration, that Mr. Hurd can
be reassured that actually after testing the system whatever
the vulnerabilities we discovered we have moved with alacrity
to address them in an efficacious way.
Ms. Colvin. Mr. Cooper, we certainly as an agency are not
----
Mr. Connolly. No, no, I am Mr. Connolly.
Ms. Colvin. I mean Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. That is all right.
Ms. Colvin. I'm sorry, sir.
Mr. Connolly. I am Irish, Virginia, via Boston a ----
Ms. Colvin. Apologize.
Mr. Connolly.--God only knows what it is. I don't know.
Ms. Colvin. Let me just assure you that ----
Mr. Connolly. No problem.
Ms. Colvin.--we are very concerned about cybersecurity in
the agency, and we know as an agency--I'm not talking about the
rest of the government. As an agency, we are always concerned
about this. We know that we're always seeking that continuous
improvement. We look at the vulnerabilities to see what the --
--
Mr. Connolly. Yes, but, look, I have got a little bit of
time. I am seeking reassurance. He raised the question, Mr.
Hurd. He was responding, Ms. Eckert, to what he thought he
heard from you. I am giving you the opportunity to come back
and reassure us you can rest easy because, yes, we discovered
vulnerabilities and here is what we did or they have all gone
away magically or they are still there and we don't know what
to do about them. I mean ----
Ms. Colvin. Well, I think Ms. Eckert can talk about what
we've done, but I just wanted to say that this is an ongoing,
continuous challenge ----
Mr. Connolly. Of course.
Ms. Colvin.--as an agency.
Mr. Connolly. We know that, but ----
Ms. Colvin. All right. Marti, you want to speak to what
we're doing?
Mr. Connolly. Well, what we have done after you got the
data you got in terms of the penetration.
Ms. Eckert. Sir, as I said, we have a holistic and
integrated ----
Mr. Connolly. You have got to speak into that microphone,
Ms. Eckert, because I can't hear you. I am sorry. Thank you.
Ms. Eckert. Oh, my apologies.
Mr. Connolly. That is all right.
Ms. Eckert. We do have an integrated, holistic approach. As
far as the specific vulnerabilities, it--identified in the DHS
report, they were recommendations that we have taken action on.
Specific vulnerabilities that were uncovered have been
remediated, but let me reiterate what the commissioner said. We
hack ourselves every day, so we look for vulnerabilities
continuously with continuous monitoring. We also on top of that
then have our own penetration testing program where, daily, we
attempt to identify and remediate vulnerabilities that we find
over and above our continuous monitoring strategy.
Mr. Connolly. And in the process of doing that, Ms. Eckert,
have you identified--you know, we have got some clunky systems
that have to be replaced, and here is the program for doing
that or here is the need we have identified, and we don't have
the resources yet to address that because that is a critical
piece, too. We are dealing with legacy systems. We are dealing
with non-encrypted systems. I mean, we have got--and, Mr.
Klopp, I'm going to get to you on that in terms of
implementation of FITARA that tries to address all of that.
But, I mean, I hope that is part of what you--it is not a sign
of weakness to identify weakness. It is a sign of weakness when
you ignore the weakness.
Ms. Eckert. We do, and we take a risk-based approach to
remediating our vulnerabilities and all cyber recommendations
that we have, whether they be from DHS, whether they be from
the inspector general, whether they are from our own
penetration testing program.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. I am now down to 13 seconds.
Mr. Klopp, real quickly, tell us about your FITARA
implementation. Your grade improved. We had a hearing on that.
And how does that relate to this broader discussion of
vulnerability and what we are doing?
Mr. Klopp. I mean, you know, FITARA is important. I would
say we are moving aggressively to fill not just the stuff that
is in front of us now and required of us, but we actually think
that we are a little bit ahead because we can see the new
FITARA stuff that's coming down the pike. You know, again, it's
a constant thing.
I guess the last thing I would say is I want--let's be
really clear about what we--you know, Marti's pointed out that
we invite these folks to come in to test our systems. We take
the testing very seriously. And what that means is we want them
to find these exposures. We are looking for them to find these
exposures.
In both of the cases of the August DHS exercise, as well as
our exercise with our other auditors, they were not able to
penetrate our system from the outside, and so we let them in.
And when we let them in, sometimes they can move around a
little bit and they declare the fact that they can move around
as a vulnerability but they can't get things out. So we allow
them another step and another step and another step because
we're looking for these vulnerabilities.
The fact that they found them is because we let them in and
we let them in and it turned things off and let them around
this because we're looking for these things. We expect to come
back to you every time with these auditors finding
vulnerabilities because we're--we want them to find them. So we
find them, we remediate them.
There's an exercise going on now with Homeland security,
and as a result of activities we've taken, we're now more
secure than they were--we were the last time in, and they're
having a harder time doing some stuff. They've also found some
new stuff. And, you know, the next time we come in you can--you
talk to us about the new stuff that they've found.
It's--but let me be really clear, and this is--probably the
assurances. As far as we know, no one, without help from us,
has ever come into the agency, entered and penetrated in or--
and exfiltrated data out. No one without help from us or
knowledge in advance of the way we have our cybersecurity
system set up has been able to do that. So that's the
assurances I would give you. They do it when we let them in or
we turn off our defenses.
Chairman Chaffetz. It scares me to death that you think
that. It just really does. It really does scare me because the
last time you had that test, they surfed around there for days
and they were totally undetected. They were able to exfiltrate
data if they wanted to.
I would appreciate it if you would share with our staff in
a bipartisan way what you have done to remediate that. We will
have to follow up on that.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Hice,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We all know that Social Security has personal
identification information of everyone in America, and I
certainly cannot overemphasize the importance of this whole
issue to me personally and my constituents, as well as my
colleagues here, that the Social Security Administration take
cybersecurity seriously and do absolutely everything within
your power to mitigate any and all threats that are potential.
And, you know, we are here today because obviously there
are some network infrastructure legacy system potential
compromising. There are some vulnerabilities is perhaps a
better word, and that is why we are here. But any system at the
end of the day is only as good as the people who are behind the
system and working with it.
Mr. Klopp just referred a moment ago to the August testing
and, you know, there are some issues that were found. Okay. We
know there are issues. So let me begin, Ms. Colvin, with you.
What is the Social Security Administration doing specifically
to improve employee training as it relates to the
vulnerabilities?
Ms. Colvin. We have ongoing mandatory cybersecurity
training for everyone within the agency. When the--any
aberration is detected that has been created by an employee,
that is discussed with them, and I think that Marti as our
expert can go into more specific detail, but that is something
that we take very, very seriously because we do have offices
throughout the country, as well as the local DDS--State DDS's
who also have access ----
Mr. Hice. Are you satisfied with the training?
Ms. Colvin. We are always looking at continuous
improvement. When we see something happening that would suggest
that employees are not fully in compliance, we do additional
trainings. So training is not a one-time thing. It's ongoing.
Mr. Hice. Do you see the FISMA requirements as a floor or a
ceiling?
Ms. Colvin. A floor because I think that we've got to keep
up with technology. We've got to always stay in front of the
hackers, and that's one of the reasons when Rob talks about
wanting to know where our vulnerabilities are, we want to shore
those up because we know as soon as we fix those, the hackers
are going to probably find something else, and so we went to
continuously do that.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So in any given month, how often do you
meet with the CIO?
Ms. Colvin. Oh, I meet with him on a weekly basis many
times. I meet with him one-on-one. He's my direct report. He's
a member of my senior executive team. We meet on Tuesdays.
Mr. Hice. What about the chief security officer?
Ms. Colvin. Absolutely.
Mr. Hice. Absolutely what? How often do you mean?
Ms. Colvin. The--we meet probably several times a week
around issues. We--I get a weekly report from Ms. Eckert
relative to cybersecurity and what is happening.
Mr. Hice. All right. What about the IG?
Ms. Colvin. The IG had been invited to attend all of my --
--
Mr. Hice. So you feel confident that you are staying in
good communication with all these as it relates to the
cybersecurity vulnerabilities?
Ms. Colvin. Absolutely because cybersecurity has to be one
of our highest priorities.
Mr. Hice. Yes, it absolutely does.
All right, Ms. Stone, let me go to you. The GAO recently
testified to thousands of information security recommendations,
and they found that agency had failed to implement those
thousands of recommendations even to the extent of 42 percent
of the 2,000 recommendations that have been offered. Given your
experience in the inspector general's office, what are the
problems? What are the challenges? Why are agencies not
implementing the recommendations?
Ms. Stone. I can speak from, I guess, experience at Social
Security. From time to time you may have a policy or procedure
that is managed out of a central office. The ability to
replicate that across the country is sometimes challenging. For
example, when there have been instances where we've identified
a vulnerability in one location, maybe the agency has had an
opportunity to come in and remediate it in that location, but
because the security posture is not that mature, you may still
see that same issue popping up somewhere else. So it really
comes down to the maturity of the security posture of the
agency in that it's a culture where we are going to detect it
and remediate it as soon as possible and then prevent it from
reoccurring elsewhere.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We are now going to recognize Ms. Plaskett, the gentlewoman
from the Virgin Islands, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Thank you so much. Good morning,
everyone.
I thought it was really interesting that your discussion
just now, Ms. Stone, about the recommendations and the work
that you are going to do and your efforts to replicate these
recommendations across the country. But one of the things that
I was wondering you had discussed with us today about the
critical work that you are performing in the inspector
general's office combating waste, fraud, and abuse is the
personnel and the amount of individuals that you have. My
colleague just stated that systems are only as good as the
people that are behind them.
And so I am wondering. I notice that the IG--and I am
quoting here in the President's fiscal year 2017 budget--that
the OIG employees on duty have dropped from 610 in fiscal year
2006 to 526 in fiscal year 2015. I know that some of that is
attrition through retirement potentially and otherwise, but
that is a decrease in 84 employees. How has that affected your
ability to combat waste, fraud, and abuse at Social Security?
Ms. Stone. Well, first, I will speak to it from an audit
perspective. Typically, our auditors are issuing one audit per
auditor per year. With the flat-line in our budget and because,
I'll say, about 86 percent of our budget is personnel, we've
not been able to replace people, so fewer auditors mean fewer
audits being conducted. I'd say we've reduced our productivity
in that area by about 25 audits.
Ms. Plaskett. So the funding constraints, they have
accounted for some of the flat-lining in productivity or
ability to ramp up additional audits, but has it led to any
reduction in your staffing as well?
Ms. Stone. Oh, absolutely, especially--I'll speak from an
investigative standpoint. Ms. Colvin referred to the
Cooperative Disability Investigations unit. We dedicate agents
to that project, but we get no additional funding for that. So
to the extent that we dedicate another agent to that process,
that's fewer agents that can actually respond to a cyber
incident or looking at facilitator fraud or things of that
nature. So to the extent that our budget remains flat or
decreases, that's fewer resources that we have to put on the
ground.
Ms. Plaskett. I have here, and you tell me if this is
correct, that the caseload has dropped from 12,000 cases in
2007, and you are saying 8,400 now?
Ms. Stone. Yes, that is correct. Our high was about 12,000
in 2007, and subsequent--and the--I believe the last 3 years
we've averaged about 8,400 cases.
Ms. Plaskett. So I know you know we are all concerned with
hacking and infiltration of these systems and our IT systems
ramping up, and I know that your office has some integration in
that in terms of criminal investigations. Has your office had
to reduce the number of those investigations due to a reduction
in the budget and the flat-lining that you have experienced?
Ms. Stone. Absolutely. Just as you indicated, we've seen
that drop from about 12,000 cases to 8,400.
Ms. Plaskett. And you talked a little earlier when you
first started our discussion on Cooperative Disability
Investigation program. And my understanding is that that is
contract support, correct?
Ms. Stone. Yes. That is a--and the Bipartisan Budget Act
actually provided additional funding or language suggesting
that there be a CDI unit to cover each State. And when that--
those funds come in, it's actually the administrative costs
that the agency pays to get those contractors at the State and
local law enforcement level. However, for us, none of our
personnel or administrative costs are covered for that.
Ms. Plaskett. And would you say--what would be, you think,
a much more thorough--and in your mind the ability to really go
after the things that it seems everyone on this panel is
concerned about? Would it be through the personnel that are
working directly in your office or through this CDI program
that they have?
Ms. Stone. Actually, it's a combination thereof because
it's a balancing act. Both of those workloads are very
important. We've proven that the CDI units are--have a high
return on investment, and they're very successful, but by the
same token, we still have a responsibility to go after
facilitator fraud, and we have to do our normal OIG
investigations. So, again, it's a balancing act.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Palmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Deputy Stone, the Social Security Administration reported
to staff in a recent briefing that was reported on the Federal
IT dashboard--I tell you what, I am going to skip that
question. I want to go to acting Commissioner Colvin.
The committee has been corresponding with you about the
disability case processing system for years. In a response you
sent Representatives Issa, Jordan, and Lankford on July 30, you
said, ``I have personally and proactively taken to put the DCPS
on the right course.'' Nearly 2 years later, here we are, and
so there are a few questions.
And I just want to point out in 2008 started this process
of overhauling the DCPS system and spent $288 million and had
to scrap it in 2014, basically threw away almost $300 million.
I want to know, today, is DCPS currently fully functional
serving all of the State DDS's?
Ms. Colvin. DCPS was started in 2008. As you point out, I
assumed leadership role here in 2013 ----
Mr. Palmer. Ma'am ----
Ms. Colvin.--so it had been in existence ----
Mr. Palmer.--because of ----
Ms. Colvin.--5 years before I came.
Mr. Palmer. Yes. I did a reset and we are on schedule. We
have an aggressive schedule where we expect to be rolling out
or having our first product to three DDS's in December 2016.
Mr. Palmer. So the answer is no, it is not fully
functional? If you are still waiting ----
Ms. Colvin. Well ----
Mr. Palmer. Let me ----
Ms. Colvin. We are doing it in an agile way so products
will be delivered on an ongoing basis.
Mr. Palmer. Well, how much have you spent since it has been
under your watch since June of 2014?
Ms. Colvin. That's--I'm sorry, I need to look at that
figure. It's about--it's about somewhere between $60 and $70
million on my watch.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. And then you have got another $60 or $70
million yet to spend, is that right?
Ms. Colvin. Yes, I would say that's accurate.
Mr. Palmer. So do the funding numbers include
customizations that Social Security Administration needs to
make so that the core DCPS is ready to accommodate the needs of
the States?
Ms. Colvin. We're looking at a core product. There will be
some additional costs for customization, but right now, we want
to make sure that we have the same product in every State.
Mr. Palmer. But yes or no, does it include the
customizations that you need to make?
Ms. Colvin. I would say yes.
Mr. Palmer. That is interesting. When this is done, how
much will Social Security Administration spend on this?
Ms. Colvin. Are you speaking relative to cost since we
reset?
Mr. Palmer. I am talking about total cost, DCPS for the
whole ----
Ms. Colvin. Well, there was $262 million spent by my
predecessor, and we're looking at a potential $170 million ----
Mr. Palmer. So we are talking about half-a-billion dollars?
Ms. Colvin. Not on the reset.
Mr. Palmer. No, I know not on the ----
Ms. Colvin. Okay.
Mr. Palmer. The total since 2008 we are going to spend
about a half-a-billion dollars and we are still not fully
functional. So ----
Ms. Colvin. Well, we started the reset in 2015.
Mr. Palmer. Ms. Stone, what is your view on it?
Ms. Stone. I would say the--my biggest concern at this
point is, you know, I don't want to be here answering these
same questions 6 months from now. And in the past we've seen
some similar situations. I know that they are--that some
questions have been raised about whether or not the December
time frame is realistic. If we have any delays, that could
result in additional cost. We know that this is a complex
system. So I'm just as interested and concerned as you all are
about the success of this implementation.
Mr. Palmer. Well, there was a McKinsey study of the DCPS
that came out in April, April 21, that says that progress had
been slower than expected and the current trajectory must be
significantly accelerated to meet the timeline for core. Why do
you think that is? Why do you think they made that finding?
Ms. Colvin. Well, I think that clearly it's a complex
program. We had had an original management review. We then
later had the technical review by McKinsey. They've clearly
stated that we're on the correct path.
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask in the few seconds I have left Mr.
Klopp to respond to that.
Mr. Klopp. Sure. So the answer is that we took off on the
project starting October 1 of last year. We, for all I think
the right reasons, decided to do this in an extremely modern
technical environment, which meant that there was a learning
curve that we had to take on in order to figure on how to work
in the cloud, how to use new programming languages, et cetera,
et cetera. And that learning curve slowed velocity in the
beginning, as you would expect it to.
What we find right now is that we're passing through that
learning curve phase and velocity is picking up, which is why
we're so confident that we're going to make the December dates.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from New Jersey, Mrs.
Watson Coleman, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to
each and every one of you here today.
To you, Commissioner, isn't it true that under the previous
Commissioner of Social Security Michael Astrue I believe his
name was, the agency made the decision to create a unified IT
program system that all DDS entities could use to process
claims known as the Disability Case Processing System? Under
his tenure, Social Security awarded that primary contract to
Lockheed Martin in 2010, is that not true?
Ms. Colvin. That's correct.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Rather than have a series of
questions, I recognize that we are operating in a very dynamic
system, and you have a tremendous responsibility to preserve,
protect our information that you have access to and at the same
time provide us services. I know in New Jersey we have had
problems with the disability office in moving things quickly,
but that is what happens.
I also recognize from what I have read that you all have
been doing a pretty doggone good job of protecting our
information.
Ms. Colvin. Thank you.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. And there is also a good relationship
with the Office of the Inspector General, so you, Commissioner,
have taken the opportunity to be a leader and to engage those
principles that are very important to the success of your
program, as well as the protection of our interests and the
delivery of our services.
It changes every day. This system with cyber attacks and
things of that nature happens every day. You fix something,
people find another way to do it. But yet none of our
information has been compromised in the same way some of these
large companies, and I need to commend you for that. And I need
you to understand that I understand that it is a moving target.
And with the right resources, you will keep up with it as much
as you absolutely can, but this is not a finite system and this
is not a perfect system.
So to each and every one of you, I want to thank you for
the dedication and the work you are doing in that space. I
yield back.
Ms. Colvin. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentlewoman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, I want to yield my time to the
chair.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Klopp, you wanted to provide clarity about penetration
and the ability from somebody in the outside to come into the
system and exfiltrate information. I want to give you another
chance at that. Are you sure that nobody has been able to do
that?
Mr. Klopp. I'm--I will tell you that--Marti and I are
passing notes back and forth. We are not aware that they were
able to do that in the August penetration--in the August
testing that they went on. What I will tell you is that we're
undergoing testing today, and I've actually been personally in
communication with ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Let there be no doubt the two tests of
that I am aware that were done at the invitation of the Social
Security Administration, they give you credit for the fact that
they couldn't penetrate from the outside, but from the inside
they certainly could.
Mr. Klopp. So I believe that when we let them in the
inside, they were able to penetrate. They were not able, as far
as ----
Chairman Chaffetz. So how many people are in the inside?
How many users of these accounts do you have?
Mr. Klopp. Thousands.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, like tens of thousands, like 96,000
is the actual number. So here is the problem. That is a
vulnerability. You had 96,000 people who are already on the
inside, and their ability to get in, surf around, and
exfiltrate information is undoubtedly happening because the two
penetration tests that were tried, that happened.
But I want to talk about from the outside penetration, not
the tests, not the people you invited, you are not aware of
anybody who has been able to penetrate from the outside
uninvited and maybe over what period of time? Any of you?
Mr. Klopp. I don't think we are--go ahead, Marti.
Ms. Eckert. So we do not to date have any evidence that
someone from the outside has gotten in and exfiltrated out. But
anyone in cyber will tell you that there are no absolutes at
this point in time.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Now, here is the problem I have
with that answer, okay, with all due respect. There is a person
who is sitting in jail for doing this very thing. There is a
person in Miami, right? Oh, now you are shaking your head yes.
What happened in that case?
Ms. Eckert. So that was a case of fraud, correct?
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, it is fraud.
Ms. Eckert. We're talking about identity theft ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Ms. Eckert.--right? And it was identity theft where they
acted as someone else ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes. Oh, yes ----
Ms. Eckert. Yes ----
Chairman Chaffetz.--how creative. I can't believe anybody
would do that. What happened? Go ahead. Keep going.
Ms. Eckert. So there have been--and I think Ms. Stone
alluded to ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Oh, so there was a penetration from the
outside where somebody disguised themselves. In fact, they
tapped in and they created 900 fraudulent accounts. How much
money did they take out from the government, how much money?
Ms. Eckert. I don't know the answer to that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes, it is $20 million. There is $11
million that still hasn't been recovered, and this guy is
sitting in jail.
Here is the problem. You are the chief information security
officer. The person came in in just the last couple of years
and did this. And this is the one that we know about. And you
don't recall that off the top of your head?
Ms. Eckert. So my apologies. I was thinking of cyber
incidents and ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Why is this not a cyber incident?
Ms. Eckert. It is ----
Mr. Klopp. It's not.
Ms. Colvin. It's not.
Ms. Eckert. It's fraud.
Mr. Klopp. It's not.
Ms. Eckert. It's identity theft ----
Ms. Colvin. It's fraud.
Ms. Eckert.--which is fraud.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So what is the difference between
----
Ms. Eckert. And my apologies.
Chairman Chaffetz.--fraud and cyber?
Ms. Eckert. I do understand from your perspective that
those things are alike, and my apology for ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Well, what is the difference?
Ms. Eckert. So we have established--we did--we have
established an Office of Antifraud Programs, and ----
Mr. Klopp. So, look, the difference is that cyber is
designed to defend us against someone who is coming in trying
to hack in through our systems, and that's a completely
different ----
Chairman Chaffetz. No, it is not.
Mr. Klopp. No, it is a completely different discipline.
Chairman Chaffetz. He came in ----
Mr. Klopp. It's recognized by the Department of Homeland
Security and those folks as a completely different discipline.
Chairman Chaffetz. He came into the system ----
Mr. Klopp. He ----
Chairman Chaffetz.--he hacked his way into the system ----
Mr. Klopp. He didn't hack his way into the system. He did
not hack is way into the system.
Ms. Colvin. No, he didn't.
Mr. Klopp. What he did was he captured somebody else's
identity and came in through the system legitimately as a
fraudster. It is not within the--it's not recognized in the
information technology world that that is a case of cyber
attack. That is not the way the information technology world
would view that. It is fraud. It is identity fraud, and it ----
Chairman Chaffetz. He did ----
Mr. Klopp. He did something that we are diligently fighting
against but ----
Chairman Chaffetz. He did ----
Mr. Klopp.--it's not cyber fraud.
Chairman Chaffetz. He didn't do this one or two times. He
didn't go down the street and grab Betty's telephone number and
address and say--he did this by the hundreds of times because
he was able to get in there ----
Mr. Klopp. Because he was able to get 100 identities. Go
ahead.
Ms. Colvin. That was because he was able to get Social
Security numbers that he had access to, and that's the big
issue of identity theft where you take someone else's identity.
But we are now using data analytics to be able to prevent that
kind of thing from happening. I've set up a complete center on
data analytics where we can look at trends and patterns.
Chairman Chaffetz. We will continue to flesh this out with
you, but when somebody is able to go in there and change those
addresses and do those types of things, I just disagree. I
think that is it--that person again, if you are going out and
stealing a couple numbers and you are doing that, that is a
little different. I would grant you that. But when this person
is doing this en masse and changing those addresses--it was the
IG that found out about it first.
Ms. Colvin. It's fraud, though. It's not cybersecurity. We
know--I mean, it's a bad issue.
Chairman Chaffetz. You've got a lot of ----
Ms. Colvin. It's one we're working on.
Chairman Chaffetz. You've got a lot of explaining to do to
us ----
Ms. Colvin. All right.
Chairman Chaffetz.--on how you are differentiating this and
who else that should be sitting at this table to protect
against that.
Ms. Colvin. And I would like an opportunity later, maybe
not at this hearing, to explain to you what we're doing in
those kinds of cases. But we're doing something very
differently in dealing with those cases than what we're doing
with cybersecurity, and we're working very closely with the
Office of Inspector General in those kinds of cases.
Chairman Chaffetz. All right. We have a vote on the Floor.
I went over my time.
Mr. Cummings. May I have just one ----
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Stone, with regard to fraud, and perhaps
you might answer this, Commissioner Colvin, does finance affect
your ability to get to those people who are trying to commit
fraud? In other words ----
Ms. Colvin. Well, it certainly does because when we
identify suspicious pattern in a case, we refer that to the
Office of Inspector General. And because their resources have
been inadequate, they're not able to handle every referral that
we make to them. So that definitely would impact their ability
to determine what is fraud because that is their role to
determine what is fraud. We simply refer cases that are
suspicious or that have a pattern.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Stone ----
Mr. Klopp. In fact, it's worth--I'm sorry, it's worth
quickly pointing out that when we see fraud, we refer to law
enforcement. When we see cybersecurity, cyber breaches, we
refer to a completely different branch.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Is that accurate, Ms. Stone?
Ms. Stone. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. All right. Two points I want to make and
then we will close out here. I was elected in 2008, so that is
the benchmark that I take in terms of funding. IT funding for
Social Security Administration was about $1.1 billion. It is
now roughly $1.5 billion. Everybody wants steady funding. I
wish the Congress would move to 2-year funding. I think that
would give people more exposure. But that is $400 million more
than it was back in 2008.
And so I know there is a lot of discussion about dollars
and steadiness and it has been up and down, but it is hundreds
of millions of dollars more than it was in 2008. And this
penetration test report coming out of Homeland Security, this
is--I am going to read this--we have got 11 minutes left on the
Floor--on one of the concerns here.
This is from Homeland Security from their report. ``Social
Security team members were apprehensive about scanning or other
rigorous testing of the mainframe due to its fragile operating
posture. The DHS team decided to forgo testing of the mainframe
in an effort to reduce the operational risk of bringing it
down. It should be noted that the fragile state of the
mainframe is a major vulnerability on its own and should be
addressed as soon as possible.''
I think we share a mutual concern of making sure--if they
couldn't even get into do a test, how fragile is it? It is an
ongoing question, and if you could help answer that question
for us.
We appreciate all you do and your cooperation in working
with us. We would appreciate it ongoing. We thank you for your
participation--Yes. Go ahead.
Mr. Cummings. Just one real quick thing. I have a list of
questions, Commissioner Colvin, with regard to EEOC and, you
know, I understand that there has been an update on the issue.
Can you tell us where we are on that?
Ms. Colvin. Well, there were two recommendations that we
had. One you are interested in what we were doing about the
recommendation of EEOC, to have that operation report directly
to me. I made that decision, and that will happen effective
June 1.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Ms. Colvin. I think the second you have questions about the
various EEO class-action cases.
Mr. Cummings. Yes, that is right. The Jensen settlement,
which was the disabled employees, has been settled. It is being
implemented. The Taylor decision has been appealed on both
sides, so we're waiting for a decision to that appeal.
Mr. Cummings. I will have some additional questions which I
will submit to you in writing.
Ms. Colvin. I will be happy to answer those.
Mr. Cummings. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Colvin. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. We have some additional
questions as well, but we have a vote on the Floor, so the
committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
Ms. Colvin. Thank you so much.
Ms. Stone. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
